EL MONTE - MUNICIPAL CODE 2000 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of El Monte, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 18, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
The El Monte, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 2000, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 18, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Rachel Montes, Mayor, and Lorene Gutierrez, City Clerk. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 18, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 2941, passed January 8, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
CITY OF EL MONTE MUNICIPAL CODE 
CITY OF EL MONTE 
INCORPORATED 1912 
CITY COUNCIL 
MAYOR ANDRÉ QUINTERO 
MAYOR PRO-TEM PATRICIA A. WALLACH 
COUNCILMAN JUVENTINO "J" GOMEZ 
COUNCILWOMAN EMILY A. ISHIGAKI 
COUNCILWOMAN NORMA MACIAS 
CITY CLERK LORENE GUTIERREZ 
CITY TREASURER HENRY J. VELASCO 
CITY MANAGER RENÉ BOBADILLA 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 18, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 18, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 18, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 18, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 18, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION* 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "El Monte Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 2518 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 1, 2000)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "El Monte Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "El Monte Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "El Monte Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "El Monte Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections and subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 2518 § 2, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 2, 2000)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "El Monte Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of El Monte, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 2518 § 3, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 3, 2000)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 2518 § 4, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 4, 2000)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 2518 § 5, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 5, 2000)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 2504, passed August 10, 1999. 
The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 2504, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 2505, 2506, 2507, 2508, 2509, 2510, 2511 and 2512. 
(Ord. 2518 § 6, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 6, 2000)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 2518 § 7, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 7, 2000)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 2518 § 8, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 8, 2000)  
1.01.090 - References to prior code. 
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 2518 § 9, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 9, 2000)  
1.01.100 - Separability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have enacted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase hereof irrespective of any determination of invalidity. 
(Ord. 2518 § 11, 2000: Ord. 2513 § 11, 2000)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Construction—Provisions governing. 
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Prior code § 1300 (part))  
1.04.020 - Headings—Effect of. 
Title, article, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, article, chapter or section hereof. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1301)  
1.04.030 - Reference to acts or omissions within this city. 
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Prior code § 1302 (part))  
1.04.040 - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering. 
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. 
(Prior code § 1303 (part))  
1.04.050 - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1304)  
1.04.060 - Writing—Includes what. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1305)  
1.04.070 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 1306 (part))  
1.04.080 - Notices—Service of. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit thereof in the custody of the United States Postal Service or its lawful successor, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to he notified, at his or her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service shall be deemed given as of the time of personal service or two (2) consecutive calendar days following the deposit of the same in the custody of the United State Postal Service. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1307 (part))  
1.04.090 - Proof of notice. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Prior code § 1308)  
1.04.100 - Tenses. 
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present. 
(Prior code § 1309 (part))  
1.04.110 - Gender. 
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(Prior code § 1310 (part))  
1.04.120 - Number. 
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 
(Prior code § 1311 (part))  
1.04.130 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall be defined for the purposes of this code as set forth below unless the context clearly requires a different interpretation: 
1.  "Chief of Police" means the Chief of the Police Department of the city. 
2.  "City" means the city of El Monte. 
3.  "City Administrator" means the appointed official of the city who occupies the position of the chief administrative officer of the city. 
4.  "Council" means the City Council of this city. 
5.  "County" means the county of Los Angeles. 
6.  "Fire Chief" means the Chief of the Fire Department of Los Angeles County. 
7.  "Goods" means and includes wares or merchandise. 
8.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
9.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
10.  Must, Shall and May. "Must" and "shall" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. 
11.  "Oath" means and includes affirmation. 
12.  Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance means such officer, employee, office or ordinance, respectively, of the city. 
13.  "Operate" means and includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. 
14.  "Ordinance" means ordinance of the city. 
15.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
16.  "Person" means and includes a natural person, any legal entity and unincorporated organization. 
17.  "Personal property" means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
18.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
19.  "Property" means and includes real and personal property. 
20.  "Real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
21.  "Sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
22.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
23.  "State" means the state of California. 
24.  "Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
25.  "Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
26.  "Written" means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
27.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 2599 § 1, 2003; amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1312—1329 (part))  
1.04.140 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
1.04.150 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
1.04.160 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
1.04.170 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - City seal. 
There shall be provided for the city a common seal of which the City Clerk shall be the custodian and which shall be of the description following, to wit: 
 A circular space of two inches in diameter, around the upper circumference of which shall be the words "City of El Monte" with two stars on each side of the phrase. Around the lower circumference shall be the words "California". Inside of said words shall be a circle seven thirty-seconds inches in width. Inside the circle shall be the words "End of the Santa Fe" in the upper circumference, and the word "Trail" in the lower circumference. A yellow ribbon seven thirty-seconds inches in width will span horizontally across the entire width of the seal and will have words which read "Inc. 1912". The interior diameter of the seal shall be one inch and three-sixteenths inches in width and contains a covered wagon; a trail; a structure situated on green hills, and brown mountains located against light blue sky and white puffy clouds. 
This common seal of the city shall hereinafter be referred to in this chapter as the "city seal." 
"City seal" shall mean and include any and all logos and multiple seals used by the city of El Monte in its regular course of business. For the purpose of this chapter, any additions, corrections and/or deletions made to the city seal shall be done through a resolution. 
(Ord. 2651 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2589 § 1, 2003: editorially amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 2700)  
1.08.020 - Use of "city seal"—Restrictions on use. 
No person shall place the "city seal" or any copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof on any written or printed material supporting or opposing any candidate or candidates for any elective public office or supporting or opposing any state or Federal legislation or any local or statewide referendum, initiative, or other ballot measure, and no person shall circulate or distribute any such written or printed material containing or bearing the "city seal" or any copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof. 
(Ord. 2589 § 2 (part), 2003)  
1.08.030 - Use of "city seal"—Authorized use. 
A.  Authorized Uses. Section 1.08.020 of this chapter shall not prohibit: 
1.  Certain Uses Authorized by Council. Use of the city seal or a copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof on written material in support of, or in opposition to, any state or Federal legislation or statewide referendum, initiative or other ballot measure when specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council. 
2.  Use on City Letterhead. Use of the city letterhead bearing the city seal by a member of the City Council for individual correspondence, or the reproduction and distribution of such a letter by its recipient, provided such reproduction comes at no cost to the city. 
B.  Unauthorized Use. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize the mass production, mass mailing or mass distribution of any such letter or written material on city stationery (including city stationery or written material bearing the city seal) or otherwise at the city's expense, or any use of public funds in connection with any political campaign or issue. Such use of city stationery or other written material bearing the city seal shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. 2589 § 2 (part), 2003)  
1.08.040 - Commercial use of city seal prohibited. 
No person shall place the city seal or any copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof on any written or printed material for any commercial, business or private purpose unless specifically authorized by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2589 § 2 (part), 2003)  
1.08.050 - Imitation of city seal prohibited. 
No person shall place any imitation of the city seal on any written or printed material which is designed, calculated, intended or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public or cause the reader of such written or printed material to believe it to be an official city publication, and no person shall circulate or distribute any such written or printed material within the city. 
(Ord. 2589 § 2 (part), 2003) 
City Seal 
   
Chapter 1.12 - ELECTIONS 
 
1.12.010 - Election dates. 
A.  The city shall hold its general municipal elections on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year. 
B.  General municipal elections held pursuant to subsection 1.12.010. A. must be consolidated with the concurrent statewide election of the same date administered by the Registrar-Recorder for the county unless the County Board of Supervisors denies such consolidation pursuant to Elections Code section 10402.5. 
(Ord. No. 2885, § 3, 7-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2885, § 2, adopted July 5, 2016 repealed § 1.12.010 and enacted a new § 1.12.010 as set out herein. Former § 1.12.010 pertained to similiar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2616, adopted July 6, 2004.  
Chapter 1.16 - ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Violation of code—Notice to appear. 
When any person is arrested in the city for violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this code, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as provided in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, which notice shall contain the name and address of such person to whom the notice is issued, the offense charged against him or her, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. 
(Prior code § 1208)  
1.16.020 - Contents of a notice to appear—General. 
A.  Each notice to appear issued by a peace officer of the city as provided in Section 1.16.010 or other applicable ordinance of the city shall contain such information as required by law and shall be in a form as approved by the Chief of Police and the City Attorney. The Chief of Police is authorized to make changes from time-to-time in the form of the notice to appear as may be required by changes in state law or by changes in the El Monte Municipal Code. 
B.  The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person and the arrested person in order to secure release must give his or her written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
C.  The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which in his or her judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1275 of the Penal Code, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall indorse upon the notice a statement signed by him or her in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the Magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the Magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the Magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his or her discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. 
Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county treasury for distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of the Penal Code. 
D.  No warrant shall issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who has given such written promise to appear in court, unless and until he or she has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
E.  Any person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. 
F.  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code, the Magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest within twenty (20) days after his or her failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a Magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he or she promised to appear, then, within twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
G.  When such person violates his or her promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a Magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the Magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
H.  In addition to the members of the Police Department who, as peace officers, are charged with the enforcement of all city ordinances, the City Poundmaster, the Building Official, the City Health Inspector, the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, the City License Collector, and Deputy City License Collector are empowered and authorized to make arrests for violations of those provisions of this code, for the enforcement of which such respective officer is directly responsible, and each is empowered and authorized to issue notices to appear in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as hereinbefore specified. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 1210—1217)  
1.16.030 - City Code Enforcement Officer—Powers and duties. 
A.  In addition to persons mentioned in Section 1.16.020H and pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, City Code Enforcement Officers, Senior Code Enforcement Officers, the Code Enforcement Supervisor and Housing Enforcement Officers are empowered and authorized to make arrests for violations of any provisions of this code and for violations of any provisions of each code and ordinance adopted by reference herein and for violations of statutory codes of the state for which the Officer has the duty to enforce, and are empowered and authorized to issue notices to appear in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as hereinbefore specified in this chapter. 
B.  The Community Development Director or his/her designee may appoint volunteer or special code enforcement officers whose authority shall be limited to initial inspection of premises and the issuance of notices of parking violations and warnings of violations of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2550 § 1, 2002)  
1.16.040 - Notices of parking violation. 
The Code Enforcement Officers are empowered and authorized to issue notices of parking violation for violations of this code and state law and are authorized and empowered to remove, store and impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this code and state law. 
(Added during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1218.1)  
1.16.050 - Code Enforcement Division—Reference to. 
All references in the El Monte Municipal Code and ordinances and resolutions of the City Council that refer to the "Inspection Bureau," "Code Enforcement Bureau" and the like mean and refer to the Code Enforcement Division unless the context of such a reference may require otherwise. 
(Added during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1218.2)  
1.16.060 - Code Enforcement Supervisor—Reference to. 
All references in the El Monte Municipal Code and ordinances and resolutions of the City Council to the office or position of the "Inspection Bureau Supervisor," "Code Superintendent" and the like mean and refer to the Code Enforcement Supervisor unless the context of such a reference may require otherwise. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; added during 1999 recodification as prior code § 1218.3)  
1.16.070 - Code Enforcement Officer—Reference to. 
All references in the El Monte Municipal Code and ordinances and resolutions of the City Council to the position of "Area Inspector," "Code Inspector," "Code Enforcement Bureau Inspector" and the like mean and refer to the Code Enforcement Officer unless the context of such a reference may require otherwise. 
(Added during 1999 recodification as prior code § 1218.4)  
1.16.080 - Interference prohibited. 
No person shall refuse, delay, obstruct, impede, interfere, resist or attempt to resist the Code Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Supervisor in the performance of his/her duty, or shall refuse to obey any lawful order of the Code Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Supervisor made in the performance of his/her duties within the power conferred upon him/her by state law or by the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; added during 1999 recodification as prior code § 1218.5)  
1.16.090 - Community Development Department—Engineering Division—Powers and duties. 
In addition to the persons mentioned in the preceding Sections 1.16.020H and 1.16.030, any full-time regular employee assigned to the Engineering Division of the Community Development Department and designated by either the Director or the Assistant Director of Community Development as an authorized enforcement officer for said division is empowered and authorized to make arrests for violations of those provisions of this code, for the enforcement of which such respective officer is directly responsible, and is empowered and authorized to issue notices to appear in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as hereinbefore specified. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1219)  
1.16.100 - Fire Prevention Bureau—Powers and duties. 
In addition to the persons mentioned in Sections 1.16.020H, 1.16.030 and 1.16.090, any person regularly assigned to the Fire Prevention Bureau as an inspector for said bureau is empowered and authorized to make arrests for violations of any provision of this code and for violations of any provision of each code and ordinance adopted by reference herein and is empowered and authorized to issue notices to appear in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as hereinbefore specified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 1220)  
1.16.110 - Parking Control Officers—Powers and duties. 
In addition to persons mentioned in Sections 1.16.020(H), 1.16.030, 1.16.090 and 1.16.100, any person regularly employed by the city as a Parking Control Officer is empowered and authorized to make arrests for violations of any provision of this code and for violations of any provision of each code and ordinance adopted by reference herein and empowered and authorized to issue notices to appear in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as hereinbefore specified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 1221)  
Chapter 1.18 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2865, § 2, adopted Sept. 15, 2015, repealed Ch. 1.18 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 1.18, §§ 1.18.010—1.18.130, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2542, § 1(part), adopted in 2001; Ord. 2258, §§ 1, 5, 7, 8, adopted in 2002; and Ord. 2581, §§ 1, 2, 4, 5, adopted in 2003. 
 
1.18.010 - Findings and applicability. 
The city council of the city of El Monte finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Enforcement of the El Monte Municipal Code and adopted ordinances throughout the city is an important public service. A program for enforcement of local codes is vital to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The establishment of a comprehensive and effective code enforcement program that is able to utilize both administrative and judicial remedies against violations of the city's laws is best equipped to protect public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Government Code Section 53069.4 authorizes local jurisdictions to enact legislation making a violation of any local ordinance subject to an administrative fine or penalty. The state Legislature has also enacted other provisions of California law that allow local governments to impose administrative fines and/or penalties for violations of specified provisions of state law. The city council intends, pursuant to this statute, to establish an administrative citation program that: 
1.  Imposes a nonjudicial administrative fine and/or penalty for offenses of the El Monte Municipal Code (including, but not limited to, any other code adopted therein) and other state laws as authorized by statute; 
2.  Encourages prompt abatement or correction of prohibited conditions, uses or activities in the city; and 
3.  Creates deterrence against future violations of the city's laws. 
C.  The administrative citation remedy is not intended to replace any other remedy allowed by the El Monte Municipal Code or state law. It is intended to provide an alternative and/or additional means by which the city's laws may be enforced. 
D.  Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city and is one remedy that the city has to address violations of the El Monte Municipal Code or other applicable provisions of state law. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its discretion or ability to utilize any administrative, civil, criminal, or other remedy available at law or equity, or any combination thereof, to address violations of the city's laws. 
E.  This chapter makes a violation of any provision, restriction, or requirement of this code or any code adopted by reference herein, any ordinance of the city, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, or any condition of any permit, license, or other entitlement issued pursuant to this code subject to an administrative fine. 
F.  This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of administrative fines and/or penalties pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4. 
G.  An administrative fine in an amount adopted by resolution of the city council shall be imposed by means of an administrative citation issued by an enforcement officer, and shall be paid directly to the city of El Monte. Payment of a fine shall not excuse a failure to correct a violation, nor shall it bar concurrent or further enforcement actions by the city. 
H.  The city manager, or a designee thereof, may dismiss a citation at any time if a determination is made that it was issued in error, in which event any deposit of a fine shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015)  
1.18.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words are defined as follows: 
A.  "Administrative fine," "fine," "penalty" and/or "administrative penalty" shall mean the monetary sanction established by resolution of the city council that is imposed upon a responsible person by means of a citation. 
B.  "Citation" shall mean an administrative citation that is issued to a responsible person pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  "Citee" shall mean a responsible person to whom a citation is issued. 
D.  "City" shall mean the city of El Monte, California. 
E.  "City Manager" shall mean the chief administrative official of the city as appointed by the City Council. 
F.  "Code" shall include: 
1.  The entire El Monte Municipal Code and any other code, rule, or regulation incorporated therein by adoption or reference; 
2.  Any uncodified ordinance adopted by the City Council of El Monte; 
3.  Any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code; 
4.  Any condition of any permit, license, or other entitlement issued pursuant to this code; and 
5.  Other state laws as authorized by statute. 
G.  "Enforcement officer" and "officer" shall mean any city employee with obligations to enforce the El Monte Municipal Code. Enforcement officers shall include personnel identified in Sections 1.16.020(H) and 1.16.030 of the El Monte Municipal Code. The City Manager may designate additional employees of other city departments to act as officers for purposes of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
H.  "Hearing officer" shall include a private person, or a public official, or duly constituted reviewing authority or commission that the City Manager designates or appoints to consider all timely requests for an administrative hearing upon issuance of a citation. The term "Hearing Officer" may also include a person with experience, qualifications and training reasonably satisfactory to the city who are employed by, or otherwise contracted by, an entity which is itself under contract with the city to provide services relating to the processing, review and disposition of administrative citations, which services also include provision of personnel to serve as hearing officers. 
I.  "Owner" shall mean and include any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, or responsibility for, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court-appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. An owner of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, responsibility for, or possession of such property. 
J.  "Person" shall mean and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, a corporation of any kind, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as fiduciaries, trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city. 
K.  "Property" or "premises" shall mean any real property, or improvements thereon, or portions thereof, as the case may be. "Property" includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting such real property. "Property" shall also include all forms of personal property or animals, where applicable. 
L.  "Responsible person" shall mean any person, whether as an owner or an agent, manager, or representative of an owner, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, suffers, or permits a violation of the code to exist or continue, by any act or the omission of any act or duty. The forgoing notwithstanding, for citations issued pursuant to Chapter 15.34 of the El Monte Municipal Code, the definition of the term "responsible person" as set forth under Section 15.34.060 (Definitions) shall apply and control. 
M.  "Violation" shall mean an act, or omission of any act, or use or condition that constitutes an offense of the code, as well as a breach or violation of any condition of a permit, approval, entitlement or license issued pursuant to the code. A "transient" violation is one that is brief or spontaneous in its commission, or that is not typically confined to a fixed location. A "nontransient" violation is continuing in nature and generally present at one location. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015; Ord. No. 2938, §§ 2, 3, 11-20-2018)  
1.18.030 - Issuance of administrative citation—Contents thereof. 
A.  Whenever an officer determines that a violation has occurred, the officer may issue a citation on a city-approved form imposing an administrative fine or fines to the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  When the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that create an immediate danger to health or safety, a citation may be issued forthwith. In the absence of an immediate danger, a citation for a violation pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues shall not be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the responsible person has first been provided with a reasonable period of up to thirty (30) days, as determined by the officer, in which to complete the abatement or compliance actions. 
C.  An officer may issue a citation for a violation not committed in the officer's presence if the officer has determined, through investigation, that the citee did commit, or is otherwise responsible for, the violation. 
D.  Each day, or any portion thereof, that a prohibited condition, use or activity under the code is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate violation for which an administrative fine may be imposed. A single citation may charge multiple violations of the code; however, each violation is subject to a separate and distinct administrative fine. 
E.  Each citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name and mailing address of the responsible person; 
2.  The date of the commission of the violation(s), or detection thereof by an officer; 
3.  The address or description of the location of the violation; 
4.  The relevant provision(s) or section(s) of the code alleged to have been violated; 
5.  A description of the violation(s); 
6.  Amount of the fine for each violation, the amount of any reinspection fee, as well as the procedure and place to pay the fine(s) and/or reinspection fees, and any late penalty and/or interest charge(s), if not timely paid; 
7.  When appropriate, the action(s) required to correct the violation(s), and, if applicable, any deadlines or time limitations for commencing and completing such action(s); 
8.  A description of the administrative citation review process and the manner by which a hearing on a citation may be obtained (including the form to be used, where it may be procured from, and the period in which a request must be made in order to be timely); 
9.  The name of the officer and the citee; 
10.  A statement that the failure to timely tender the fine(s) and other charges/fees imposed pursuant to this chapter may result in: (a) a civil action against citee; (b) the recordation of a lien or special assessment against the citee's real property; and (c) the denial of any city approval, license, entitlement or permit to citee until all delinquent monies are paid to the city; and 
11.  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015)  
1.18.035 - Service of citation. 
A.  A citation may be served either by personal delivery to the citee or by first class mail through the United States Postal Service. The date of personal service shall constitute the issuance date of a citation. 
B.  If served by first class mail, the citation shall be sealed in an envelope with postage prepaid and addressed to the citee at his or her last-known business or residence address as same appears in public records of the city, the Los Angeles County Tax Assessor's Office, and/or the Secretary of State. The date a citation is deposited with the United States Postal Service shall constitute: (1) its issuance date, and (2) the date that service by first class mail shall be deemed to have been completed. 
C.  If an agent, manager or representative of a responsible person is personally served with a citation, a copy thereof shall also be served by first class mail to the responsible person at his or her last-known business or residence address as same appears in public records of the city, the Los Angeles County Tax Assessor's Office, and/or the Secretary of State. In such instances, the date a copy of the citation is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the issuance date of a citation. 
D.  If service cannot be accomplished personally or by mail, the officer shall post the citation on the real property where the violation is alleged to have occurred. The date of posting shall constitute the issuance date of a citation. 
E.  Any notice or order given pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be served in the manner provided for in this section, unless otherwise stated. 
F.  Failure of a citee to receive a citation or notice shall not invalidate any fine, late penalty charge, action or proceeding that is imposed or brought pursuant to this chapter, if service was given in a manner stated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015)  
1.18.040 - Imposition of administrative fines, late penalty and interest charges, as well as reinspection fees. 
A.  The amounts of the fines for misdemeanor violations of the EMMC imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in a schedule of fines established by resolution of the City Council. The City Council may, by resolution, also impose escalating fines in amounts it deems appropriate for repeat offenses of the same ordinance. The amounts of fines may be modified from time to time by a resolution of the City Council. 
B.  If a violation is otherwise classified as an infraction under the code, the administrative fine shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second offense of the same code provision within a twelve-month period of time, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or subsequent offense of the same code provision within a twelve-month period of time, as set forth in subdivision (b) of Section 36900 of the California Government Code. The amounts of such fines may be modified from time to time by a resolution of the City Council provided they do not exceed the limits allowed by state law. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection B above, a violation of local building and safety codes determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation. 
D.  In addition to any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter, a reinspection fee and/or any associated costs expended (including, but not limited to, investigation, abatement, and legal) may be assessed against any responsible person in an amount established by resolution of the City Council if the responsible person does not timely and completely correct or abate a violation (with all requisite approvals, permits, entitlements, licenses, and/or inspections) after having received notification from the city to correct or abate same. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015)  
1.18.050 - Payment and collection fines and fees. 
A.  The due date for the city's receipt of an administrative fine and any applicable reinspection fee shall be thirty (30) calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. Thereafter, a late penalty charge shall be due and owing for the unpaid fine, as well as interest, as imposed by this chapter. 
B.  Failure to pay an administrative fine by the due date shall result in the assessment of a late penalty charge of twenty-five (25) percent per month for four (4) months. 
C.  Failure to pay an administrative fine within thirty (30) days after the issuance of an uncontested administrative citation or, if contested, within thirty (30) days after an order to pay pursuant to a decision by a hearing officer or judicial officer confirming the fine, shall also result in the imposition of an interest charge at a rate established by resolution of the City Council. Interest shall not accrue on a late penalty charge or reinspection fee. The rate of interest may be modified from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Administrative fines, reinspection fees, late penalty charges, investigation, and abatement costs, and any interest due shall be paid to the city at such location or address as stated in the citation, or as may otherwise be designated by the City Manager. 
E.  Payment of an administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code. 
F.  Abatement of a violation shall not excuse the obligation of a citee to pay an administrative fine or any other charges, fees, or costs imposed as a result of the issuance of a citation. 
G.  Unpaid administrative fines and other charges, fees, or costs imposed in accordance with this chapter shall constitute a debt that may be collected in any manner allowed by law, including, but not limited to: (1) the filing of a civil action in the Los Angeles Superior Court; and/or (2) the recordation of a lien with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office against citee-owned property that was the subject of the citation in the manner set forth in EMMC Section 1.19.040; and/or (3) by means of a special assessment against citee-owned property that was the subject of the citation in the manner set forth in EMMC Section 1.19.050; and/or (4) by means of collecting the debt using the California Franchise Tax Board "Inter-Agency Offset Program" (pursuant to Section 12419.10 of the California Government Code); and/or (5) by denying the issuance or renewal, in the manner set forth in EMMC Section 1.18.110, of any city approval, entitlement, license or permit to any citee who has failed to tender all unpaid administrative fines, late penalty charges, interest charges, or reinspection fees. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney's fees and costs arising from an action to collect an administrative fine and other charges, fees, or costs imposed in accordance with this chapter, if it is the prevailing party and provided it made the election to seek attorney's fees at the commencement of the action. A citee shall be entitled to recover his or her attorney's fees if the city made the election to seek attorney's fees at the outset of the action and the citee prevails thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015)  
1.18.060 - Right to an administrative hearing. 
A.  Any citee may contest the violation(s), or that he or she is a responsible person, by filing an application requesting an administrative hearing on such forms as may be approved by the city. The appeal application shall be filed with the department or entity designated by the city on the application form. Application forms shall be available on the city's internet homepage or at the offices of the Neighborhood Services Division during the city's regular business hours. A completed application form must be filed along with any required appeal fee that may be indicated in the application form within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the issuance date of a citation. If a citee fails to timely file an appeal application, the citee shall have waived his/her right to an appeal hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. Also, except as otherwise provided under Section 1.18.070, below, if an appeal application that does not also include any required appeal fee and/or the advance deposit in the amount of the fine(s) set forth in the citation, such applications shall be deemed incomplete and may be considered untimely if the required appeal fee and advance deposit are not also submitted within the 21-day filing period referenced in this paragraph, above. It is the responsibility of each citee to ensure that his or her appeal application is complete and that all required appeal fees and advance deposits have been submitted along with the appeal application. The city is under no obligation to notify a citee when he or she fails to include the requisite appeal fee or advance deposit with his or her application prior to the expiration of the 21-day period for filing appeal applications. 
B.  Citees who do not timely file a request to contest the violation(s) or who fail to also submit the advance deposit or any appeal fee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. 
C.  A written request for a hearing shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
1.  The citation number; 
2.  The name, address, telephone and any facsimile number and/or e-mail address, of the person contesting the citation; 
3.  A written statement explaining the factual and/or legal grounds upon which the city's issuance of the citation is being challenged by the citee along with any other documentary evidence the citee believes supports his/her challenge to the citation; and 
4.  The date and signature of the citee(s). 
D.  Except as otherwise authorized under Section 1.18.070, below, written requests for a hearing shall be accompanied by an advance deposit of the entire amount of the administrative fine stated in the citation. Failure to submit the deposit in the fine amount with the written request for hearing within the required period for filing the written request for hearing, shall render the application request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely, in which case the citee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. Fine deposits shall not accrue interest. Fine deposits shall be returned to the citee for those violations alleged in the citation that are overturned by the Hearing Officer or dismissed by the city. 
E.  A timely request for a hearing shall not excuse a citee from the duty to immediately abate a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code. 
F.  For purposes of Sections 1.18.060 through 1.18.90, where any deadline specifies that an application, deposit, fee or other item must be submitted or filed with the city or an entity designated by the city within a specified period of time, such application, deposit, fee or other items shall be deemed submitted or filed on the date it is actually received by and in the possession of the city or designated entity. Accordingly, if an application, deposit, fee or other item is deposited in the mail or given to a courier services for delivery to the city or the city's designated entity, such application, deposit, fee or other item shall not be considered submitted or filed until it is actually received by, and in the possession of, the city or the city's designated entity. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015; Ord. No. 2938, § 4, 11-20-2018)  
1.18.070 - Waiver of requirement to advance fine deposit. 
A.  If a citee who challenges a citation pursuant to Section 1.18.060, above, also contends that he or she is financially unable to submit the advance deposit required under subdivision D. of Section 1.18.070, above, the citee may also submit a separate application requesting that the city waive the requirement to advance such deposit along with the appeal application. The application to request a waiver of the requirement to submit an advance deposit shall be accompanied by documentation and other evidence which the citee believes supports his or her waiver request. The City Manager shall administratively designate which city employees shall have standing authority to review, evaluate and act on such waiver requests. Nothing in this section shall operate to waive a citee's obligation to pay any and all fine amounts due should a citation be upheld on appeal. 
B.  To be considered for a waiver, the citee's waiver application must be complete, signed by the citee, and must be accompanied by documents that enable the city to reasonably evaluate the citee's present inability to advance the deposit sums in the amount of the administrative fine. Documents suitable for such consideration may include, without limitation, accurate, complete and legible copies of state and federal income tax returns and all schedules for the preceding tax year; financial statements, loan applications, bank account records, income and expense records for twelve (12) months preceding submittal of the waiver form, as well as other documentation demonstrating the citee's financial hardship. The city may, in its sole discretion, request additional documents in order to determine a citee's financial ability to tender an advance deposit of the fine. Failure to submit sufficient evidence of a citee's financial inability to tender an advance deposit of the fine shall result in a denial of the hardship waiver. 
C.  The city shall issue a written decision regarding the application for a waiver within ten (10) calendar days from the date the waiver application is submitted. If the hardship waiver is denied, the written decision shall specify the reasons for the denial. Decisions regarding waiver requests are final and non-appealable. If a waiver request is denied, the citee shall tender the full amount of the advance deposit at the location specified in the denial notice and by the date and time specified in the denial notice. The failure of the citee to timely submit such advance deposit following the denial of a waiver request shall result in the appeal request being deemed incomplete and untimely and the citation shall be deemed final. 
D.  The city may, at a time chosen in its sole discretion and after a citation is final or confirmed, destroy or discard the documents submitted by a citee for a hardship waiver without prior notice to the citee. 
E.  All notices, including notices of decision to be issued by the city under this section may be issued by city personnel or by any entity under contract with the city to process and review. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015; Ord. No. 2938, § 5, 11-20-2018)  
1.18.080 - Administrative hearing—Procedures. 
A.  An administrative appeal hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) calendar days and not more than sixty (60) calendar days after the date a timely and complete appeal application is received as provided under Section 1.18.060, above. A citee who files a request for an administrative hearing to challenge the issuance of a citation (hereafter "appellant") shall be notified in writing by first class mail of the date, time, and location of the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing or city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  At the place and time set forth in the notification of administrative hearing, the Hearing Officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the Issuing Officer, the appellant(s), and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the violation(s) alleged in the citation. 
C.  Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and responsibility therefor by a preponderance of evidence. The issuance of an administrative citation shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation. The appellant(s), and officer, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. An appellant and the officer issuing the citation may represent himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice. An appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at the appellant's sole expense. The city may, at its discretion, record the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording. The Hearing Officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing. 
D.  An appellant may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the city at a return address indicated in the hearing notice referenced under subdivision A of Section 1.18.080, above, at least seven (7) city business days prior to the hearing. For purposes of this section "city business days" means Monday through Thursday and excludes Saturday, Sunday and Friday and any other date in which the City is closed for business. If an appellant elects to appear at the hearing by written declaration, the Issuing Officer who issued the citation shall not be required to attend or participate at the hearing. If the appellant fails to attend the scheduled hearing, or to otherwise submit a written declaration in a timely manner, the hearing shall be canceled and notice thereof shall be mailed to the appellant(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the citation (and corresponding fine and other applicable fees) shall be deemed final. The term "Issuing Officer" shall refer to the city employee who issued the citation under dispute, and may include, without limitation, a sworn officer of the El Monte Police Department, an official of the El Monte Neighborhood Services Division dully authorized to issue administrative citations on behalf of the city or any other city employee duly authorized by the city to issue citations on the city's behalf. 
E.  Hearings may be continued once at the request of an appellant or the Issuing Officer who issued the citation. The Hearing Officer may also continue the hearing for cause. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015; Ord. No. 2938, § 6, 11-20-2018)  
1.18.090 - Hearing officer decision—Right of appeal therefrom. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the citation and shall state the reasons therefor. The city shall preserve all exhibits and evidence submitted at the hearing until all appeals have been exhausted. If the citation is upheld and the violation has not been fully corrected as of the date of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall order correction thereof in the decision and provide a deadline to complete said action(s). The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. If the citation is upheld and the appellant did not deposit the fine at the time the appellant requested an administrative appeal hearing, the Hearing Officer shall also order the payment of the fine (and other applicable fees and costs) within twenty (20) calendar days of the decision. 
B.  The appellant(s) shall be served by first class mail with a copy of the Hearing Officer's written decision. The date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Decisions of the Hearing Officer are, in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4(b), appealable to the superior court within twenty (20) days after the date of their service. Each decision shall contain a statement advising the appellant(s) of this appeal right and the procedures and court filing fee for its exercise. As required under Government Code Section 53069.4(b), the appellant shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal upon the city at the Office of the City Clerk. Such service may be made in person during the City's regular business hours or by first-class mail, provided that in both instances the notice of appeal must be received by the Office of the City Clerk within five (5) calendar days after the filing of the original court filed notice of appeal. Service upon any other division or department of the city, other than the Office of the City Clerk, shall be deemed defective. 
D.  If a Hearing Officer's decision is not appealed in a timely manner, the decision shall be deemed confirmed. 
E.  The superior court is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal from a Hearing Officer's decision is not appealable to the City Council. If an appellant prevails on appeal to the Superior Court, the city shall order the reimbursement of his or her filing fee, as well as the fine deposit in accordance with the court judgment. These monies shall be mailed to the appellant within forty-five (45) calendar days after the city's receipt of a notice of judgment or ruling from the Superior Court Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015; Ord. No. 2938, § 7, 11-20-2018)  
1.18.100 - Denial of city approvals, entitlements, licenses and permits for delinquent administrative citation fines, late penalty and interest charges, as well as for unpaid reinspection fees. 
A.  Cause to Deny Approvals, Entitlements, Licenses and Permits. The city may deny any city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof, due to the citee's nonpayment of all fines, late penalties and interest charges, as well as reinspection fees (hereafter, collectively, the "debt") that are due in connection with an uncontested citation, or with a final or confirmed citation. 
1.  The city's election not to exercise this remedy and to alternatively issue an approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof does not constitute a satisfaction, discharge, or waiver of the debt. The issuance of any approval, entitlement, license or permit does not bar the city from denying the issuance of a different city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof, nor the election to use any other remedy to collect the debt. 
B.  Notice Denying an Approval Due to an Unpaid Debt. The department charged with receiving an application for a city approval, license, permit or entitlement, or renewal thereof, may, within five (5) business days after receiving an application, issue a written notice of denial to the citee and to the applicant therefor (hereafter in this section, collectively, the "citee"), stating that the application is denied for failure to pay the debt (a summary accounting for which shall be included therein). The notice shall also contain information concerning the right to appeal the denial and the time period and manner in which to do so. 
C.  Service of Notice. The notice issued under this section shall be served by first class mail to the citee. The date of its placement in a United States postal container shall be the date of service. Failure of the citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action under this section. 
D.  Appeal. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the code, a citee seeking to appeal a denial pursuant to this section (hereafter the "appellant") may not challenge or contest the underlying basis for the issuance of the citation or citations that gave rise to the debt. For any other reasons to appeal a denial pursuant to this section, appellant shall file a written notice of appeal with the Office of the City Clerk, El Monte City Hall, 11333 Valley Boulevard, El Monte, CA 91731 within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the notice that contains the following information: 
1.  The full name, address and telephone number for each person filing the appeal. 
2.  The grounds for the appeal, including, if applicable, a completed or pending bankruptcy action whereby the debt has been discharged, or is subject to discharge. 
3.  A copy of the notice of denial that was issued pursuant to this section. 
Payment of a fee is not required for an appeal under this section. If the office of the City Clerk does not receive a notice of appeal in the required period, the appellant shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the denial. The appeal procedure in this section shall supersede all other appeal procedures in the code. 
The procedure outlined in this section shall be the only method of challenging a denial of a city approval, license, permit or entitlement, or renewal thereof, that was based solely on the city's contention that the citee has an outstanding debt. 
E.  Notice of Appeal Hearing. Upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal, the office of the City Clerk shall issue a notice of hearing before the hearing officer, via first class mail to the appellant at the address shown in the application. An appeal hearing shall be set within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
1.  The date the notice of hearing is deposited in a United States postal container shall constitute the date of service. 
2.  The notice shall include the date, time, and location of the hearing, which must be no sooner than ten (10) calendar, days after the date of service of the notice of hearing. 
3.  The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing shall not invalidate any action under this section. 
F.  Administrative Appeal Hearing—Procedure. 
1.  At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider the testimony of the appellant(s) and/or their witnesses, and of the representative, if present, of the department that issued the denial of the application, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the denial of the application. 
2.  This administrative hearing is informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The appellant bears the burden of proving he/she/it is not the citee that owes the debt, or that the entire debt has been paid to the city, or that the debt has been discharged in a bankruptcy action, or is subject to discharge in a pending bankruptcy action. The appellant(s), and department representative, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. An appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at the appellant's sole expense. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing. 
3.  Failure of the appellant, or a representative thereof, to attend the hearing shall result in the hearing officer canceling the hearing and sending a notice thereof to the appellant by first class mail to the address stated in the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to nonappearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the denial of the application shall be deemed final, without right of appeal to the City Council. 
4.  Hearings may be continued once at the request of the appellant or the department who issued the denial of application. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause. 
G.  Decision of Hearing Officer—Notice Thereof. 
1.  The hearing officer shall consider the evidence and testimony in reaching a decision, but shall not consider testimony or evidence that constitutes a challenge to the underlying basis for the issuance of a citation or citations that gave rise to the debt in rendering a decision. 
2.  The hearing officer shall affirm the denial of application if he or she determines the appellant is the citee with regard to the unpaid citation(s), and the entire debt has not been paid to the city. 
3.  The hearing officer shall overrule the denial of application if he or she determines: (a) the appellant is not the citee with regard to the unpaid citation(s); or (b) the entire debt has been paid to the city; or (c) the debt has been discharged, or is subject to discharge in a pending bankruptcy action, as established with satisfactory evidence of the appellant at the appeal hearing. 
4.  The appellant shall be served by first class mail with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision. 
5.  The decision shall be deemed final, without right of appeal to the City Council. 
A decision by a hearing officer to grant an appeal (i.e., to overturn the denial of a city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof) on any basis other than the debt having been paid or otherwise discharged by a bankruptcy does not constitute a satisfaction, discharge, or waiver of the debt, nor does such a decision bar the city from denying the issuance of a different city approval, entitlement, license, permit, or renewal thereof, nor the election to use any other remedy to collect the debt. 
H.  Effect on Existing Approvals, Entitlements, Licenses and Permits Pending Appeal. When the holder of a city approval, entitlement, license, or permit is notified in accordance with subsection B of this section that such approval, entitlement, license or permit will not be renewed unless a debt is paid, the approval, entitlement, license or permit shall remain in effect during the pendency of the appeal process described in subsections F and G of this section. When an approval, entitlement, license or permit is found to be eligible for renewal, through the appeal process, it shall remain in effect until the renewal is issued. When an approval, entitlement, license or permit is found to be ineligible for renewal, through the appeal process, it shall expire at such time as the holder has exhausted or failed to exhaust the appeal procedures described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015)  
1.18.110 - Penalties. 
Failure of a citee to comply with a corrective action within the time stated in any uncontested citation, or with regard to a correction order in any hearing officer decision that is deemed confirmed and not appealed to the superior court, or with regard to a correction order appealed to and upheld by the superior court, shall constitute a misdemeanor. A citee's willful nonpayment of administrative fines, late penalty charges, interest charges, other investigative fees, attorney's fees, or reinspection fees shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 2, 9-15-2015)  
Chapter 1.19 - ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2865, § 3, adopted Sept. 15, 2015, repealed Ch. 1.19 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 1.19, §§ 1.19.010—1.19.190, pertained to administrative compliance citations and derived from Ord. 2542, § 2(part), adopted in 2001, and Ord. 2258, § 9, adopted 2002. 
 
1.19.010 - Enforcement. 
In addition to those public officers and employees authorized by state law, this code and any other ordinances of the city may be enforced by the Police Department of the city, city personnel designated by job description as being responsible for enforcement of the municipal code, and the City Manager or designee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 3, 9-15-2015)  
1.19.020 - Recovery of code enforcement fees. 
The City Council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 54988 and California Health and Safety Code Section 17951 (and any successor statutes thereto), the El Monte building code, and any other applicable local, state, or federal law, as well as by the city's police powers as authorized by the California Constitution, responsible persons, who cause, allow, permit, suffer, or maintain a violation in, or upon, any real property located within the city, shall be charged fees (hereafter "code enforcement fees") by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions. 
Such fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are chargeable whether the city's code enforcement actions occur in the absence of formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or subsequent to the initiation of such proceedings. 
1.  As used herein, "responsible person" means and includes any person that causes, creates, allows, permits, suffers, or maintains a public nuisance to exist or continue within the city, by any act or the omission of any act or duty, including, but not limited to, any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. A responsible person shall also include, but shall not be limited to, employees, principals, joint venturers, officers, agents, and/or other persons acting in concert with, or at the direction of, and/or with the knowledge and/or consent of the owner and/or occupant of the lot, building or structure on, or in, which a public nuisance or violation exists or existed, as well as any persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court-appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. "Responsible person," with regard to personal property, shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, or possession of such property. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
2.  "Public nuisance" or "nuisance" means anything which is, or is likely to become, injurious or detrimental to health, safety or welfare, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or that unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any sidewalk, public park, square, street or highway. Any condition, use, or activity that violates or is otherwise contrary to any provision of this code or any approval, license, permit, or other entitlement issued pursuant to or in accordance with this code, or that violates or is contrary to any applicable county, state, or federal law or regulation, shall also constitute a public nuisance. 
3.  As used herein, "violation" means and includes any prohibited activity, condition, or use on land or in connection with a building or a structure that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, inaction, or omission) by a responsible person in disregard of, or nonconformity with, any other provision, regulation, prohibition, or requirement of the El Monte Municipal Code, or any applicable county, state, or federal laws or regulations. Any such violation shall also constitute an unlawful public nuisance for each and every day or part thereof during which it is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by a responsible person. 
4.  As used herein, "code enforcement fees" shall mean fees imposed by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, pursuant to California Government Code Section 54988 and California Health and Safety Code Section 17951 (and any successor statutes thereto), the El Monte building code, and any other applicable local, state, or federal law, as well as by the city's police powers as authorized by the California Constitution, including, but not limited to, the time and other resources of public officials and city consultants expended by them in identifying, inspecting, investigating, seeking or causing the abatement of a violation at a real property. Examples of code enforcement actions include, but are not limited to, site inspections, drafting reports, taking photographs, procuring other evidence, engaging in meetings with other officials of the city or other agencies, engaging in conferences and communications with responsible persons, their agents or representatives, concerning a violation, as well as with attorneys for the city at any time, and appearances before judicial officers or reviewing authorities during the commencement or pendency of a judicial or administrative hearing. The time and resources that public officials and city consultants further expend to confirm that a real property remains free of a violation while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a matter concerning a property remains pending before a reviewing authority in an administrative action shall also constitute code enforcement actions. 
B.  The amount(s) or rate(s) of code enforcement fees for city personnel time and other resources that are used for code enforcement actions shall be established, and may thereafter be amended, by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The City Manager, or a designee thereof, is authorized to adopt regulations for the uniform imposition of code enforcement fees, and for related administrative actions pertaining to such fees. 
D.  The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fines, fees, interest or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with any other provision of the El Monte Municipal Code, or which are imposed pursuant to county, state or federal laws or regulations. 
E.  Code enforcement fees shall be recoverable in conjunction with any civil, administrative or criminal action to abate, cause the abatement or cessation of, or otherwise remove, a violation as defined in this section. 
1.  In every instance where an owner or other responsible person is required to obtain a permit, approval, license or entitlement under any provision of the El Monte Municipal Code in connection with the abatement of a violation, the city may condition the issuance of said permit, approval, license or entitlement on the prior payment of all code enforcement fees. 
F.  Unpaid code enforcement fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law, including, but not limited to: (1) the filing of a civil action in the Los Angeles Superior Court; and/or (2) the recordation of a lien with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office provided the responsible person has a legal interest in the property on which the violation was located; and/or (3) by means of a special assessment provided the responsible person has a legal interest in the property on which the violation was located; and/or (4) by means of collecting the debt using the California Franchise Tax Board "Inter-Agency Offset Program" (pursuant to Section 12419.10 of the California Government Code); and/or (5) by denying the issuance or renewal, pursuant to EMMC Section 1.18.110, of any city approval, license, entitlement, or permit to any responsible person who has failed to pay code enforcement fees that are imposed pursuant to this section. The remedies may be concurrently used to collect unpaid code enforcement fees. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 3, 9-15-2015)  
1.19.030 - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
A.  A prevailing party in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate, or cause the abatement of, a violation of this code or any public nuisance, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees. Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the City Manager, or a designee thereof, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the city, elects in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney's fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the city. 
B.  Provided that the city has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of attorney's fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding. 
C.  Unpaid attorney's fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 3, 9-15-2015)  
1.19.040 - Uniform lien procedures. 
A.  Unless a different procedure is authorized elsewhere in this code, where the code authorizes the city to record a lien for any unpaid fee, cost, charge, or other monies, the following procedures shall apply: 
1.  A lien may be recorded upon real property that is the subject of enforcement activity if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies resulting from said enforcement activity are not paid within forty-five (45) calendar days of written notice thereof. This section shall not apply to owner-occupied residential dwelling unit(s) pursuant to Government Code Section 54988. 
a.  Said notice must have advised the owner(s) of the subject property in plain language of the city's intent to record a lien if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies were not paid within forty-five (45) calendar days, the amount of the proposed lien, a description of the basis for the amount(s) comprising the lien, and an opportunity to appear before the City Council (or designee thereof) and to be heard regarding the amount of the proposed lien. 
b.  Where the City Council designates another hearing body should the property owner(s) exercise his/her/their right to be heard, the hearing body shall make a written recommendation to the City Council that shall include factual findings based on evidence introduced at the hearing. The City Council may adopt the recommendation without further notice of hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing before the City Council. Notice in writing of the de novo hearing shall be provided to the property owner(s) at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the scheduled hearing. 
2.  The lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
3.  A lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the city, the name of the city department or division on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date upon which the lien was created, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
4.  In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (A)(3) of this section shall be recorded by the city. A lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
5.  A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
6.  The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien, providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien, and of pursuing a foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 3, 9-15-2015)  
1.19.050 - Uniform special assessment procedures. 
A.  Unless a different procedure is authorized elsewhere in this code, where the code authorizes the city to impose a special assessment for any unpaid fee, cost, charge, or other monies, the following procedures shall apply: 
1.  A special assessment may be imposed upon real property that is the subject of enforcement activity if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies resulting from said enforcement activity are not paid within forty-five (45) calendar days of written notice thereof. 
a.  Said notice must have advised the owner(s) of the subject property in plain language of the city's intent to impose a special assessment if the fine, fee, cost, charge, or other monies were not paid within forty-five (45) calendar days, the amount of the proposed assessment, a description of the basis for the amount(s) comprising the assessment, and an opportunity to appear before the City Council (or designee thereof) and to be heard regarding the amount of the proposed assessment. 
b.  Where the City Council designates another hearing body should the property owner(s) exercise his/her/their right to be heard, the hearing body shall make a written recommendation to the City Council that shall include factual findings based on evidence introduced at the hearing. The City Council may adopt the recommendation without further notice of hearing, or may set the matter for a de novo hearing before the City Council. Notice in writing of the de novo hearing shall be provided to the property owner(s) at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the scheduled hearing. 
2.  The special assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment, except that if any real property to which the assessment would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of taxes would become delinquent, then the assessment that would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not attach to the real property and instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
3.  A notice of special assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is imposed which shall contain the following recitals: 
The property may be sold after three (3) years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. 
4.  The city attorney or city prosecutor shall establish the notice of special assessment form for use, or consideration, by the tax collector for the city in collecting a special assessment. 
5.  The notice of special assessment shall also be entitled to recordation with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager (or designee thereof) to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills for taxes levied against the respective real property in accordance with the policies and procedures established by the Los Angeles County Department of Auditor-Controller. Failure of the cite to receive the notice of special assessment shall not invalidate these proceedings. 
7.  The amount of a special assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the owner's subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2865, § 3, 9-15-2015)  
Chapter 1.20 - ADMINISTRATIVE INSPECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.20.010 - Notice of intent to inspect real property. 
Upon a determination by the City Attorney, City Administrator and Planning Director that sufficient cause exists for the city to seek an administrative inspection warrant for the purpose of determining the existence or nonexistence of any violation of this code or of any code adopted by reference in this code, the city may, after due notice as set forth herein, file a notice of intent to inspect real property with the Recorder's Office of the county of Los Angeles thereby putting all persons on notice that the city has determined that cause exists to believe that violations of the El Monte Municipal Code may exist on the indicated real property and that the city intends to seek an administrative inspection warrant for said premises. No less than five (5) regular business days prior to the filing of a notice of intent to inspect, written notice shall be served on the owner of the property to be inspected requesting permission to inspect the property and giving notice that the city may file a notice of intent to inspect with the Los Angeles County Recorder if such permission is not granted to the city within three (3) regular business days from the date of service. Service shall be made by personal service on the owner in the city, or in the event the owner cannot be readily served personally in the city, by the posting of notice in a conspicuous place on the property and by mailing by first-class mail a copy of said notice to the owner of record as shown on the tax register and by leaving a copy thereof with the person apparently responsible for said property if such person is present at the time of posting. Any notice of intent to inspect filed with the Los Angeles County Recorder shall automatically expire and be self-vacating ninety (90) days after being recorded. Any administrative inspection warranted acquired by the city for a property for which a notice of intent to inspect has been recorded shall be filed with the Los Angeles County Recorder and itself shall automatically expire and be self-vacating ninety (90) days after being recorded. 
(Prior code § 1222)  
Chapter 1.24 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.24.010 - Violations of code. 
No person shall violate any of these provisions, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. 
A.  Misdemeanors. Except as is expressly provided in subsection B of this section, any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
B.  Infractions. An infraction shall be punishable upon a first conviction by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); for a second conviction of the same code provision within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00); and for a third or any subsequent conviction of the same section within the same twelve (12) month period, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Violations of the following sections of this code shall be deemed to be infractions: 
1.  Sections 10.12.020, 10.20.020 and 10.24.020 of this code and all provisions of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted herein by reference; and 
2.  Sections 9.04.060, 9.12.020 and 9.12.030; and 
3.  Minors—Infractions, Penalties, Continuing Violations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when a person under the age of eighteen (18) years is charged with a misdemeanor violation of this code, and a peace officer issues a notice to appear in Superior Court to the minor, the charge shall be deemed to be an infraction violation of this code unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. The amount of the fine imposed on the minor shall be set by the Court. 
(Ord. 2593 § 1, 2003: amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 1200—1200.3, 1200.5)  
1.24.020 - Misdemeanors reduced to infractions by court discretion. 
Notwithstanding the language of Section 1.24.010 of this chapter, any misdemeanor violation of any provision of this code may, in the discretion of the court, on motion of the Prosecuting Attorney be reduced to an infraction after such charges are filed with the court if such reduction facilitates the interests of justice. Any charge filed by way of complaint for a violation of any provision of the El Monte Municipal Code may be filed as an infraction if the Prosecuting Attorney determines that such filing is in the interest of justice. 
(Prior code § 1200.4)  
Chapter 1.28 - PRISONERS 
Sections: 
 
1.28.010 - Labor upon public works. 
Persons confined in the city jail under a final judgment of imprisonment for violation of any ordinance may be required by the Chief of Police to perform labor on the streets or other public property or works within the city. 
(Prior code § 1202)  
1.28.020 - Streets and public works defined. 
The phrase, "streets or other public property or works within the city," as used in this chapter shall include, among things, clerical and menial labor in the city jail, or in any camp maintained for the labor of such persons on the streets or other public property or works within the city. 
(Prior code § 1203)  
1.28.030 - Security for prisoners. 
The Chief of Police shall procure and use such means as he or she shall deem necessary for the security of all prisoners under his or her charge and may prescribe and administer such rules and regulations as shall be deemed necessary to keep good order among the prisoners and compel them to do their work. 
(Prior code § 1204)  
1.28.040 - Treatment of prisoners. 
All prisoners shall be treated with the utmost kindness compatible with the enforcement of the rules and regulations necessary in compel discipline and obedience to the officer in charge. 
(Prior code § 1205)  
1.28.050 - Escape by prisoners. 
Any prisoner employed as above directed who escapes while so employed or while going in or returning from any such public work, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor in the same manner and to the same extent as violations of this code are punishable. 
(Prior code § 1206)  
Chapter 1.32 - RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION 
Sections: 
 
1.32.010 - Authority. 
Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance, the officer or employee may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, that the officer or employee shall effect entry in the manner provided in Section 1.32.020 of this chapter, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of such building or premises has been otherwise obtained. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
1.32.020 - Consent. 
If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, the officer or employee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
1.32.030 - Refusal to consent to entry. 
This chapter shall be controlling over any other ordinance or part of an ordinance on the same subject, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, unless such ordinance or part of an ordinance provides differently by an express reference to this chapter. Notwithstanding any other ordinance of this city, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, it shall not be a violation of this chapter to refuse or fail to consent to an entry for inspection. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Regular meetings. 
A.  1.  Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first Tuesday and third Tuesday of each month commencing at 6:00 p.m. If the day fixed for holding any such regular meeting falls upon (i) any legal holiday specified by Government Code Sections 6700 or 6701, (ii) upon any of those holidays specified in Section 2.68.010(B) of the El Monte Municipal Code, or (iii) the date of any general or special municipal election of the city, then said regular meeting shall be held on the next business day and shall be considered a regular meeting pursuant to Subdivision (a) of Government Code Section 54954. 
2.  All meetings of the City Council must be adjourned no later than 10:00 p.m., unless an extension of the time of adjournment is approved by a majority vote of the City Council for the purpose of considering items that are listed on the agenda, or to consider items that have been added to the agenda in accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). To ensure the observance of this subsection, the City Clerk shall publicly advise the presiding officer of the City Council at approximately 9:30 p.m., or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, of the pending adjournment requirement and applicable exceptions delineated herein. 
B.  The City Council sitting as any other decision-making body of the city may conduct standing joint regular meetings with such other bodies, including, but not limited to the El Monte Industrial Development Authority, the El Monte Water Authority, the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency, the El Monte Public Financing Authority, and the El Monte Housing Authority. 
C.  The City Council, in its discretion, may also conduct a joint meeting with any city advisory committee or commission, joint powers authority, or community organization when such bodies are scheduled to discuss items of interest to the City and its residents, provided that such bodies have agreed to the joint meeting and that the conduct of such meetings complies with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Open Meeting Act, Government Code section 54950 et seq., (the "Brown Act"). Nothing in this subsection shall operate to allow persons other than members of the City Council and those individuals authorized by the Brown Act to participate in any closed session proceeding of the City Council, the El Monte Industrial Development Authority, the El Monte Water Authority, the El Monte Redevelopment Agency, the El Monte Public Financing Authority, the El Monte Housing Authority or any other body whose membership is composed exclusively of the all of the members of the City Council. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the City Council, the El Monte Industrial Development Authority, the El Monte Water Authority, the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency, the El Monte Public Financing Authority or the El Monte Housing Authority from conducting standalone special meetings, emergency meetings, adjourned meetings or continued meetings as provided under the Brown Act. Nothing in the section shall be interpreted to require that such special meetings, emergency meetings, adjourned meetings or continued meetings be held jointly between the City Council, the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency, the El Monte Public Financing Authority and/or the El Monte Housing Authority. 
E.  All "meetings" (as defined by Government Code Section 54952.2) of City "legislative bodies" (as defined by Government Code Section 54952) shall be conducted in accordance with all provisions of the Brown Act as the same may be amended from time to time by the California legislature, including but not limited to, the City Council and the City Council as successor agency to the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency, the El Monte Water Authority, the El Monte Financing Authority, the El Monte Housing Authority, the El Monte Planning Commission, the Community Services Commission and all other City Commissions established under the El Monte Municipal Code, the El Monte Permit Committee and such other commissions and committees as may be created by the City Council now and in the future. 
(Ord. 2526 § 2, 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2783, § 3, 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2798, § 1, 7-31-2012; Ord. No. 2821, § 2, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 2847, § 2, 1-27-2015; Ord. No. 2862, § 2, 8-18-2015)  
2.04.020 - Meeting place. 
All meetings of the City Council shall be held in that certain building in the city located at 11333 Valley Boulevard, and known and referred to as the El Monte City Hall, in a room therein designated as the council chamber. The said City Council may from time to time adjourn any meeting to any room, auditorium or other locality in said building, or to any other locality within the corporate limits of the city, and such meeting when so held shall be valid for all purposes. 
(Prior code § 2101)  
2.04.030 - Council members salaries. 
Each member of the City Council shall receive a salary during each month in which he or she is a member of the City Council. The amount of such salary shall be six hundred sixty-five dollars ($665.00) per month, representing the amount specified in the last salary adjustment operative on January 23, 1990 in accordance with Ordinance No. 2285, to which shall be added the further sum of sixty-six dollars and fifty cents ($66.50) pursuant to Government Code Section 36516(a)(4) as provided below. The monthly salary herein set forth shall be applicable during the month (or portion thereof) for which said salary is due; provided, however, that the increase of six hundred sixty-five dollars ($665.00) per month herein specified shall become applicable as of April 15, 2001, unless sooner authorized by the State Legislature. 
(Ord. 2523 § 1, 2001: prior code § 2103)  
2.04.040 - Propriety of conduct while addressing the council. 
A.  The presiding officer at a meeting may in his or her discretion bar from further audience before the council, or have removed from the council chambers, any person who commits disorderly, insolent, or disruptive behavior, including but not limited to, the actions set forth in subsection B of this section. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person while addressing the council at a council meeting to violate any of the following rules after being called to order and warned to desist from such conduct: 
1.  No person shall make any personal, impertinent, profane, insolent, or slanderous remarks. 
2.  No person shall yell at the council in a loud, disturbing voice. 
3.  No person shall speak without being recognized by the presiding officer. 
4.  No person shall continue to speak after being told by the presiding officer that his or her allotted time for addressing the council has expired. 
5.  Every person shall comply with and obey the lawful orders or directives of the presiding officer. 
6.  No person shall, by disorderly, insolent, or disturbing action, speech, or otherwise, substantially delay, interrupt, or disturb the proceedings of the council. 
(Ord. 2517 § 1, 2000: prior code § 2105)  
2.04.050 - Addressing the council—Procedure. 
Each person desiring to address the council shall approach the microphone at the podium, state his or her name and city of residence for the record, state the subject he or she wishes to discuss, state whom he or she is representing if he or she represents an organization or other persons and unless further time is granted by majority vote of the council, shall limit his or her remarks to the time specified by resolution of the City Council. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a whole and not to any member thereof. No questions shall be asked of a council member or a member of the city staff without obtaining permission of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. 2517 § 2, 2000: prior code § 2106)  
2.04.060 - Addressing the council—Spokesperson for group of persons. 
In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentation, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to inquire whether or not the group has a spokesman and if so, that he or she be heard with the following speakers in the group to be limited to facts not already presented by the group spokesman. 
(Ord. 2517 § 3, 2000: prior code § 2107)  
2.04.070 - Disorderliness by members of the audience. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person in the audience at a council meeting to do any of the following after being called to order and warned to desist from such conduct: 
1.  Engage in disorderly, disruptive, disturbing, delaying or boisterous conduct, such as, but not limited to, handclapping, stomping of feet, whistling, making noise, use of profane language or obscene gestures, yelling, videotaping from anywhere other than the rear of the council chambers or similar demonstration which conduct substantially interrupts, delays, or disturbs the peace and good order of the proceedings of the council. 
2.  Refuse to comply with a lawful order or directive of the presiding officer of the council. 
B.  The sergeant-at-arms shall have the authority to remove any such person from the council chamber and place him or her under arrest, or both. 
(Ord. 2517 § 4, 2000: prior code § 2108)  
2.04.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of Sections 2.04.040, 2.04.050 or 2.04.070 of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
(Ord. 2517 § 5, 2000)  
Chapter 2.05 - FILLING CITY COUNCIL VACANCIES 
Sections: 
 
2.05.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings set forth in this section, unless otherwise stated in this chapter: 
"Acting Council" means the El Monte City Council acting or otherwise conducting official business under circumstances in which no more than two (2) of its five (5) seats are vacant. 
"Council" means the legislative body of the city of El Monte, namely the El Monte City Council, which is composed of four (4) regular Council seats and the Mayor's Council seat. 
"Mayor's Council seat" means the one seat on the El Monte City Council which is occupied by the Mayor. 
"Regular Council seat" means the four (4) seats on the El Monte City Council which are occupied by persons other than the person serving as Mayor. 
(Ord. 2647 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.05.020 - Filling vacancies—General provisions. 
A.  Vacancies to Regular Council Seats. Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of a vacancy to a regular Council seat, the Acting Council shall fill such vacancy: 
1.  By appointment; or 
2.  By calling a special election to be held on the next regularly established election date not less than one hundred fourteen (114) days from the call of the special election. 
The decision to fill such a vacancy by appointment or by special election shall be decided by a motion receiving a minimum of three (3) votes in favor of one of the two (2) courses of action listed above. If the Acting Council fails to take any action within thirty (30) days from the effective date of a vacancy, such vacancy shall then be filled by election held at the next regularly established election date. 
B.  Vacancies to the Mayor's Council Seat. Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of a vacancy to the Mayor's Council seat, the Acting Council shall fill such vacancy by calling a special election to be held on the next regularly established election date not less than one hundred fourteen (114) days from the call of the special election. In the interim, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve as the presiding officer over all meetings of the Acting Council. 
C.  Restrictions on Appointment Power. The Acting Council may not fill a vacancy by way of appointment if such appointment would result in a majority of the Council's members being appointees. 
D.  Length of Service. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person appointed or elected by special election to fill any vacated Council seat shall only serve for the unexpired balance of the term corresponding to that vacated seat. 
E.  Prohibition on Holding Other Offices. Unless authorized by state law, no person appointed or elected to serve on the Council may continue to hold any other elective office or public office. Pursuant to state law, no person appointed or elected to serve on the Council may continue to hold any position of employment with the city of El Monte or the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency. 
F.  Completion of Appointment Process. The appointment process shall be complete when a person selected to fill a Council vacancy has done all of the following: 
1.  Provided the City Clerk or his or her designee with proof of identity in the form of a valid California driver license or valid United States passport; 
2.  Provided the City Clerk or his or her designee with proof that his or her primary place of residence is located within the city of El Monte as evidenced by documentation that may include, but shall not be limited to, a utility bill bearing the person's name and address for the month immediately preceding the month in which the appointment was made; 
3.  Signs a written affidavit under penalty of perjury identifying his or her address in the city of El Monte and further stating that such address is his or her primary place of residence; 
4.  Confirms his or her willingness to accept appointment on the record of the Council meeting at which the appointment selection is made; 
5.  Properly completes and submits all other documentation required by state law and/or the El Monte Municipal Code as a prerequisite to holding office; and 
6.  Is sworn into office. 
A prospective appointee must execute the aforementioned affidavit; provide proof of identity and residency; and complete all other documentation required by state law before being sworn into office. A prospective appointee must be present at the meeting in which the appointment selection is to be made. The failure of a prospective appointee to comply with the requirements of this section by the date of the meeting at which the appointment selection is to be made shall constitute a refusal to accept appointment. 
G.  Restrictions on Calling of Special Elections. No vacated Council seat may be filled by way of a special election in any instance where the vacancy occurs less than one hundred fourteen (114) days from the date upon which the vacated seat will be up for election in any event. The foregoing restriction shall also apply to any attempt to call for a special election by way of petition as provided in Section 2.05.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2696 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 2647 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.05.030 - Exercise of appointment power. 
A.  If a regular Council seat is to be filled by appointment, the appointee shall be the person who: 
1.  Received the third highest number of votes as a candidate for a regular Council seat during the last Council election without being elected to office; and 
2.  Is not currently serving on the Council. 
If such person is unwilling, unable or legally ineligible to accept appointment; or if there is no third highest voter-getter from the last Council election, the Acting Council shall fill the vacancy by calling a special election held not less than one hundred fourteen (114) days from the call of such election. 
B.  If the presumptive appointee for a vacated regular Council seat is reasonably identifiable to the City Clerk before the decision to appoint or call a special election is made, the City Clerk shall notify such person in writing of the date, time and place of the meeting in which the Acting Council will decide the manner in which a vacancy shall be filled. Such notice shall also advise the potential appointee that: (1) his or her presence at such meeting shall be required, if he or she wishes to accept a possible appointment offer; (2) proof of identity and residency must be provided to the City Clerk's office on or before the date of the meeting; (3) a failure to attend the meeting or a failure to provide adequate proof of residency or identity shall constitute a refusal to accept appointment; and (4) the Acting Council shall be under no obligation to fill the vacancy by appointment. 
(Ord. 2647 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.05.040 - Petition calling for special election. 
A.  Section 2.05.020(A) notwithstanding, when petitions bearing at least ten (10) percent of the verified signatures of registered El Monte voters are presented to the City Clerk, a special election shall be called, provided: 
1.  Such petitions are submitted to the City Clerk within one hundred sixty (160) days from the effective date of a vacancy; 
2.  There are more than one hundred fourteen (114) days left on the unexpired term of the vacated Council seat at the time such petitions are presented to the City Clerk; and 
3.  There are more than one hundred fourteen (114) days left on the unexpired term of the vacated Council seat at the time a special election is to be called by the Acting Council following the City Clerk's certification that a sufficient number of petition signatures have been obtained as provided under subsection E of this section. 
Any person previously appointed to fill a vacated regular Council seat under such circumstances shall thereafter hold office only until the date of the special election which shall be held on the next regularly established election date not less than one hundred fourteen (114) days from the call of such election. The City Clerk shall notify any person previously appointed to the Council of the presentation of petitions as soon as reasonably possible. 
B.  Petition signatures shall be collected on a petition form furnished by the City Clerk's office. Such petition form shall, at a minimum, conform to the requirements of Elections Code Section 100. 
C.  When a petition is filed, the City Clerk shall make a prima facie examination of the petition to determine if the minimum number of required signatures have been submitted. If the number of signatures equals or exceeds the minimum, the City Clerk shall conditionally accept the petitions for filing. If the number of signatures is insufficient, the City Clerk shall reject the petitions for filing and shall return them to the petition proponent(s). Any voter who has signed a petition may withdraw his or her signature by filing a written request with the City Clerk prior to the date such petition is presented to the City Clerk by the petition proponent(s). 
D.  After petitions have been conditionally accepted by the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall have thirty (30) days from the date of filing to examine the petitions and determine if the petition(s) contain a sufficient number of valid signatures of registered voters. The City Clerk may verify each and every signature or alternatively use a random sampling method. A random sampling shall require the examination of at least five hundred (500) signatures or five (5) percent of the petition signatures, whichever is greater. If the result of the random sampling shows one hundred ten (110) percent or more of the number of signatures required are valid, the petition(s) shall be deemed sufficient. If between ninety (90) and one hundred ten (110) percent are valid, the City Clerk shall abandon the random sampling method and verify each signature. If less than ninety (90) percent of the signatures are valid by the random sampling method, the petition(s) shall be insufficient. 
E.  At the completion of the examination of the petitions, the City Clerk shall certify the petition(s) as sufficient or insufficient; and (1) notify proponents of the sufficiency or insufficiency of the petition(s); and (2) if the petition is sufficient, submit the certificate of sufficiency to the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council shall then immediately call for a special election. 
(Ord. 2647 § 1 (part), 2005)  
2.05.050 - Repeal or amendment of chapter. 
This chapter may not be repealed, amended or modified either in whole or in part absent four (4) votes in favor of such repeal, amendment or modification. The requirement for four (4) votes shall not apply when a repeal, amendment or modification is mandated by court order or becomes necessary to bring this chapter into compliance with changes to applicable state law. 
(Ord. 2647 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 2.08 - MAYOR 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Mayor's salary. 
The Mayor shall receive a salary during each month in which he or she is the Mayor. The amount of such salary shall be six hundred sixty-five dollars ($665.00) per month, representing the amount specified in the last salary adjustment operative on January 23, 1990, in accordance with Ordinance No. 2285, to which shall be added the further sum of sixty-six dollars and fifty cents ($66.50) pursuant to Government Code Section 36516(a)(4) as provided below. The monthly salary set forth in this section shall be applicable during the month (or portion of a month) for which such salary is due; provided, however, that the increase of sixty-six dollars and fifty cents ($66.50) per month herein specified shall become applicable as of April 15, 2001, unless sooner authorized by the State Legislature. 
(Ord. 2523 § 2, 2001: prior code § 2104)  
2.08.020 - Mayor—Election, term and compensation. 
The Mayor shall be elected from the city at large and shall serve for a term of two (2) years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. He or she shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his or her official duties and shall receive a salary which shall be set by ordinance in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as the salaries of Councilmembers pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 36516 as it now exists or as it may be hereafter amended by the State Legislature. 
(Prior code § 2150)  
2.08.030 - Mayor—Eligibility. 
No person shall be eligible to file as a candidate or hold office as Mayor unless he or she shall be a qualified elector at the time of filing his or her nomination papers and shall have been a resident of the city at least thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of such filing or appointment. 
(Prior code § 2150.1)  
2.08.040 - Mayor—Presiding officer. 
The Mayor shall be the official head government of the city and the Mayor shall: 
A.  Be the representative of the city for all ceremonial purposes; 
B.  Preside over the meetings of the City Council; 
C.  Make or second any motion and present and discuss any matter as a member of the Council; 
D.  Make all appointments to boards, commissions, and committees with the approval of the City Council except that appointments to the Property Maintenance and Zoning Review Commission shall be as designated in Section 2.52.020 of this title; 
E.  Sign, on behalf of the city, all contracts, ordinances, resolutions and warrants except as hereafter set forth; 
F.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed or may be assigned to him or her by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 2150.2)  
2.08.050 - Mayor Pro Tempore—Appointment and duties. 
At least as frequently as the time prescribed under Government Code Section 36801, the City Council shall meet to choose one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore. The foregoing notwithstanding, the City Council, in its sole and absolute discretion, reserves the right to make such appointments on a more frequent basis, including on an annual basis, if desired. A councilmember appointed to serve as Mayor Pro Tempore serves in such capacity at the pleasure of the City Council. If the Mayor is absent or unable to attend any meeting of the City Council, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall discharge the duties of the Mayor while the Mayor is absent. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall have all of the powers and duties of the Mayor during the Mayor's absence from a meeting of the City Council or during such period of time as the Mayor is not able to discharge the duties of office. 
(Ord. 2696 § 1 (part), 2007; prior code § 2150.3) 
(Ord. No. 2906, § 1, 1-24-2017)  
2.08.060 - Construction—Provisions governing. 
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Prior code § 1300 (part))  
2.08.070 - Reference to acts or omissions within this city. 
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Prior code § 1302 (part))  
2.08.080 - Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering. 
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. 
(Prior code § 1303 (part))  
2.08.090 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(Prior code § 1306 (part))  
2.08.100 - Notices—Service of. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit thereof in the custody of the United States Postal Service or its lawful successor, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service shall be deemed given as of the time of personal service or two (2) consecutive calendars following the deposit of the same in the custody of the United State Postal Service. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1307 (part))  
2.08.110 - Tenses. 
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present. 
(Prior code § 1309 (part))  
2.08.120 - Gender. 
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(Prior code § 1310 (part))  
2.08.130 - Number. 
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 
(Prior code § 1311 (part))  
2.08.140 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall be defined for the purposes of this code as set forth below unless the context clearly requires a different interpretation: 
1.  "Chief of Police" means the Chief of the Police Department of the city. 
2.  "City" means the city of El Monte. 
3.  "City Administrator" means the appointed official of the city who occupies the position of the chief administrative officer of the city. 
4.  "Council" means the City Council of this city. 
5.  "County" means the county of Los Angeles. 
6.  "Fire Chief" means the Chief of the Fire Department of the city. 
7.  "Goods" means and includes wares or merchandise. 
8.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
9.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
10.  Must, Shall and May. "Must" and "shall" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
11.  "Oath" means and includes affirmation. 
12.  Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance means such officer, employee, office or ordinance respectively of the city. 
13.  "Operate" means and includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. 
14.  "Ordinance" means ordinance of the city. 
15.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
16.  "Person" means and includes a natural person, any legal entity and unincorporated organization. 
17.  "Personal property" means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
18.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
19.  "Property" means and includes real and personal property. 
20.  "Real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
21.  "Sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
22.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
23.  "State" means the state of California. 
24.  "Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
25.  "Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
26.  "Written" means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
27.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 1312—1329 (part))  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.12.005 - Definition adoption. 
All references to "City Administrator" throughout the El Monte Municipal Code shall mean "City Manager." 
(Ord. 2539 § 1, 2001)  
2.12.010 - City Council-City Manager government. 
A.  A City Council-City Manager government is established and the provisions hereof shall define and implement said government for the city. 
B.  All administrative functions of the government of the city are transferred from the City Council to the Office of the City Manager as defined and limited herein. Said administrative functions shall include, without limitation, all day to day operations of the city government and the direction and supervision of the department heads and employees of the city. 
C.  The City Council retains unto itself all executive, judicial and legislative duties, functions and powers of the city not expressly delegated herein including, without limitation, the authority to enter into contracts, and convey and accept real property. 
D.  Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of that person's office, shall take the oath of office as provided for in the Constitution of this state, and shall file the same with the City Clerk. 
E.  The City Council shall fix by resolution the amounts and terms of the official bonds of all officials, officers or employees who are required by ordinance to give such bonds. All bonds shall be executed by responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Premiums on official bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2200)  
2.12.020 - Office of City Manager. 
A.  The Office of the City Manager is established, which shall consist of a City Manager, an Assistant City Manager and such deputies and secretaries as the City Manager may appoint. 
B.  The City Manager shall be head of the administrative branch of the city. The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. 
C.  The Assistant City Manager shall assist the City Manager in the performance of the duties, functions and powers of said office. In the absence of the City Manager or in the event the City Manager is unable to perform said duties, functions or powers, the Assistant City Manager shall assume the duties, functions and powers of said office unless and until the City Council directs otherwise. In the event that there is no Assistant City Manager or the Assistant City Manager is not available, the City Manager shall designate a department head to act as City Manager during any period that the City Manager is unavailable. 
D.  In the exercise of their duties and powers, the City Manager and the Assistant City manager shall endeavor, at all times, to exercise the highest degree of courtesy, patience, and tact in dealing with the public and with all city commissions, boards, departments, officers and employees and shall use their best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship between all personnel employed by the city to the end that the highest possible standards of public service be continuously maintained. 
E.  The City Manager, the City Attorney and such other officers of the city as may be designated by the City Council, shall be accorded a seat at the City Council table and shall be entitled to participate in the deliberations of the City Council, but shall not have a vote. 
F.  The persons appointed to the Office of City Manager shall be employees of the city for purposes of the Governmental Tort Claims Act, and said persons shall retain all immunities and rights thereunder. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2201)  
2.12.030 - Duties and powers of the City Manager. 
The City Manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city under the direction and control of the City Council except as otherwise provided herein. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation, it shall be the duty, function and power of the City Manager to: 
A.  Appoint and maintain competent, qualified department heads, including the Assistant City Manager, and all other employees of the city and to direct and reorganize all employees within or between departments and divisions; 
B.  Appoint committees to consider issues and problems and make recommendations to the City Manager on such matters; 
C.  Attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused by the Mayor or the City Council; 
D.  Assemble estimates of the financial revenues and needed expenditures of the city for each ensuing year, and prepare a program of activities within the financial capacity of the city, embodying in it a budget document with proper supporting schedules and analyses; 
E.  Control and direct all department heads and their subordinate employees except the City Attorney, City Clerk and City Treasurer; 
F.  Discipline all employees in the administrative service, and authorize department heads to discipline their subordinates; 
G.  Enforce the laws of the state pertaining to the city and all laws and ordinances of the city, and require that all contracts, franchises, permits and other privileges or entitlements granted by the city are faithfully observed; 
H.  Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, parks and property owned or controlled by the city; 
I.  Inform the City Council at all times on the financial condition and needs of the city and make such other reports and recommendations as may be desirable for or requested by the City Council; 
J.  Investigate or inquire into the affairs or operation of the city government and any department or employee and any complaints against the operation of the city government or any employee of the city; and when so authorized by the City Council, employ such auditors, consultants, counsel or investigators to aid in such investigations or inquiries; 
K.  Organize or reorganize the city departments and divisions in the best interest of the city; 
L.  Overrule or set aside any action or decision of a department head or any subordinate employee; 
M.  Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated from time to time by ordinance, resolution or minute action of the City Council; 
N.  Prepare the budget annually, submit it to the City Council and be responsible for its implementation after adoption by the City Council; 
O.  Prepare and present to the City Council an annual report of the city's affairs, including a summary of reports of department heads, and such other reports as the Council may request; 
P.  Prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary or expedient for the conduct of proper administration of the city or its employees, and to revoke, suspend, or amend any such rule or regulation; 
Q.  Purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies and equipment for all of the departments or divisions of the city in accordance with procedures established by ordinance; 
R.  Recommend to the City Council the adoption of such programs, measures and ordinances as may be necessary or expedient; 
S.  Serve in any appointed office within the city government when appointed thereto by the City Council, and hold and perform duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council; 
T.  Submit to the City Council, at each meeting for its approval, all claims and bills approved for payment by the City Manager. (Ord 2541 §§ 2, 4, 2001; Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2202)  
2.12.040 - Positions assumed by City Manager. 
The City Manager is appointed to, and shall assume, all positions in the administrative service of the city government described in this code including but not limited to: 
A.  "Personnel Officer" pursuant to Sections 2.72.020 and 2.72.70. 
B.  "Appointing authority" pursuant to Sections 2.72.120 and 2.72.200 and the "appointing power" and "Personnel Officer" pursuant to the personnel rules and regulations. 
C.  "Purchasing Agent" pursuant to Section 3.24.040 in lieu of a resolution. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2203)  
2.12.050 - Powers subject to municipal code. 
The exercise of the powers and duties of the City Manager set out in this chapter, and the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to this code and to any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this code including the classification of employees, the appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion, removal, suspension, dismissal and reinstatement of such employees and the procedures outlined therein governing the same. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2204)  
2.12.060 - Appointment, qualifications and term. 
A.  The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority vote of the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. 
B.  The City Manager shall be selected on the basis of the administrative abilities and qualifications of the person so appointed, with particular emphasis on actual experience in, and knowledge of, the administration of city government. 
C.  The City Manager shall not be required to reside in the city upon appointment provided that the City Manager, as a condition of appointment, shall reside in the city within six (6) months after the appointment unless the City Council excuses this condition. 
D.  The City Council may enter into employment agreements with the City Manager and the Assistant City Manager that delineate the terms and conditions of their employment provided that said terms and conditions are not contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City Council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the City Manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
F.  No Councilmember shall be eligible for appointment to the office of City Manager during the term for which that Councilmember shall have been elected nor within two (2) years thereafter. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2205)  
2.12.070 - Compensation. 
The City Manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the City Council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the Council shall designate. The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the duties of said office provided that receipts shall be submitted for all such expenses. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2506 [2206])  
2.12.080 - City Council direction to City Manager. 
The City Manager shall take direction and orders from the City Council only through and at a duly convened meeting of the City Council. For this purpose, the Mayor or any Councilmember may request any proposed direction or order to the City Manager to be placed on the agenda for consideration and action by the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The City Council may direct or order the City Manager on all matters within its jurisdiction. Neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember shall give any direction or order to the City Manager except as provided herein. However, the Mayor and each Councilmember may inquire of the City Manager on any matter pertaining to the affairs and operations of the city or the performance of the duties of the City Manager. Further, the Mayor and Councilmembers may discuss or suggest anything pertaining to the affairs and operation of the city with the City Manager. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2507 [2207])  
2.12.090 - City Council relations with administration. 
The Mayor and Councilmembers shall deal with the department heads and employees of the city government only through the City Manager; and neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember shall give orders to any employee of the city government. However, the Mayor and Councilmembers may inquire about the affairs and operations of the city government from a department head or employee of the city government; but neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember may direct, instruct or order a department head or employee of the city government. Whenever the Mayor or a Councilmember requests information, the department head or employee shall to whom the request was made shall advise the City Manager immediately as to the nature and timing of the information requested. In the event that the information requested may be confidential or subject the city to liability for its disclosure, the City Manager shall request a ruling thereon from the City Attorney. Unless instructed to the contrary by the City Manager or the City Attorney, the department head or employee shall provide the information requested within a reasonable period of time to the Mayor or Councilmember who made the request. The City Manager shall not take any part in securing, nor shall contribute any money, toward the nomination or election of any candidate for municipal office. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2508 [2208])  
2.12.100 - Cooperator with the City Manager. 
It shall be the duty of all department heads, employees, the City Attorney, the City Clerk and the City Treasurer to assist and cooperate with the City Manager in the discharge of his or her duties and powers and the administration of the affairs of the city. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2209)  
2.12.110 - Attendance at Commission meetings. 
The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission, and any other commission, board, or committee created by the City Council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At any such meeting, which the City Manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commission, board, or committee as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof. The City Manager shall inform such commission, board, or committee as to the status of any matter being considered by the City Council pertaining to that body, and shall cooperate to the fullest extent with members of all commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2210)  
2.12.120 - Contract authority. 
The authority to enter into contracts and to bind the city to any contract is reserved to the City Council except as explicitly delegated to the City Manager herein. Any contract signed or entered into by the City Manager contrary to the provisions hereof and any resolution adopted hereunder shall be null and void. The sole authority of the City Manger to sign contracts or to enter into contracts on behalf of the city shall be limited to the following: 
A.  The City Manager may sign any contract approved by the City Council, which approval authorized the City Manager to sign the contract on behalf of the city; and 
B.  The City Manager may enter into contracts binding the city provided that the City Council adopts a resolution that specifies the subject matter of such contracts, the dollar amount of such contracts for budgeted items or services only, the period of such authorization and the approval of the City Attorney as to the form of such contracts. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2211)  
2.12.130 - Removal of City Manager. 
A.  The City Council may remove the City Manager at any time upon a majority vote of the City Council. In case of an intended removal, the City Manager shall be furnished with a written notice thereof, at least, forty eight (48) hours prior to the intended removal. The City Council may remove the City Manager, in its sole discretion; and its action to remove shall be final and it shall not depend upon any particular showing. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election the Mayor or a Councilmember is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected Mayor or Councilmember, or a reorganized City Council, to observe the actions and ability of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of the office. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the City Council from removing the City Manager for acts of moral turpitude or of violation of any law which would bring disrepute upon his or her office or has committed any acts of dishonesty. 
(Ord. 2504 § 2 (part), 1999: prior code § 2212)  
Chapter 2.16 - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Office of City Attorney. 
A.  The office of City Attorney is hereby established which shall consist of one person holding the office of City Attorney who shall be appointed by the City Council and such Assistant and Deputy City Attorneys as may be appointed by the City Attorney. All persons holding the Office of City Attorney, Assistant or Deputy City Attorney shall be admitted and licensed to practice law in California. The person appointed to the office of City Attorney shall possess sufficient experience, knowledge and judgment in municipal law as may be required by the City Council. 
B.  The City Attorney, each Assistant and Deputy City Attorney shall take and sign an oath of office and file same with the City Clerk prior to assuming the duties of said office provided that no oath shall be required by any lawyer contracted as special counsel by the City Council. 
C.  For purposes of the Governmental Tort Claims Act, the City Attorney, each Assistant and Deputy City Attorney is an employee of the city. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2250)  
2.16.020 - Duties of the City Attorney. 
A.  The City Attorney shall be legal counsel to the city on legal matters affecting or pertaining to the city. In such capacity, the City Attorney shall advise the City Council, all boards and commissions of the city, all officials, officers and employees of the city on all legal matters affecting or pertaining to the city which are brought to the attention of the City Attorney by the Mayor, a City Councilmember, the City Administrator, or the City Administrator's designee, provided that the City Attorney, at all times, shall represent the interests of the city. 
B.  The duties of the City Attorney shall include the following: 
1.  Attend regular meetings of the City Council unless excused by the Mayor or the City Council; 
2.  Attend special meetings of the City Council as may be requested by the Mayor or City Administrator; 
3.  Attend regular and special meetings of the Planning Commission; 
4.  Attend regular and special meetings of the City's boards or commissions as may be necessary from time to time; 
5.  Approve or prepare all ordinances and resolutions; 
6.  Approve, negotiate and/or prepare all contracts to which the city is a party, which shall be a condition of their validity and effectiveness; 
7.  Defend all actions brought against the city, its elected and appointed officials, and all of its employees except as otherwise permitted by law; 
8.  Prosecute all civil actions in favor of the city as may be authorized by the City Council; 
9.  Prosecute any civil actions in favor of the city which are authorized by statute if said statute provides for the recovery of attorneys fees and if, in the opinion of the City Attorney it is reasonably likely that the city would recover attorneys fees sufficient to pay for the cost of litigation; 
10.  Prosecute all violations of the El Monte Municipal Code which constitute infractions or misdemeanors; 
11.  Report to the City Council on the legal affairs of the city in the manner and time as requested by the City Council; 
12.  Review and supervise all liability claims filed against the city except for those asserted against the police department or employees thereof; 
13.  Supervise the Assistant and Deputy City Attorneys and each special counsel retained by the City Council; 
14.  Such duties and functions as the City Council may delegate by contract or resolution. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2251)  
2.16.030 - Authority of the City Attorney. 
The City Attorney is vested with the following authority and functions: 
A.  Appear in all courts of competent jurisdiction on behalf of the city and represent the interests of the city in all actions or proceedings, whether legal, equitable or otherwise, to which the city or its officials, officers and employees may become parties. 
B.  Contract for special counsel to provide legal services and for litigation experts to provide specialized knowledge to the city provided that all such contracts shall be approved by the City Council and that the cost thereof shall not exceed the amounts authorized or approved by the City Council. 
C.  Delegate any duty of the City Attorney to an Assistant City Attorney, a Deputy City Attorney or special counsel. 
D.  Negotiate, review and/or approve all contracts to which the city is a party and recommend their approval to the City Council. 
E.  Join, as Amicus, those appeals to which the city is not a party but the outcome of which would affect the interests of the city. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2252)  
2.16.040 - Cooperation with the City Attorney. 
A.  All elected officials, officers, appointees, employees, contractor employees and contractors of the city shall provide assistance, cooperation and information to the City Attorney in the performance of the duties and functions described herein. 
B.  All officers, appointees, employees, contractor employees and contractors of the city shall disclose all information known to them about any matter that may affect or pertain to the legal interests of the city. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2253)  
2.16.050 - Contract approval. 
No officer, appointee, employee or contractor employee of the city shall negotiate any contract on behalf of the city without the advice, consent and direction of the City Attorney. No officer, appointee, employee or contractor employee of the city shall enter into any contract on behalf of the city without the written approval of the City Attorney and the authorization of the City Council. Any contract entered into on behalf of the city contrary to the provisions hereof shall be null and void and not binding on the city. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2254)  
2.16.060 - Compensation. 
The City Council shall determine the compensation of the City Attorney by resolution and/or written agreement. The City Council may grant such benefits that are available to the management employees of the city to the City Attorney, Assistant City Attorney or Deputy City Attorney. The City Council may reimburse such attorneys for their reasonable travel and lodging expenses when necessary to perform the city's business or attend seminars on municipal matters. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2255)  
2.16.070 - Term of office. 
The person appointed to the office of City Attorney shall hold said office at the pleasure of the City Council or for such term prescribed by the City Council provided that said term shall not exceed three (3) years from the date of any appointment or from the date of any renewal of such term or appointment. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2256)  
2.16.080 - Agreement. 
The City Council may enter into a written agreement with the City Attorney or any Assistant City Attorney or Deputy City Attorney prescribing the term of such appointment and such other terms and conditions of employment as may be deemed necessary and reasonable including compensation provided that said agreement may not conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2502 § 1 (part), 1999: prior code § 2257)  
Chapter 2.20 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Creation. 
In accordance with Title 4, Division 3, Part 3, Chapter 2, Article 1, Section 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state of California, and in order to establish a central agency for the uniform processing and development of all fiscal, accounting and budgetary functions within the city government, there is established a Department of Finance. 
(Prior code § 2800)  
2.20.020 - Powers, duties and responsibilities. 
The office of Director of Finance is established. The Director of Finance shall be the head of the Finance Department of the city and shall supervise and direct the activities and functions of the Department of Finance. He or she shall have the power and be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities under the jurisdiction and direction of the City Administrative Officer: 
A.  Plan, organize, direct and supervise the accounting, auditing, budget preparation, cost accounting, licensing and computer service activities, functions and systems of the city; 
B.  As liaison deputy for the City Administrative Officer, coordinate various city tax and other revenue producing programs and assist the City Administrative office on special city-wide management functions and projects, such as long-term capital budgeting, community redevelopment and insurance programs; 
C.  Maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and of each of the respective departments, divisions and services thereof, and prescribe the accounting and bookkeeping procedure that may now or hereafter be established or in operation in any department; 
D.  Perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the sentence of accounting progresses; 
E.  Assist in the preparation of the annual budget and in the administration thereof as the City Administrative Officer may direct; prepare instructions and forms for securing budget estimates and projections to effect a balanced budget; supervise the preparation of copies of the budget and its distribution; study financial management and accounting methods for city functions and recommend improvements; 
F.  Assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, pre-auditing, presenting and disbursement of claims, warrants and demands against the city, including payrolls, to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; audit all expenditures as to budget or Council authorization; audit and approve for payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and demands; prepare and submit to the City Council periodically a register of audited demands in conformance with state law; supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys; 
G.  Review revenue and expenditure reports in comparison with the approved budget and recommend controls necessary to keep budget in balance, and participate in the development of instructions and forms for the planning of a capital outlay program; 
H.  Cooperate in the purchase of all services, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the city; give general direction for the purchasing function of the city and audit and approve all purchase orders for payment; conduct special studies, prepare special reports and assist in general city management problems as directed by the City Administrative Officer; 
I.  Supervise the License Division and the City Treasurer s functions in cooperation with the elected City Treasurer and supervise the Water Department financial accounting and the Computer Services Division; 
J.  Under the direction of the City Administrative Officer, plan and direct the implementation of appropriate policies, operating methods and operating results of the program of business licensing, motel-hotel tax, sales tax, cashiering and insurance escrows, including the preparation of regular and special reports covering the revision, improvement, or adjustment of these programs and related services, fees or expenditures; 
K.  On behalf of and as directed by the City Administrative Officer, provide liaison with the office of the City Treasurer; 
L.  On behalf of the City Administrative Officer and in cooperation with other departments, develop and administer a long-term capital budget providing for the construction of essential facilities as needed and the financing thereof; 
M.  Perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the City Clerk or the City Controller, and the City Clerk and the City Controller shall be relieved of such duties, including all such duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Article 1 of Chapter 4, Part 2, Division 3, Title 4, and by Sections 40802 through and including 40805 of the Government Code of the state of California; 
N.  Cooperate with other department heads in offering assistance on financial problems and maintaining records and cost records of financial activities; 
O.  Perform such duties as may be imposed upon him or her by law or by the direction of the City Council or the City Administrative Officer. 
(Prior code § 2801)  
2.20.030 - Financial reports. 
The Department of Finance shall prepare and present to the City Administrative Officer the following reports in sufficient detail as to show the exact financial condition of the city: 
A.  Quarterly, or more frequently as the City Administrative Officer may direct, a statement of all receipts, disbursements and balances of the city; 
B.  An annual statement of report on the financial condition of the city; 
C.  Such other financial and activity reports as may be required by the City Council or the City Administrative Officer; 
D.  Reports for state and private agencies. 
(Prior code § 2802)  
2.20.040 - Appointment of deputies. 
With the consent of the City Administrative Officer, the Director of Finance may appoint one or more deputies, as may be necessary. 
(Prior code § 2805)  
2.20.050 - Bond. 
The Director of Finance shall execute a bond to the city in the same amount as required of the City Clerk by the provisions of Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state, said bond to be in a reasonable amount recommended by the City Attorney and approved by the City Council by resolution, but in no event less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Prior code § 2806)  
2.20.060 - Substituting of Director of Finance for Clerk. 
In all ordinances or parts of ordinances and resolutions where the words "City Clerk" are used pertaining to any financial or accounting duties, or the words "City Controller" are used in any context, said words shall be read and construed to be and mean "Director of Finance," and to that extent all said ordinances, parts of ordinances, resolutions and parts of the Code are amended to read as if the term "Director of Finance" were used. 
(Prior code § 2807)  
Chapter 2.24 - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Creation. 
A City Planning Commission is established. 
(Prior code § 2400)  
2.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms set forth in this section shall have the following meanings unless otherwise indicated in this chapter. 
"Brown Act" means the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.) of the state of California. 
"Commission" means the City Planning Commission of the city of El Monte which is composed of five (5) Commission seats. 
"Commissioner" means any one of the five (5) occupants of the five (5) Commission seats that constitute the City Planning Commission of the city of El Monte. The plural term "Commissioners" can refer to more than one Commissioner or all five (5) Commissioners, whichever meaning is reasonably appropriate given the context. 
"Council" means the legislative body of the city of El Monte, namely the El Monte City Council, which is composed of five (5) Council seats, including the Council seat occupied by the Mayor. 
(Ord. 2629 § 1 (part), 2004: amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 2401) 
(Ord. No. 2870, § 2, 12-15-2015)  
2.24.030 - Membership, appointment, and term. 
A.  Composition. The Commission shall consist of five (5) members. 
B.  Appointment of Commissioners. The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with Government Code Section 40605 as the same may be amended from time to time. 
C.  General Commission Term. Commissioners shall serve four-year terms, subject to the limitations set forth under Section 2.24.040(B). In the event a Commissioner's term expires before a replacement has been appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council and if the loss of the outgoing Commissioner would also cause the Commission to lack a quorum to conduct business, then the Commissioner whose term has expired shall continue to validly serve on the Commission until such time as a replacement is appointed and approved but in no event may such extension term exceed a period of ninety (90) calendar days from the date the Commissioner's term expired. No person who has served on the Commission for a period of at least eight (8) consecutive years may be reappointed to serve on the Commission prior to the lapse of one full year from the date his or her term on the Commission expired. In those situations where a Commissioner continues to serve on the Commission notwithstanding the lapse of the eight-year maximum limit for the reasons set forth under the second sentence of this paragraph, then the one-year period during which the outgoing Commissioner may not be considered for re-appointment shall be deemed to commence upon the earlier of the following, the date his or her replacement on the Commission was sworn in or the end of the ninety-day maximum period in which a Commissioner whose term has expired is allowed to continue serving in the interest of preventing the loss of a quorum to conduct business. 
D.  Basic Qualifications. No person shall be eligible for appointment or re-appointment to the Commission, unless at the time of such appointment or reappointment, he or she: (i) is eighteen (18) years of age or older; (ii) for at least one year prior to such appointment or re-appointment was a resident of the city of El Monte; (iii) holds a bachelor's degree and/or at least five (5) years experience in the field of real estate, engineering, architecture, public administration, urban planning, or construction management. No person shall continue to serve as a Commissioner once he or she ceases to be a resident of the city of El Monte. A prospective Commissioner's submission of documentation that reasonably corroborates his or her qualifications or residence may be a condition for appointment. 
E.  Restriction on Assuming Other Offices or Positions. No Commissioner shall hold or assume any other remunerative office or position with the City after being sworn in as a Commissioner. In the absence of a state or federal statute to the contrary, no Commissioner may occupy another public office, whether elected or appointed, while serving on the Commission, including but not necessarily limited to, election or appointment to any project area committee created pursuant to California's Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code Sections 33000 et seq.). The foregoing shall not preclude a Commissioner from serving on a commission, committee, or other public board, where the Commissioner is serving as the Commission-designated and Council-approved representative of the Commission. Any Commissioner serving on such a commission, committee or other public board in such a capacity serves at the pleasure of the Commission and the Council and may be removed from such commission, committee or other public board by either the Commission or the Council at any time with or without cause. 
(Ord. 2629 § 1 (part), 2004: prior code § 2401.1) 
(Ord. No. 2809, § 4, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 2870, § 3, 12-15-2015)  
2.24.040 - Vacancies and removal. 
A.  Voluntary Vacancies. If a Commissioner voluntarily vacates a Commission seat for any reason, the vacating Commissioner shall be replaced in accordance with Section 2.24.030(B) and the replacement Commissioner will serve for the unexpired balance of the outgoing Commissioner's four-year term. Thereafter, the replacement Commissioner may be reappointed, in accordance with Government Code Section 40605, for a subsequent four-year term, subject to the maximum limit of eight consecutive years referenced under Section 2.24.030(D), above. 
B.  Tenure at Will; Removal without Cause. Nothing in this chapter shall operate to entitle any Commissioner to a right to serve a full four-year Commission term or the right to serve a maximum of eight (8) consecutive years on the Commission. All Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed at any time with or without cause by no less than three (3) affirmative votes of the City Council. A motion to remove a Commission may be made and seconded by any member of the Council, provided, however, that the seating of any replacement shall be made in accordance with Government Code Section 40605. 
(Ord. 2629 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2526 § 4, 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2870, § 4, 12-15-2015)  
2.24.050 - Internal organization. 
A.  Chair and Vice-Chair. On the first meeting in January of each calendar year, the Commissioners shall nominate and elect from among themselves one Commissioner to serve as Chair of the Commission and one Commissioner to serve a Vice-Chair of the Commission. A Commissioner elected to serve as Chair or Vice-Chair shall occupy that post for a term of one year, unless the Commissioners vote to remove the Chair or Vice-Chair before the end of their terms by no less than four (4) votes with all Commissioners present for the vote or unless a Commissioner serving as Chair or Vice-Chair is removed from the Commission or vacates his or her Commission seat. The Chair shall preside over all meetings of the Commission. The Vice-Chair shall assume the duties of the Chair when the Chair is absent from a meeting of the Commission. In the event the Commissioner serving as Chair is removed from the Commission or vacates his or her Commission seat, the Vice-Chair shall assume the position of Chair for the remainder of the removed or vacating Chair's one-year term. If the Vice-Chair is elevated to the post of Chair due to the removal or vacation of the post by the departing Chair, the Commission shall elect a new Vice-Chair from among themselves no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. 
B.  Additional Offices. Subject to all restrictions applicable to Commissioners under this chapter, the Commission may create and fill such other internal offices as it may determine to be advisable or desirable. 
C.  Meetings. The Commission shall hold duly-noticed, regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers of the El Monte City Hall, City Hall East, 11333 Valley Boulevard, El Monte, California or at such other time and/or location as may be convenient or necessary, provided timely notice of such alternate time and/or location is given. In no event shall the Commission fail to meet at least once each month. The Commission may hold such additional adjourned or special meetings as may be called in accordance with the provisions of the Brown Act and any other applicable state statutes or provisions of the code. If the second or fourth Tuesday of a given month falls on the same date as a federal, state or city holiday, such regular meeting may be adjourned to the next regular meeting day after such holiday and all meetings otherwise scheduled or noticed to be held on a regular meeting day falling upon such holiday shall be held on the next regular meeting day following the holiday without the necessity of any further notice. 
D.  Internal Rules for the Conduct of Business. Subject to Council overrule and in conformity with the Brown Act and all other applicable federal and/or state laws or this code, the Commission may adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record subject to disclosure in the absence of any applicable statutory or common law privileges, restrictions or exemptions. 
E.  Administrative Support Staff. The Planning Division of the El Monte Community Development Department (hereinafter, the "Division") shall be the city division responsible for working with and providing administrative support to the Commission as it conducts its business. The Division shall make its phone and fax numbers available to each Commissioner. At least two (2) staff member of the Division shall attend each regularly scheduled, adjourned or special meeting of the Commission. 
(Ord. 2629 § 1 (part), 2004: prior code § 2403) 
(Ord. No. 2821, § 3, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 2847, § 3, 1-27-2015)  
2.24.060 - Duties and powers. 
The Commission shall have all the rights, privileges, powers and duties applicable to general law cities as set forth under Title 7 (Planning and Land Use) of California's Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Sections 65000 et seq.) hereinafter referred to as the "Planning and Zoning Law. " Such statutory rights, privileges, powers and duties are incorporated into this section by reference and made a part hereof as if the same were set forth in full in so far as the same relates to general law cities. All of the rights, privileges, powers and duties relating to general law cities under the Planning and Zoning Law are granted to the Commission, the Council, the members thereof and those applicable city officials with administrative authority over the city's planning and zoning processes, including but not limited to, the City Manager, the Deputy City Manager for Community Development, the Planning Services Manager or their respective designees. All of the duties required to be performed under the Planning and Zoning Law or under this code, shall be so performed in the time and manner provided therein. In the event any provision of this chapter is in conflict with, or contrary to, the Planning and Zoning Law, the Planning and Zoning Law shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2629 § 2 (part), 2004)  
2.24.070 - Financial limitation. 
Neither the Commission, nor any Commissioner or group of Commissioners thereof, nor any person employed thereby, shall incur any financial liability or execute any contract in the name of or on the behalf of the city of El Monte or its various departments or divisions, without the express, prior consent and authorization of the Council by resolution. 
(Ord. 2629 § 2 (part), 2004)  
2.24.080 - Stipend. 
The Council, in its sole discretion, may permit the granting of a stipend to Commissioners or compensation for Council-authorized costs and expenses incurred by a Commissioner on behalf of the Commission or the city of El Monte. The Council, in its sole discretion may set, increase or decrease the amount or rate of the stipend at any time with or without cause or notice to the Commissioners. Service on the Commission is voluntary and any stipend Commissioners may receive shall not be construed as an inducement to, or consideration for, their service on the Commission but merely a means to defray costs and expenses incident to such service. Commissioners shall have no vested interest in receiving any stipend the Council, in its sole discretion, may elect to provide. Accordingly, the Council may reduce the amount or rate of stipends or eliminate the grant of stipends altogether at any time it determines such action is necessary or desirable. Any of the actions authorized under this section shall be accomplished by resolution of the Council. 
(Ord. 2629 § 2 (part), 2004)  
2.24.090 - Application of 2015 amendments to Chapter 2.24. 
As to all members of the Commission who are seated and serving the Commission as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2870 which implements the 2015 amendments to Chapter 2.24, any and all consecutive years of service on the Commission served by a sitting member prior and up to the effective date of Ordinance No. 2870 shall not be counted toward four-year term referenced under Section 2.24.030(D) or the maximum limit of eight (8) consecutive years of service also referenced under Section 2.24.030(D). All members seated and serving on the Commission as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2870 shall be deemed to be at the start of their first four-year term on the Commission. The foregoing notwithstanding, the right of the City Council to removal any such sitting members pursuant to Section 2.24.040(B), above, shall govern and control. 
(Ord. 2629 § 2 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 2870, § 5, 12-15-2015)  
Chapter 2.25 - CITY COMMISSIONS (NON-PLANNING)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2809, § 3, adopted Jan. 8, 2012, amended Ch. 2.25 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 2.25, §§ 2.25.010—2.25.080, pertained to the El Monte Veterans and Homeless Affairs Commission and derived from Ord. No. 2590, § 1 (part), 2003. 
 
2.25.010 - Commissions established. 
Three (3) commissions are hereby established by the City Council: the Cultural Affairs Commission, Community Affairs Commission, and the Veterans and Homeless Affairs Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013)  
2.25.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter 2.25 (City Commissions (Non-Planning)), the terms set forth in this section shall have the following meanings unless otherwise indicated in this chapter. 
"Acting Council" means the El Monte City Council acting and operating under circumstances in which at least one but no more than two (2) of its five (5) seats are vacant. 
"Advisory Committee" means that certain advisory body to the El Monte Patriotic Commission composed of representatives of various community organizations (including local service organizations) with a special interest in promoting and participating in patriotic events and activities within the city of El Monte. 
"Brown Act" means the Ralph M. Act (Government Code Section 54590 et seq.) of the state of California. 
"City" means the city of El Monte, a California municipal corporation. 
"Code" means the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Commission" means either the Cultural Affairs Commission, Community Affairs Commission, or the Veterans and Homeless Affairs Commission. The plural term "Commissions" means the Cultural Affairs Commission, Community Affairs Commission, and the Veterans and Homeless Affairs Commission. 
"Commission seat" means any one of the ten (10) membership positions on each of the Commissions which are occupied by each of the ten (10) Commissioners. The plural term "Commission seats" may refer to one or more Commission seats or all ten (10) Commission seats, whichever meaning is reasonably appropriate given the context. 
"Commissioner" means any one of the ten (10) occupants of the ten (10) Commission seats that constitute each Commission. 
"Council" means the legislative body of the city of El Monte, namely the El Monte City Council, which is composed of five (5) Council seats, including the Council seat occupied by the mayor. 
"Council seat" means any one of the five (5) membership positions on the Council which are occupied by each of the five (5) Council Member. 
"Council member" means any one of the five (5) occupants of the five (5) Council seats that constitute the Council. The plural term "Council Member" shall be used to refer to all five (5) of the occupants of the five (5) Council seats that constitute the Council. 
"Council seat" means any one of the five (5) membership positions on the Council which are occupied by each of the five (5) Council members. 
"Normal Expiration Date" means the date upon which the term of office for a particular Council seat would otherwise expire, absent an early vacancy. For example, in the case of a Council seat occupied by the Mayor, the normal expiration date is a date that is two (2) years from the date a person is sworn in as Mayor. In the case of all other Council seats, the normal expiration date is a date that is four (4) years from the date a person is sworn in as a Council member. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013)  
2.25.030 - Membership. 
A.  Composition. Each Commission shall be composed of ten (10) Commissioners in total. 
B.  Appointment of Commissioners. The members of each Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with Government Code Section 40605 as the same may be amended from time to time. 
C.  General Term. Commissioners shall serve four-year terms, subject to the limitations set forth under Section 2.25.040(B). No person who has served on a Commission subject to this chapter for a period of at least eight (8) consecutive years may be re-appointed to serve on the Commission prior to the lapse of one full year from the date his or her term on the Commission expired. 
D.  Basic Qualifications. No person shall be eligible for appointment as a Commissioner unless at the time of such appointment he or she: (1) is eighteen (18) years of age or older; and (2) is, and for at least one year prior to such appointment was, a resident of the city of El Monte. No person shall continue to serve as a Commissioner once he or she ceases to be a resident of the city of El Monte. When a Commissioner ceases to be a resident of the city of El Monte, the Commission seat he or she occupies shall be declared vacated by the City Council. 
E.  Restriction on Assuming Other Offices or Positions. No Commissioner subject to this chapter shall hold or assume any other remunerative office or position with the City after being sworn in as a Commissioner under this chapter or under Chapter 2.24. In the absence of a state or federal statute to the contrary, no Commissioner may occupy another public office, whether elected or appointed, while serving on the Commission, including but not necessarily limited to, election or appointment to any project area committee created pursuant to California's Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code Sections 33000 et seq.). The foregoing shall not preclude a Commissioner from serving on a commission, committee, or other public board, where the Commissioner is serving as the Commission-designated and Council-approved representative of the Commission. Any Commissioner serving on such a commission, committee or other public board in such a capacity serves at the pleasure of the Commission and the Council and may be removed from such commission, committee or other public board by either the commission her or she serves on or the Council at any time with or without cause. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 2870, § 6, 12-15-2015)  
2.25.040 - Vacancies and removal. 
A.  Voluntary Vacancies. If a Commissioner voluntarily vacates a Commission seat for any reason, the vacating Commissioner shall be replaced in accordance with Section 2.25.030(B) and the replacement Commissioner will serve for the unexpired balance of the outgoing Commissioners four-year term. Thereafter, the replacement Commissioner may be reappointed for a subsequent four-year term, subject to the maximum limit of eight (8) consecutive years referenced under Section 2.25.030(D), above. 
B.  Tenure at Will; Removal without Cause. Nothing in this chapter shall operate to entitle any Commissioner to a right to serve a full four-year term or the right to serve a maximum of eight (8) consecutive years on any Commission subject to this chapter or on any other board, commission or committee of the city; rather, all Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed at any time with or without cause by no less than three (3) affirmative votes of the City Council. 
C.  Removal by Council for Cause. The City Council, by direct action or upon the recommendation of the Commission, may remove a Commissioner in the event of the following: 
1.  Conduct Unbecoming. The Commissioner engages in conduct unbecoming of a representative for the City, including but not limited to the conviction of a felony or any crime of moral turpitude; wrongfully and knowingly representing personal positions, opinions, or beliefs as being those of the entire Commission or the city; the criminal or negligent misappropriation or misuse of Commission funds or other city property (including city funds); or legally binding (or attempting to legally bind) the Commission or the city to promises, assurances or agreements that have not been duly ratified by the Commission or the Council, whichever is the appropriate ratifying body; or 
2.  Unexcused Absences from Meetings. The Commissioner fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of a Commission without notifying city staff or the Commission that he or she will be absent prior to the start of the regularly scheduled meeting. All approved absences must be noted in the minutes of the Commission in order to be valid. 
D.  Ineligibility Following Removal—Ineligible Persons. The following persons shall be ineligible for appointment to a Commission for a period of one year from the date of their vacancy or removal from the Commission, whichever the case may be: 
1.  Any Commissioner removed by the Council pursuant to Section 2.25.040(C); and/or 
2.  Any Commissioner who has served on a Commission for eight (8) consecutive years of service on a Commission, however, such ineligibility in this Section 2.25.040(D)(2) shall only apply to the same Commission on which such Commissioner served his or her eight (8) consecutive years. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 2870, § 7, 12-15-2015)  
2.25.050 - Internal organization. 
A.  Commission Officers. The Commissioners of each Commission shall nominate and elect from among themselves one Commissioner who shall serve as Chair; one Commissioner who shall serve as Vice-chair; one Commissioner who shall serve as Treasurer; and one commissioner who shall serve as Secretary. Any Commissioner elected to serve as Chair, Vice-chair, Treasurer or Secretary shall occupy that Commission post for a term of one year, unless the Commissioners vote to remove a Commissioner elected to serve as Chair; Vice-Chair; Treasurer or Secretary before the end of his or her term by no less than seven votes with all commissioner present for the vote or unless a Commissioner serving as Chair; Vice-Chair; Treasurer or Secretary is removed from the Commission or vacates his or her Commission seat. The Chair shall preside over all meetings of the Commission. The Vice-Chair shall assume the duties of the Chair when the Chair is absent from a meeting of the Commission. In the event the Commissioner serving as Chair is removed from the Commission or vacates his or her Commission seat, the Vice-Chair shall assume the position of Chair for the remainder of the removed or vacating Chair's term. If the Vice-Chair is elevated to the post of Chair due to the removal or vacation of the post by departing Chair, the Commission shall elect a new Vice-Chair from among themselves no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. If a Commissioner serving as Vice-Chair, Treasurer or Secretary is removed from the Commission or vacates his or her Commission seat, the remaining Commissioners shall elect a new person(s) to fill the vacated Commission post(s) at the earliest possible meeting date. No person may simultaneously serve on more than one Commission. 
B.  Additional Offices. Subject to all restrictions applicable to Commissioners under this Chapter 2.25, each Commission may create and fill such other internal offices as it may determine to be advisable or desirable. 
C.  Meetings. Each Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month at such time and location as may be permitted by law and as may be necessary or convenient. No such regular meeting shall occur earlier than 5:30 p.m. and no such regular meetings shall occur on a Friday, Saturday, Sunday or City observed holiday. If a regular meeting falls on a City observed holiday, the Commission may reschedule the meeting for any other day of the month. Upon the prior approval of the City Manager or the City Council, a Commission may hold such additional adjourned or special meetings as may be called in accordance with the provisions of the Brown Act and any other applicable state statutes or provisions in the Code. 
D.  Internal Rules for the Conduct of Business. Subject to the council overrule and in conformity with the Brown Act and all other applicable laws or Code provisions, the Commission shall conduct all proceedings in conformity with the latest edition Robert's Rules of Order and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record subject to disclosure in the absence of any applicable statutory or common law privileges, restrictions or exemptions. 
E.  Administrative Support Staff. The administrative support staff of the City Manager's Office (hereinafter, the "administration office") shall be responsible for working with and providing administrative support to each Commission as it conducts its business. The administration office shall designate those members of its staff who shall have the special responsibility of overseeing the administration office's work with each Commission and shall make the work number and work address of such staff members available to each Commissioner. At least one staff member of the administration office shall attend each regularly scheduled, adjourned or special meeting of each Commission. 
F.  Orientation/Ethics Training. The administrative office shall provide orientation for all Commissioners, including AB 1234 ethics training, to the extent required by law. 
G.  Provisions and Stipends. The City shall not provide business cards to Commissioners. Name badges for Commissioners shall be provided only for use at City-sponsored events. No stipend or other form of compensation shall be provided to Commissioners. 
H.  Commissioner Fundraising. No Commission or Commissioner shall undertake, advertise or otherwise promote any sort of Commission fundraiser without the prior written approval of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013)  
2.25.060 - Duties and powers. 
Subject to review and approval by the Council, each Commission shall have the duties and responsibilities set forth in the following subsections, and as the same may be further modified or augmented from time to time by resolution of the Council: 
A.  The Cultural Affairs Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Council concerning the cultural celebrations, music festivals, arts festivals, food festivals, dance festivals, and Sister Cities events. 
B.  The Community Affairs Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Council concerning the youth sports council, after school sports, health fairs, job fairs, health and safety, coordinating with the Council, and any youth commission. 
C.  The Veterans and Homeless Affairs Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Council concerning Memorial Day, Fourth of July celebrations, Veterans Day, homeless counts and homeless services. 
D.  Each Commission may organize and maintain such subcommittees as deemed necessary to assist each Commission from time to time on various projects and programs related to the activities of the Commission. 
E.  Each Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and maintain a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. It shall be the duty of each Secretary of each Commission to transmit all recommendations, findings and determinations of each Commission to the Council. 
F.  Each Commission shall prepare protocol rules and procedures for all events germane to its purpose to submit to the Council for review and approval. 
G.  Each Commission may raise funds to finance the activities or events for which it is authorized to participate in provided that the Commission shall first receive the approval of the Council before undertaking any fund raising effort. 
No Commission or individual Commissioner may assign staff or use staff, real property, personal property, facilities, funds, alleys or streets of the city in connection with any events or activities without the prior consent of the Council by resolution and the grant of such consent by the Council shall not constitute approval of any city licenses or permits which may be required to undertake any such events or activities. In the event the Council consents to any such events or activities, the relevant Commission shall adhere to all federal, state, or local governmental permit requirements and shall adhere to all federal, state and local laws in undertaking such events or activities. Each Commission shall also adhere to any additional restrictions or requirements which the Council may choose to impose in its sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013)  
2.25.070 - Financial limitation. 
A.  Contracts. No Commission nor any individual Commissioner, nor any person employed thereby shall incur any financial liability or execute any contract in the name of or on behalf of the city without the express consent or authorization of the Council. 
B.  Solicitation of Non-Governmental Funds. Subject to the supervision oversight and control by the City Manager or designee, each Commission shall be authorized to solicit and disburse non-governmental funds and contributed funds for the purpose of carrying out its special projects and activities. 
C.  Annual Reports. Each Commission shall submit an annual report to the Council for review of all activities and financial transactions for the prior fiscal year. The annual report shall be prepared and submitted to the Council during the month of December of each calendar year and shall be for the preceding fiscal year's activities and actions. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013)  
2.25.080 - Commission committees. 
By resolution, the Council may create an Advisory Committee to a Commission which shall be composed of persons who represent various community organizations with a special interest in promoting and participating in events and activities pertinent to the relevant Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2809, 3, 1-8-2013)  
2.25.090 - Application of 2015 amendments to Chapter 2.24. 
As to all members of the Commission who are seated and serving the Commission as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2870 which implements the 2015 amendments to Chapter 2.24, any and all consecutive years of service on the Commission served by a sitting member prior and up to the effective date of Ordinance No. 2870 shall not be counted toward four-year term referenced under Section 2.25.030(D) or the maximum limit of eight (8) consecutive years of service also referenced under Section 2.24.030(D). All members seated and serving on the Commission as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2870 shall be deemed to be at the start of their first four-year term on the Commission. The foregoing notwithstanding, the right of the City Council to removal any such sitting members pursuant to Section 2.25.040(B), above, shall govern and control. 
(Ord. No. 2870, § 8, 12-15-2015)  
Chapter 2.36 - EMERGENCY SERVICE ORGANIZATION 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Emergency Organization Ordinance. 
(Prior code § 2420)  
2.36.020 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Prior code § 2420.1)  
2.36.030 - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Prior code § 2420.2)  
2.36.040 - Disaster Councilmembership. 
The El Monte Disaster Council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The Mayor, who shall be chairperson; 
B.  The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be vicechairperson; 
C.  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services; 
D.  Such Section Coordinators and Emergency Services Management Staff as are provided for in current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2566 §§ 1, 2, 2002; prior code § 2420.3)  
2.36.050 - Disaster Council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the El Monte Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered to recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairperson or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the Vice-Chairperson. 
(Ord. 2566 § 3, 2002: prior code § 2420.4)  
2.36.060 - Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
A.  There is created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services; 
B.  There is created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director. 
(Ord. 2566 § 4, 2002; prior code § 2420.5)  
2.36.070 - Powers and duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
A.  The Director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Advise the Mayor to request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the Director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council upon the adoption by resolution of the City Emergency Plan. 
C.  The Director of Emergency Services shall with the assistance of the Emergency Services Management Staff, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city. 
D.  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services shall serve as Director with all the powers therein, in the absence of the Director, and shall perform as assigned such other powers, duties, and responsibilities as ordered by the Director. 
(Ord. 2566 §§ 5—8, 2002; prior code § 2420.6)  
2.36.080 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.36.070(A)(6)(c) of this chapter be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 2420.7)  
2.36.090 - Emergency plan. 
The Director of Emergency Services and the Emergency Services Staff shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan will comply with the Standardized Emergency Management System and shall take effect upon the adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2566 § 9, 2002: prior code § 2420.8)  
2.36.100 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Prior code § 2420.9)  
2.36.110 - Punishment of violations. 
No person shall: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Prior code § 2420.10)  
2.36.120 - Special curfews. 
A.  In addition to the powers of the City Council or the powers delegated to the Director under this chapter, upon the declaration of a local emergency or upon the declaration of a state of emergency affecting the city, the City Council and the Director shall have the power to establish and enforce a curfew as provided in this section. 
If the existence of a local emergency has been proclaimed in accordance with this chapter, a curfew may be established by an order of the City Council or Director, as appropriate, by reference to this section ("curfew order"). A curfew order shall be effective for no more than seventy-two (72) hours following its commencement if promulgated by the City Council on such shorter period as directed by the City Council. A curfew order shall be effective for no more than twenty-four (24) hours following its commencement if promulgated by the Director. The term of a curfew order may be extended by order of the City Council or the Director upon a written finding of necessity for such an extension; provided however, no extension of the term of a curfew order may exceed twenty-four (24) hours, unless prior to the expiration of the curfew order, as extended, another written finding is made in support of a further extension. A curfew order (and each extension of a curfew order) shall indicate the time at which the curfew order shall become effective and shall also specify its duration in accordance with this section. A curfew order (and each extension of a curfew order) may include the supplemental provisions of subsection C and/or D of this section or any other provision as authorized or implied by Government Code Section 8550, et seq., or this chapter, and in addition, an existing curfew order may be modified or amended to include such provisions. 
B.  During the effectiveness of a curfew order (and each extension of a curfew order), no person shall be in a public place except for a lawful business purpose. It is unlawful for any person who is in a public place to refuse to provide a peace officer with written identification of the identity of such person, and a verbal statement so the peace officer of the lawful business purpose of such person for being in a public place during the time of such curfew. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "lawful business purpose" means and includes going to or from the dwelling of the person: in connection with school or an occupation, or in connection with seeking medical treatment, or in connection with transporting other persons to a place of work or occupation or school or medical treatment, or in connection with obtaining goods or services at a specific business location disclosed so a peace officer, or in connection with visiting third persons at a specific location on private property disclosed to the peace officer, or in connection with engaging in worship or other lawful public assembly at a specific location disclosed to the peace officer. 
C.  A curfew order (or extension of a curfew order) may include, at the discretion of the City Council and/or the Director, a direction that the retail sale of the following products shall cease or shall be subject to other specific regulation as may be included in the curfew order: (1) retail sales of gasoline; (2) retail sales of weapons and ammunition; and (3) retail sales for off-premises and/or on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
D.  A curfew order (or extension of a curfew order) may include, at the discretion of the City Council and/or the Director, a direction that all or certain designated places of business shall be closed within a portion (or all) of the city as designated in a curfew order. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provision of Section 2.36.110, it shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both for any person to violate a curfew order (or extension of a curfew order) established under this section or such other form of curfew order as may be established by other applicable law. 
F.  In the event that the county may declare a state of emergency as applicable so the territorial jurisdiction of the city and enact a curfew order under such owners as authorized by applicable law to the county which is effective in the city, then in such event, a curfew order of the city shall have no further force nor effect, and peace officers shall enforce such county curfew order in the city in accordance with the terms of such county curfew order. 
G.  Regardless of its term, a curfew order may be rescinded at any time following its effectiveness upon an order of the City Council or the Director. 
H.  The City Council declares its intention that the provisions of this Section 8550 shall be cumulative with the other powers authorized by Government Code Section 8550 et seq., and this chapter, and shall not be deemed so be a limitation upon such powers. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 2420.11)  
Chapter 2.40 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Established. 
The City Council finds and declares that there is a need for an industrial development authority to function in the city. 
(Ord. 2387 § 1, 1993)  
2.40.020 - Board of Directors. 
The City Council declares itself to be the Board of Directors of such industrial development authority, and all the rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities, disabilities and immunities vested in such a board shall be vested in this City Council as such Board. 
(Ord. 2387 § 2, 1993)  
2.40.030 - Declarations—Statutory authority. 
Declarations set forth in this chapter are made in accordance with the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Title 10, commencing with Section 91500, of the Government Code). 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; Ord. 2387 § 3, 1993)  
2.40.040 - Authority established. 
The authority established in the city by the Act referred to a Section 2.40.030 and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers thereunder by this chapter shall be known as the "Industrial Development Authority of the City of El Monte." 
(Ord. 2387 § 4, 1993)  
2.40.050 - Industrial Development Authority. 
The Industrial Development Authority of the city was established pursuant to Ordinance 2387 adopted on November 9, 1993. It is the intent of the City Council in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter that the provisions hereof be deemed a codification of the provisions of Ordinance 2387 shall not constitute a new enactment, rather a codification of the division of said ordinance, in this code for the convenience of the public. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification)  
Chapter 2.44 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.44.010 - Created. 
The City Council has heretofore found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for the Redevelopment Agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the city, and said Agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; Ord. 1649 § 1, 1972)  
2.44.020 - Rights, powers and duties. 
Pursuant to Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code, the City Council of the city does declare itself to be the agency, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities, vested by law in a Redevelopment Agency, shall be vested in the City Council of the city, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 1649 § 2, 1972)  
Chapter 2.60 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
Sections: 
 
2.60.010 - Declaration of intent. 
The City Council declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 2440)  
2.60.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13510(a) and Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code, the city will adhere to standards for recruitment and training of local law enforcement officers and local public safety dispatches established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Prior code § 2441)  
2.60.030 - Adherence to Department of Corrections standards. 
While receiving any State Aid pursuant to Article 3, commencing with Section 6040 of the California Penal Code, the city will adhere so the standards for selection and training established by the Board of Corrections. 
(Prior code § 2442)  
Chapter 2.64 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
2.64.010 - Property found by city employees. 
Every officer and employee of the city who shall find any lost money or property in or upon any public ground, street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk as defined by Section 5600 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, any public building or other real property of the city, or when in the course of his or her duties as a city employee shall otherwise come into the possession of any personal property the owner of which is unknown, shall deliver the same to the officer or person in charge of the place where such money or property is found, or to the head of the department in which such employee is employed, together with a written statement disclosing the circumstances of the finding, including the tune and place thereof and the address of the owner or the person entitled to the possession thereof if known to the finder. 
(Prior code § 4301)  
2.64.020 - Duties of finder not a city employee. 
Any person who is not an employee of the city and who finds and takes possession of any money, goods, or other personal property having a value of ten dollars ($10.00) or more shall, within a reasonable time, inform the owner, if known, and make restitution without charge, except a reasonable charge for taking care of the property. 
(Prior code § 4301.1)  
2.64.030 - Delivery to Police Department. 
A.  If the owner is unknown or has not claimed the property, the person finding the property, the head of the department to whom such property is delivered by a city employee, or the officer or person in charge of the place where such property is found and to whom such property is delivered by a city employee, shall within a reasonable time cause the property, along with any written statement relevant to its finding received from a city employee, to be delivered to the custody of the Chief of Police who shall care for and protect all such property coming into his or her possession. The person finding such property and delivering such property to the Chief of Police, if not an employee of the city nor the officer or person to whom such property was delivered by an employee of the city, shall make an affidavit particularly describing the property and stating when and where it was found. 
B.  Unclaimed property is to be delivered to the Police Department only if the property has a value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 4302)  
2.64.040 - Restoration to owner. 
The Police Department shall notify the owner, if his or her identity is reasonably ascertainable, that it possesses the property and where it may be claimed. The Police Department may require payment by the owner of a reasonable charge to defray costs of storage and care of the property. If the owner appears within ninety (90) days after receipt of the property by the Police Department, proves his or her ownership of the property, and pays all reasonable charges, the Police Department shall restore the property to him or her. 
(Prior code § 4302.1)  
2.64.050 - Holding period. 
When property is found and turned over to the Police Department and no owner appears and proves his or her ownership within ninety (90) days: 
A.  If the reported value of the property is less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), title thereto shall vest in the person who found or saved the property unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency in which case the property shall be sold at public auction. 
B.  If the reported value of the property is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more, the Chief of Police shall cause a notice of the property to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation including the city. If, after seven (7) days following the first publication of the notice, no owner appears and proves his or her ownership of the property and the person who found or saved the property pays the cost of publication, title thereto shall vest in that person unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency in which case the property shall be sold at public auction. Title to the property shall not vest in the person who found or saved the property or in the successful bidder at the public auction unless the cost of publication is first paid to the city. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 4302.2)  
2.64.060 - Sale at public auction. 
All unclaimed property, other than money, received by the Police Department either pursuant to Section 2.64.030, found or saved on property subject to its jurisdiction, or seized as evidence pursuant to its jurisdiction and subsequently authorized for release, shall be held for a period of at least three (3) months from and after the date of its being received, found, or authorized for release, whichever is longer, and thereafter sold by the Chief of Police, or by some person under his or her direction, at public auction to the highest bidder. 
(Prior code § 4303)  
2.64.070 - Property appraisal. 
When the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines that unclaimed property has a special value, it shall be appraised for the purpose of establishing a minimum bid for such item. In the event such item does not receive the minimum bid at auction, it may be retained by the Chief of Police or his or her designee and thereafter sold at a subsequent public auction without a minimum bid or disposed of pursuant to Section 2.64.100. 
(Prior code § 4303.1)  
2.64.080 - Sale of unclaimed property—Notice. 
Notice of sale of unclaimed property shall be given by the Chief of Police at least five (5) days before the time fixed therefore by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation including the city. Said notice shall contain a statement of the time and place fixed by the Chief of Police for such auction, together with a general statement of the kind of property offered for sale. 
(Prior code § 4304)  
2.64.090 - Sale of unclaimed property—Proceeds. 
Immediately upon the completion of any such sale, the Chief of Police shall report to the City Controller the necessary expenses of such sale actually incurred and a statement of the proceeds of such sale, and shall forthwith pay to the City Treasurer for deposit in the general fund the proceeds remaining after payment of the expenses actually incurred. 
(Prior code § 4305)  
2.64.100 - Disposal by Administrative Officer. 
If there be no bids for any item offered for sale at such auction, it shall be offered for sale with other unclaimed found property at the next auction sale. If any item be not sold at the second auction at which it is offered, it shall be turned over to the Administrative Officer who shall make such disposition thereof, in the public interest, as he or she shall deem fit. The Administrative Officer shall advise the City Controller of the disposition made of all such property thus received by him or her, and shall forthwith pay the City Treasurer all moneys received by him or her in the disposal of such property. 
(Prior code § 4306)  
2.64.110 - Disposal of dangerous property. 
Property of any kind or character whatsoever the possession of which is prohibited by law or, as determined by the Chief of Police, is inherently dangerous or poses a threat to public peace or safety, shall not be offered for sale at public auction pursuant to Section 2.64.080, nor be disposed of by the Administrative Officer pursuant to Section 2.64.100, nor be retained for public use pursuant to Section 2.64.120 except as an educational or training aid for the police and/or fire departments with the approval of the City Council, but shall be disposed of as is provided by law or, in the absence of an applicable provision, as designated by the Chief of Police and approved by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 4306.1)  
2.64.120 - Retention for public use. 
If the Chief of Police, his or her designee, the Purchasing Officer of the city, or the Administrative Officer of the city, determines that any unclaimed property designated for sale or disposal is needed for a public use, pursuant to authority granted by California Civil Code Section 2080.4, such property need not be sold or disposed of but may be retained by the city. 
(Prior code § 4306.2)  
2.64.130 - Bicycles and toys. 
The Chief of Police, in lieu of sale at public auction or conversion to public use by the city, may elect to dispose of bicycles and toys by delivering them over to the Probation Department or Welfare Department of the county pursuant to the provisions of Section 217 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. 
(Prior code § 4306.3)  
2.64.140 - Redemption by owner. 
If property is designated for sale at public auction pursuant to Section 2.64.060 of this chapter or converted to public use pursuant to either Section 2.64.120 or 2.64.130, it shall not thereafter be redeemable by the owner or other person entitled to possession. 
(Prior code § 4306.4)  
2.64.150 - Money. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, any money deposited with the Chief of Police may be held by the Chief of Police and/or the City Treasurer for a period of three (3) years. Any money deposited which remains unclaimed for three (3) years shall become the property of the city if not claimed or if no verified complaint is filed and served after notice is given pursuant to Section 2.64.160. 
(Prior code § 4307)  
2.64.160 - Money—Notice. 
At the expiration of the three (3) year holding period, the Chief of Police and/or City Treasurer shall cause a notice to be published in the official newspaper once a week for two (2) successive weeks stating the amount of the money, the fund if any in which it is held, and that it is proposed that the money will become the property of the city on a designated date of not less than forty-five (45) days nor more than sixty (60) days after the first publication of said notice. 
(Prior code § 4307.1)  
2.64.170 - Claim for money. 
Upon or prior to publication, a party of interest may file a claim with the Chief of Police and/or City Treasurer which must include the claimant's name, address, amount of claim, the grounds on which the claim is founded, and any other information that may be required of the claimant. The Chief of Police and/or City Treasurer shall accept or reject each such claim according to its merit. Upon rejecting any claim, the Chief of Police and/or City Treasurer shall notify the claimant that he or she has only thirty (30) days in which to file and serve a court action on the claim. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the Chief of Police and/or City Treasurer may release to the depositor of the unclaimed money, their heir, beneficiary, or duly appointed representative, unclaimed money if claimed prior to the date the money becomes the property of the city upon submission of satisfactory proof. 
(Prior code § 4307.2)  
2.64.180 - Unclaimed money. 
Any money not claimed by the date designated in the notice or for which no court action is filed and served within thirty (30) days of a claim rejection shall become the property of the city and shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(Prior code § 4307.3)  
2.64.190 - Acquisition without notice. 
Any other provision of law notwithstanding, any amount of money of less than ten dollars ($10.00), or any amount if the depositor's name is unknown, which remains unclaimed for three (3) years may be transferred to the general fund by the City Council without the necessity of publication of notice. 
(Prior code § 4307.4)  
2.64.200 - Intentionally abandoned property. 
The provisions of this chapter have no application to things which have been intentionally abandoned by their owner. 
(Prior code § 4308)  
Chapter 2.68 - MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.68.010 - Public office hours. 
A.  On all days of the calendar year, the business offices of the city shall be open to the public for the transaction of city business between the hours of seven a.m. and five-thirty p.m. Monday-Thursday, except on the following days: 
1.  Every Saturday; 
2.  Every Sunday; 
3.  New Year's Day; 
4.  Washington's Birthday; 
5.  Memorial Day; 
6.  Independence Day; 
7.  Labor Day; 
8.  Veteran's Day; 
9.  Thanksgiving Day; 
10.  Christmas Day; 
11.  Every day appointed by proclamation of the President or Governor for a public fast, thanksgiving, or holiday; 
12.  Half day before Christmas Day (12:00—5:30); 
13.  Half day before New Year's Day (12:00—5:30). 
B.  If any of the days specified in subsections (A)(3)—(11) of this section falls upon a Sunday, the public offices of the city shall be closed on the Monday following that day. If any of the days specified in subsections (A)(3)—(11) of this section falls upon a Saturday, the public offices of the city shall be closed on the Friday preceding that day. 
(Prior code §§ 2731, 2732)  
2.68.020 - Charges for copies of public records. 
The City Council may authorize the Office of the City Clerk, and other departments of the City, to assess and collect a reasonable fee or charge for the production, copying or transmittal of any public record or document as may be requested by an interested person pursuant to the Public Records Act or other applicable law, including without limitation Government Code Section 54954.1. The City Council may authorize such reasonable fees and charges from time to time by resolution upon the conclusion of a duly noticed public hearing thereon. The City Council may authorize certain exemptions from such fees and charges, as appropriate. 
(Prior code § 2734)  
2.68.030 - Police fees and charges—Purpose. 
The City Council finds that it is appropriate to authorize the El Monte Police Department so impose certain fees and charges associated with the discharge of certain custodial duties and services of the Police Department, including without limitation the assembly and production of various reports and public records. Such fees and charges shall be established or changed from time to time in accordance with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3960.0)  
2.68.040 - Fees for release of impounded vehicles. 
A.  Upon receipt of a written report and recommendation from the Chief of Police, the City Council may authorize and approve (or amend from time-to-time) a service fee payable upon the release of any vehicle impounded or otherwise in the custody or control of the El Monte Police Department. The fee shall be based upon the reasonable cost to the city associated with the impoundment of the vehicle, including without limitation clerical and overhead costs of the Police Department as associated with the preparation of papers and documents as necessary to accomplish the release of the vehicle. The fee or charge as authorized by this section shall be payable upon the release of the vehicle. Certain persons shall be exempt from the payment of the fee or charge as authorized by this section: (1) victims of the theft of the vehicle as impounded or in the custody of the El Monte Police Department; and (2) such other persons who make a satisfactory showing of good cause for waiver of the fee or charge in accordance with written guidelines as approved by the Chief of Police. 
B.  Any such fee or charge (or change in an existing or previously authorized fee) shall be approved by resolution of the City Council upon the conclusion of a public hearing for which notice has been published in accordance with Government Code Section 6062a. 
C.  The resolution of the City Council may provide administrative procedures for the collection of the fee or charge as may be appropriate. In the event that an action may hereafter be initiated by the city to collect any sum which may be owed to the city under a fee or charge approved under this section, then in such a case the judgment in such fee collection action may include reasonable attorneys' fees of the city. 
D.  There is established a special service fee fund of the city identified as "El Monte Police Department Impounded Vehicle cost Recovery Fee Fund," and all sums which may hereafter be collected by the El Monte Police Department and/or the city under this section shall be deposited into such funds. 
(Prior code § 3960.1)  
Chapter 2.72 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM* 
Sections: 
 
2.72.010 - Purpose and definitions. 
The objective of these rules is to facilitate efficient and economical services to the public and to provide for a fair and equitable system of personnel management for employees in the competitive service of the city. These rules set forth in detail those procedures which ensure similar treatment for those who compete for original employment and promotion, and define the obligations, rights, privileges, benefits and prohibitions which are placed upon all employees in the competitive service of the city. At the same time, within the limits of administrative feasibility, recognition shall be given to the fact that individuals differ, that no two individuals react alike to reward and discipline or to uniform motivation and encouragement. For this reason, considerable latitude shall be given to the Human Resources Officer in the execution of his/her duties and responsibilities relating to employee morale and discipline. 
(Ord. 2579 § 1, 2003)  
2.72.020 - Definition of terms. 
The following terms, whenever used in these rules, shall be construed as follows 
"Advancement" means a salary increase of one or more steps within the limits of the pay range established for a class. 
"Allocation" means the assignment of a single position to its proper class in accordance with the duties performed, and the authority and responsibilities exercised. 
"Anniversary date" means the first day of employment other than temporary in any classification for those employees hired as of the first day of any calendar month. For those employees hired after the first day of any calendar month, it shall mean the first day of the month following their date of regular employment in any classification. All vacation, sick leave, probationary, salary and retirement status shall be figured as of the anniversary date. 
"Appointing power" means the City Manager for the purpose of an appointment to a position within the Competitive Service. For purposes of transfer, promotion, discipline, reinstatement or discharge of an employee within the Competitive Service, "appointing power" shall mean the City Manager or the affected employee's department head. As used herein "appropriate authority" shall mean "appointing power" as defined in this paragraph. 
"Assigned leave with pay" means temporary leave of absence with full pay and benefits. For purposes of calculating continuity of service, an assigned leave with pay shall not be considered as a break in service. 
"City" means the City of El Monte. 
"Class" means all positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority, responsibility, and working conditions to permit grouping under a common title and the application with equity of common standards of selection, transfer, promotion, and salary. 
"Competitive service" means the positions and employments which are included or which may hereafter be included under the classified service of the city by order of the City Council. The competitive service does not include elective officers, positions on appointive boards, commissions or committees, the City Manager, Deputy City Managers, Chief of Police, City Attorney, provisional or hourly employees. 
"Days" means Calendar days unless specified otherwise. 
"Demotion" means the movement of a regular employee from one class to another class having a lower maximum rate of pay. Demotion may be made on a temporary or permanent basis. 
"Dismissal" means the discharge of an employee from the competitive service by the appointing power for cause. 
"Eligible" means a person whose name is on an employment list. 
"Employment list" means a list of names of persons who are qualified for appointment to a class in the competitive service. 
"Examination" means: 
A.  Assembled examination. An examination conducted at a specified time and place at which applicants are required to appear for competitive examination under the supervision of an examiner. 
B.  Unassembled examination. An examination consisting of an appraisal of training, experience, work history, or any other means for evaluating other relative qualifications of applicants. 
"Medical and/or psychological examination" means an examination by a licensed physician or psychologist to determine fitness for the position. 
"Immediate family" means and includes, in addition to the employee of the city, the following persons and no others: 
A.  The employee's spouse or domestic partner as defined in F.C. Section 297. 
B.  The employee's son, son-in-law, daughter or daughter-in-law. 
C.  The employee's stepchild. 
D.  The employee's adopted child. 
E.  The employee's father, father-in-law, mother or mother-in-law. 
F.  The employee's brother, brother-in-law, sister or sister-in-law. 
G.  The employee's grandparents and grandparents-in-law. 
"Layoff' means termination of employment of an employee for lack of work, lack of funds or reorganization. 
"Personnel ordinance" means Title 2, Chapter 2.72 of the El Monte Municipal Code, which contains the provisions concerning the personnel system for the City. 
"Probationary period" means a working test period during which an employee is required to demonstrate fitness for the duties to which appointed by actual performance of the duties of the position. 
"Promotion" means the movement of a regular employee from one class to another with a higher rate of pay. 
"Promotional examination" means an examination for a particular class, admission to the examination being limited to regular employees in the competitive service and hourly employees. 
"Promotional list" means an employment list resulting from a promotional examination. 
"Reduction" means a salary decrease within the limits of the pay range established for a class. Reduction in step within range as a disciplinary measure is the withdrawal of increments granted. The maximum reduction in pay that may be given for any one disciplinary action shall be two (2) steps within the range for that class. Reduction in pay shall become effective on the first of the pay period following the effective date of the disciplinary action. Reduction may be made on a temporary or permanent basis. 
"Regular employee" means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary period and has been retained as hereafter provided in these rules. 
"Reinstatement" means the reemployment without examination of a former regular employee within two years following resignation from the City service to a vacant position. Such action must have the approval of the Department Head and the Human Resources Officer. 
"Rejection" means the separation of an employee from the service during the probationary period without cause. 
"Resignation, voluntary and implied" means: 
A.  Voluntary. Termination of employment of an employee made at the request of the employee. 
B.  Implied. Termination of employment in accordance with the implied resignation clause of the governing Memorandum of Understanding. 
"Safety employees" means uniformed members of the Police Department whose official duties, in the protection of life and property, qualify them as "Safety Members," under the California Public Employees' Retirement System. 
"Seniority" means an employee's length of continuous, regular service since his/her last date of hire, less any adjustments due to layoff or other breaks in service. Ties are to be broken by a lottery conducted by the Human Resources Officer. Seniority shall be terminated when a regular employee resigns; is discharged in accordance with these rules; is absent without authorization as outlined in the governing Memorandum of Understanding or is laid off and fails to report to work in accordance with the layoff provisions of these rules. 
"Sick leave" means absence because of illness, injury, exposure to contagious disease, attendance on a sick member of the employee's immediate family, death in the immediate family, or doctor and dental appointments. 
"Suspension" means the temporary removal of a regular employee from the payroll for disciplinary purposes. 
"Temporary appointment" means an appointment of a person not on the eligible list who possesses the minimum qualifications established for a particular class and who has been appointed to a position in that class on other than a probationary or regular basis. 
"Written reprimand" means written reprimand as a disciplinary action means an official notification to the employee that there is cause for dissatisfaction with the employee's conduct or performance and that further disciplinary action may be taken if said cause is not corrected. Written reprimand shall be made a part of the employee's official personnel record and may be considered as pertinent evidence in any appeal hearing. Upon request of the employee, letters of reprimand shall be removed from the personnel file after two (2) years providing the letters have not led to other discipline as defined herein. 
(Ord. 2579 § 2, 2003)  
2.72.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Violation of Rules. Violation of the provisions of these Rules and Regulations shall be grounds for discipline. 
B.  Supervision by Department Heads. Department Heads shall be responsible for effective supervision of their employees as well as for maintenance of appropriate working relationships. Department Heads shall notify the Human Resources Officer immediately of changes in the assignment of duties to employees. 
C.  Departmental Rules. No Departmental Rules may be adopted or administered that are inconsistent with these Personnel Rules and Regulations. 
D.  Disclosure of Religious or Political Affiliations. No question in any test, in any application form, or in any other personnel proceedings, or by any appointing authority, shall be so framed as to attempt to elicit information concerning political or religious opinions or affiliations of an applicant or employee. No appointment to or removal from a position in the competitive service shall be affected or influenced in any manner by any political or religious opinion or affiliation. 
E.  Gratuities and Gifts. Because the very nature of service rendered by a municipal employee requires unimpeachable public trust, confidence and impartiality of service by each and every employee, it is the City's policy, consistent with effective public relations, that no employee shall accept a personal gift of such value as will place the employee under obligation to the donor. 
F.  Personal Telephone Calls. The telephones provided by the city are for use in conducting city business. The use of these telephones during business hours for personal calls, either outgoing or incoming, is not strictly prohibited, but such calls shall be kept to a minimum so as not to overload the existing lines and retard essential city business. Toll calls of a personal nature should not be made on city telephones except in extreme emergencies and with prior approval by the Department Head. 
G.  Grand Jury Testimony. The refusal of any employee to appear when subpoenaed before the County Grand Jury in a County Grand Jury investigation of governmental bribery or misconduct in public office shall constitute good and sufficient ground for discipline. 
H.  Employee Responsibility for Correct Personnel Information. It shall be the responsibility of each employee to keep the city advised concerning his/her marital status, number of dependents, his correct address and telephone number on forms prescribed by the city. 
I.  Loyalty Oath. Upon appointment, but prior to reporting for duty, a new employee shall be required to take the loyalty oath to be administered by the City Clerk or other duly authorized person. The oath shall be in a form required by the California Constitution. 
J.  Official Duties Outside of State. Where an employee's official duties requires his/her absence outside of the State of California, approval shall be given by the City Council prior to such departure. This section shall not apply to safety members in the performance of their regular duties. 
K.  Amendment and Revision of Rules. Recommendations for amendment and revisions of these Rules may be made by the Human Resources Officer. Prior to consideration, any amendment or revision shall be publicly posted at such places as the City Council shall prescribe, for at least five consecutive days together with notice of the time, place and date of hearings by the City Council. Amendments and revisions shall become effective upon adoption by the City Council following meeting and conferring with the authorized bargaining units, if any, and public comment. Prior to consideration, the authorized bargaining units shall receive notice of any revision of those Rules which are substantive changes of wages, hours and terms and conditions of employment and be given the opportunity to meet and confer on these revisions. 
(Ord. 2579 § 3, 2003)  
2.72.040 - Classification. 
A.  Preparation of Plan. The Human Resources Officer, or a person or agency employed for that purpose, shall ascertain and record the duties and responsibilities of all positions in the competitive service and, after consultation with appointing powers and Heads of Departments affected, shall recommend a classification plan for such positions. The classification plan shall consist of classes of positions in the competitive service defined by class specifications, including title, a description of typical duties and responsibilities of positions in each class, a statement of the training, experience and other qualifications to be required of applicants for positions in each class. The classification plan shall be so developed and maintained that all positions substantially similar with respect to duties, responsibilities, authority, and character of work are included within the same class, and that the same schedules of compensation may be made to apply with equity under like working conditions to all positions in the same class. Amendments and revisions shall become effective upon adoption by the City Council following meet and confer, if any, and public comment. Prior to consideration, the authorized bargaining units shall receive notice of any revision of these rules which are substantive changes of wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment and be given the opportunity to meet and confer on these revisions. 
B.  Adoption of Plan. Before the classification plan or any part thereof shall become effective, it shall first be approved in whole by the City Council. Upon adoption by the Council, by resolution, the provisions of the classification plan shall be observed in the handling of all personnel actions and activities. The classification plan shall be amended or revised as occasion requires in the same manner as originally established. 
C.  Allocation of Positions. Following the adoption of the classification plan, the Human Resources Officer shall allocate every position in the competitive service to one or the classes established by the plan, same to be approved by the City Council. 
D.  New Positions. When a new position is created, before that position may be filled the appointing power shall notify the City Manager and the Human Resources Officer and, except as otherwise provided by ordinance or these Rules, no person shall be appointed or employed to fill any such position until the classification plan has been amended to provide therefore and an appropriate employment list has been established for such position. 
E.  Reclassification. Positions, the duties of which have changed materially so as to necessitate reclassification, shall be allocated by the Human Resources Officer to a more appropriate class, whether new or already created, in the same manner as originally classified and allocated. Reclassifications shall not be used for the purpose of avoiding restrictions surrounding demotions and promotions. 
F.  Amending the Classification Plan. The Human Resources Officer may recommend the creation of new classes and the revision and abolishment of existing classes. 
(Ord. 2579 § 4, 2003)  
2.72.050 - Compensation. 
A.  Preparation of the Plan. The Human Resources Officer or the person or agency employed for that purpose shall prepare a pay plan covering all classes of positions in the competitive service, showing the minimum and maximum rates of pay. In arriving at such salary ranges, consideration shall be given to prevailing rates of pay for comparable work in other public and in private employment, including consideration of conditions of work as well as basic pay; to current costs of living; to the ability to recruit and retain employees; to internal alignment between classes; to suggestions of Department Heads; and to the city's financial condition and policies. The Human Resources Officer or the person or agency employed for that purpose shall thereafter make such further studies of the compensation plan as may be requested by the City Council. 
B.  Adoption of the Plan. The Human Resources Officer shall submit the proposed pay plan to the City Council. The Council shall adopt or amend and adopt the proposed plan. Thereafter, no position shall be assigned a salary higher than the maximum or lower than the minimum salary provided for that class of position unless the salary schedule for the class is amended in the same manner as herein provided for its adoption. 
(Ord. 2579 § 5, 2003)  
2.27.060 - Applications and Applicants. 
A.  Announcement. All examinations for classes in the competitive service shall be published by posting announcements in the City Hall, on official bulletin boards, and in such other places as the Human Resources Officer deems advisable at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the closing date fixed for fling an application form. The announcements shall specify the title and pay range of the class for which the examination is announced; the nature of the work to be performed; preparation desirable for the performance of the work of the class; the dates, time, place and manner of making applications; and other pertinent information. 
B.  Application Forms. Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Human Resources Office. Such forms shall require information covering training, experience, and other pertinent information, and may include certificates, references and fingerprinting. All applications must be signed by the applicant. 
C.  Disqualification. The Human Resources Officer shall reject any application which indicates on its face that the applicant does not possess the minimum qualifications required for the position. Applicants also shall be rejected if: 
1.  The applicant has made false statements of any material fact, or practiced any deception or fraud on the application, declarations or in securing eligibility or appointment; 
2.  The applicant is found to lack any of the certifications for the position involved; 
3.  The applicant is physically or psychologically unfit for the performance of the position duties, and cannot be reasonably accommodated, including, but not limited to, impairment caused by current abuse of alcohol; 
4.  The applicant has been convicted of a crime, either a misdemeanor or felony, that relates to the position duties; 
5.  The applicant used or attempted to use political pressure or bribery to secure an advantage in the examination or appointment; 
6.  The applicant failed to submit the employment application correctly or within the prescribed time limits. 
7.  For any material cause, which in the judgment of the Human Resources Officer would render a new applicant unfit for the position. This paragraph shall not apply to current regular employees of the city. 
8.  The Human Resources Officer may also reject a new applicant or limit the number of new applicants to be examined if a large number of applicants closely meet the requirements of the position. 
D.  Notice of Rejection of Application. Applicants who are rejected, will be notified by the Human Resources Officer. The Human Resources Officer may permit an applicant to make minor corrections on an application on file, provided that the time limit for receiving applications has not expired. 
E.  Appeal Procedure. If the applicant is rejected, the applicant can appeal the rejection to the Human Resources Officer within five (5) working days of notice. The Human Resources Officer shall review the appeal and affirm the rejection or reinstate the applicant. The Human Resources Officer's decision is final. 
(Ord. 2579 § 6, 2003)  
2.72.070 - Examinations. 
A.  Nature and Types of Examinations. The selection techniques used in the examination process shall be impartial, of a practical nature and shall relate to those subject which, in the opinion of the Human Resources Officer, fairly measure the relative capacities of the persons examined to execute the duties and responsibilities of the class to which they seek to be appointed. Examinations shall consist of such recognized personnel selection techniques as achievement tests, aptitude tests, evaluation of personality and background through personal interviews, performance tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or physical agility tests or any combination of them. 
B.  Promotional Examinations. Promotional examinations may be conducted whenever, in the opinion of the Human Resources Officer, the needs of the service make promotional examinations necessary or advisable. Promotional examinations may include any of the selection techniques mentioned in Section 2.72.070(A) of these rules, or any combination of them. Only regular, hourly or probationary employees who meet the requirements set forth in the promotional examination announcements may compete in promotional examinations. 
C.  Conduct of Examinations. The Human Resources Officer shall determine the manner and methods and by whom examinations shall be prepared and administered and shall publish the weights and methods of selection in the job announcement. The city may contract with any competent agency or individual for the performance by such agency or individual of the responsibility for preparing and administering examinations. In the absence of such a contract, the Human Resources Officer shall perform such duties. The Human Resources Officer shall arrange the use of public buildings and equipment for the conduct of examinations and shall render such assistance as shall be required with respect thereto. 
D.  Scoring Examinations and Qualifying Scores. 
1.  A candidate's overall score in a given examination (whether for entry into the city's personnel system as a new hire or for purposes of promotion) shall be the weighted average of the candidate's subscore(s) on each competitive subpart of the examination. The foregoing notwithstanding, an examination may be structured in such a manner as to provide that a candidate's failure to earn a preestablished minimum passing score on any one subpart shall be grounds for disqualifying the candidate from further consideration or participation in the application and examination process for a particular appointment or promotion. The Human Resources Director and the director or head of the department seeking to make an appointment or promotion shall establish the weight to be given to each competitive subpart of an examination as well as the minimum scoring threshold below which a candidate shall be deemed to have failed a particular sub-part. For purposes of this subsection (D) only, the term "qualified candidate" shall refer to an applicant who has not been disqualified from further consideration by virtue of a failing score on any subpart of an examination and who has earned an overall score of seventy (70) percent or more. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided under subsection (D)(3) of this section, below, a qualified candidate who also qualifies as an eligible veteran within the meaning of this subsection (D)(2) shall have an additional ten (10) percentage point credit (hereinafter referred to as a "veterans preference credit") added to his/her overall score as initially calculated under subsection (D)(1) of this section, above, except than no qualified candidate's overall score shall be deemed to exceed the maximum overall score of one hundred (100) percent, notwithstanding the addition of the veterans preference credit. A candidate who qualifies as an eligible veteran but who fails to meet the requirements for being considered a qualified candidate may not receive the veterans preference credit and the veterans preference credit may not be used to convert a non-qualified candidate into a qualified candidate. For purposes of this subsection (D)(2), the term "eligible veteran" shall have the same meaning as the term "veteran" as defined under Title 5, Section 2108(1) of the United States Code as the same may be amended or re-codified from time to time. For purposes of band ranking pursuant to Section 2.72.080, below, a qualified candidate's score shall be the initial overall score calculated under subsection (D)(1) of this section plus any veteran's preference credit the qualified candidate may qualify for under this subsection, subject to the one hundred (100) percent score ceiling referenced, above. 
3.  The veterans preference credit referenced under subsection (D)(2), above, is intended to apply to new hire candidates for entry level positions only and shall not be awarded to promotional candidates or applied to scores for promotional examinations, notwithstanding a promotional candidate's qualification as an eligible veteran. 
4.  It shall be the responsibility and burden of each qualified candidate to provide the city with adequate proof of his/her eligibility to receive the veterans preference credit by or before the applicable application filing deadline and the city shall be under no obligation to award the veterans preference credit absent the presentation of such proof to the Human Resources Officer. Failure to provide adequate supporting information by or before the applicable application deadline shall constitute a waiver of the credit. A genuine DD214 (Certificate of Discharge or Separation form) or other official genuine and bona fide document(s) issued by the branch of the service shall be used to verify eligibility for the veterans preference credit. The Human Resources Officer is authorized to include reference to, and information about, the city's veterans preference credit program in all job advertisements and other similar informational materials issued by the City of El Monte and shall also establish such forms as may be reasonably necessary to implement the program. 
E.  Notification of Assembled Examination Results and Review of Papers. Each promotional candidate in an assembled examination shall be given written notice of the results thereof, of his/her final earned score and, if successful, rank on the employment list. Any promotional candidate shall have the right to request that the Human Resources Officer re-examine his or her assembled examination papers within fifteen (15) days after the notices of examination results were mailed. Any error in computation, if called to the attention of the Human Resources Officer within this period, shall be corrected. 
(Ord. 2579 § 7, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2771, § 1, 3-1-2011)  
2.72.080 - Employment lists. 
A.  Employment Lists. As soon as possible after the completion of an examination, the Human Resources Officer shall cause to be prepared and shall certify an employment list consisting of the names of candidates who qualified in the examination. 
B.  Banding of Applicants. Successful applicants will be ranked according to their final scores and placed into Bands I, II or III on the eligibility list. 
1.  Band I will be comprised of those applicants who receive scores of ninety (90) percent or higher during the recruitment period taking into account the standard error of measurement. 
2.  Band II will be comprised of those applicants who receive scores of at least eighty (80) percent but less than ninety (90) percent during the recruitment period taking into account the standard error measurement. 
3.  Band III will be comprised of those applicants who receive score of at least seventy (70) percent but less than eighty (80) percent during the recruitment period taking into account the standard error of measurement. 
4.  As positions become available, the department will select new hires from the eligibility list for that job category. At least three candidates from Band I will be selected for further interview and evaluation. If fewer than three persons appear in Band I at the time the vacancy is to be filled, the department will select enough individuals from Band II to provide for an applicant pool of at least three individuals to be further interviewed and evaluated. If a total of fewer than three candidates appear in Bands I and II at the time the vacancy is to be filled, the department will select enough individuals from Band III to provide for an applicant pool of at least three individuals to be further interviewed and evaluated. The department may hire any of three interviewees, irrespective of their competitive scores. All offers will be contingent upon the successful completion of a medical examination. 
C.  Duration of Employment Lists. Employment lists shall become effective upon certification and shall remain in effect for one year, unless sooner exhausted, or unless the Human Resources Officer determines that the list should be extinguished. The lists may be extended, prior to their expiration dates, by action of the Human Resources Officer for additional six-month periods, but in no event shall an employment list remain in effect for more than two years. 
D.  Re-employment Lists. The names of probationary and regular employees who have been laid off shall be placed on appropriate re-employment lists in the order of their seniority, from highest to lowest. Such names shall remain thereon for a period of three years unless such persons are sooner re-employed. Prior to using any other employment lists, the appropriate re-employment list shall first be exhausted to fill vacancies. The Human Resources Officer shall certify from the top of such list the number of names equal to the number of vacancies to be filled, and the appointing power shall appoint such persons to fill the vacancies. 
E.  Removal of Names From Lists. The names of any persons appearing on an employment, re-employment or promotional list shall be removed by the Human Resources Officer if the eligible requests in writing that his/her name be so removed, or if he/she fails to respond to a notice of certification mailed to his/her last known address, or if he/she has been certified for appointment three times and has not been appointed. The person so removed shall be notified of the removal of his/her name by a notice mailed to the last known address. The names of persons on promotional employment lists who resign from the service shall automatically be removed from such lists. All such notices shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested). 
F.  Appointment. After interview and investigation, the appointing power shall make appointments from among those certified, and shall immediately notify the Human Resources Officer of the person or persons appointed. The Human Resources Officer shall thereupon notify the person appointed, and if the applicant accepts the appointment and presents himself/herself for duty within such period of time as the appointing power shall prescribe, he/she shall be deemed to be appointed; otherwise, he/she shall be deemed to have declined the appointment. 
G.  Temporary Appointments. A temporary appointment may be made by the City Manager of a person meeting the minimum education, experience or training requirements. Temporary appointments extending for a period exceeding three (3) weeks shall be submitted to the City Council for confirmation and approval. An employment list shall be established within ninety (90) days for any position filled by a temporary appointment. No special credit shall be allowed in meeting any qualification or in the giving of any test or the establishment of any employment or promotional lists for services rendered under a temporary appointment. 
H.  Emergency Appointments. To meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, earthquake or war, the City Council may employ such persons as may be needed for the duration of the emergency without regard to the personnel ordinance or rules affecting appointments. 
I.  Nepotism Prohibited for Non-safety Employees. 
1.  No person shall be appointed or promoted to a probationary or permanent position in any department in which such person's relative already holds a position, when such employment would result in a supervisor - subordinate relationship. For the purpose of this section, a supervisorial relationship shall be defined as one in which one person exercises the right to control, direct, reward or punish another person by virtue of the duties and responsibilities assigned to his or her position. 
2.  For purposes of this section, "relative" is defined in Section 2.72.020(P), as amended. 
3.  If a city employee marries another person employed by the city within the same department, both employees shall be allowed to retain their respective positions provided that a supervisorial relationship does not exist at the time of marriage between these two positions. During the period of employment, no supervisorial relationship shall exist between the two employees. 
4.  The city also retains the right to refuse to place both relatives or spouses in the same department, division or facility where such has the potential for creating adverse impact on supervision, safety, security or morale or involves conflicts of interest. 
5.  Where the above circumstances exist and mandate that two spouses or relatives shall not work in a prohibited relationship, the City Manager will attempt to transfer one spouse or relative to a similar classified position in another city department. Although the wishes of the involved parties as to which person is to be transferred will be given consideration by the city, the controlling factor in determining which person is to be transferred shall be the positive operation and efficiency of the city. 
6.  If continuing employment of two relatives or spouses cannot be accommodated consistent with the city's interest in promotion of safety, security, morale and efficiency, then the city may separate one spouse or relative from city employment. 
J.  Nepotism Prohibited for Safety Employees. 
1.  No person shall be appointed or promoted, by probationary or permanent appointment, to a position in any department in which any member of such person's immediate family as defined in Section 2.72.020(P) (except a brother-in-law or sister-in-law) already holds a position in the city employ under a probationary or regular appointment. (City of El Monte Resolution No. 4156). 
2.  If a safety employee marries another person employed by the city in the same department, both employees shall be allowed to retain their respective positions provided that a supervisorial relationship does not exist between the two employees. During the period of employment, no supervisory position shall exist between the two employees. For the purposes of this section, a supervisorial relationship shall be defined as one in which one person exercises the right to control, direct, reward, or punish another person by virtue of the duties and responsibilities assigned to his/her position. (City of El Monte Resolution No. 4151). 
3.  If two members of an immediate family, as defined in Part 2.72.020(P) (except brother-in-law or sister-in-law), become members of one department solely by reason of the merger of two or more of such departments, neither employee of such immediate family shall thereby be deprived of his position with the city, provided however, that neither member of such immediate family holds any position in such department under either a probationary or permanent appointment. (City of El Monte Resolution No. 4156). 
(Ord. 2579 § 8, 2003)  
2.72.090 - Probationary period. 
A.  Regular Appointment Following Probationary Period. All original and promotional appointments shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period of not less than six (6) months of continuous service. The City Manager may, by after meeting and conferring with the authorized bargaining unit, establish a longer probationary period for specified classes. All original appointments for safety employees shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period of not less than twelve (12) months of continuous service. Periods of time on unpaid leave exceeding twenty (20) days shall not be counted toward completion of the probationary period. The probationary period shall be automatically extended by the number of days the employee is on leave. All promotional appointments for safety employees shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period of not less than six (6) months of continuous service. The Human Resources Officer shall notify the appointing power and the probationer concerned two (2) weeks prior to the date of termination of any probationary period. If the service of the probationary employee has not been satisfactory to the Department Head, then the Department Head shall file with the Human Resources Officer a statement in writing to such effect and stating that the retention of such employee in the service is not desired. If such a statement is not filed, the employee will be deemed satisfactory and his/her employment status shall be changed to regular. Notification of probationary rejection must be made to the employee prior to the expiration of the employee's probationary period. 
B.  Objective of Probationary Period. The probationary period shall be regarded as a part of the testing process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to his/her position, and for rejecting any probationary employee whose performance does not meet the required standards of work. 
C.  Rejection of Probationer. During the probationary period an employee may be rejected at any time by the appointing power without cause. Notification of rejection in writing shall be served by the Human Resources Officer on the probationer prior to the end of the probationary period and a copy retained by the Human Resources Officer. The probationer shall have the right within ten (10) days to discuss his/her rejection with the Department Head, whose decision shall be final. 
D.  Rejection Following Promotion. Any employee rejected during the probationary period following a promotional appointment, by reason of failure to satisfactorily complete the probationary period shall be reinstated to the position from which the employee was promoted unless there is a basis for dismissing the employee for cause as provided herein. 
(Ord. 2579 § 9, 2003)  
2.72.100 - Attendance and leaves. 
A.  Annual Vacation Leave. The purpose of annual vacation leave is to enable each regular employee annually to return to work mentally refreshed. All employees in the competitive service shall be entitled to annual vacation leave with pay in accordance with the appropriate governing Memorandum of Understanding. Each eligible employee shall be entitled to take his/her vacation as it is accrued. (The times during a calendar year at which an employee may take his/her vacation shall be determined by the Department Head with due regard for the wishes of the employee and particular regard for the needs of the city; and the times when a Department Head may take his/her vacation shall be determined by the City Manager with due regard to the employee and particular regard to the needs of the city; and the times during the calendar year at which the City Manager may take their vacations shall be determined by the City Council with due regard to the employee and particular regard for the needs of the city). 
B.  Sick Leave. Sick leave with pay shall be granted by the appointing power in accordance with the appropriate governing Memorandum of Understanding. All employees in the competitive service shall be entitled to sick leave privileges except the following: 
1.  Employees still serving the first six (6) months' of their original probationary period in the service of the city. However, sick leave credits for such time will continue to accrue and may be used after the first six (6) months of uninterrupted employment. 
C.  Combined Salary and Compensation for Injury on Duty. Whenever any regular non-safety employee is disabled in accordance with the workers' compensation statutes, whether temporarily or permanently, by injury or illness arising out of and in the course of that person's duties, the employee shall become entitled, regardless of that person's period of service with the city, to leave of absence while so disabled without loss of salary in lieu of temporary disability payments, or maintenance allowance payments, if any, which would be payable for the period of the disability, but not exceeding one year, or until such earlier date as the unit member is retired on disability pension or would be retired for disability pension if eligible under PERS requirements. A unit member so disabled may use no other kind of accrued leave during the period of disability. No leave of absence may commence after resignation, whether voluntary or involuntary. All authorized deductions will continue as though the unit member was in regular work status. 
D.  Military Leave. Military leave shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of Section 395 of the Military and Veterans Code. All employees entitled to military leave shall give the appointing power an opportunity within the limits of military regulations to determine when such leave shall be taken. 
E.  Leave of Absence. The City Manager may grant a regular employee leave of absence with or without pay not to exceed one year. No such leave shall be granted except upon written request of the employee. Approval shall be in writing and a copy filed with the Human Resources Officer. Upon expiration of a regularly approved leave, or within a reasonable period of time after notice to return to duty, the employee shall be reinstated in the position held at the time leave was granted. Failure on the part of an employee on leave to report promptly at its expiration, or within a reasonable time after notice to return to duty, shall be cause for discipline. 
F.  Hours of Work. All offices of the city, except those for which special regulations are required, shall be kept open for business on all days outlined in the appropriate governing Memoranda of Understanding or in accordance with regulations prepared by the appropriate Department Head. 
G.  Attendance. Employees shall be in attendance at their work in accordance with the rules regarding hours of work, holidays, and leaves. All departments shall keep daily attendance records of employees which shall be reported to the Human Resources Officer in the form and on the dates specified. Failure on the part of an employee, absent without leave, to return to duty within twenty-four (24) hours after notice to return shall be cause for immediate discharge, and such employee automatically waives all rights under the Personnel Ordinance and Rules. 
H.  Holidays. All probationary and permanent regular employees employed on a weekly, semi-monthly or monthly pay basis shall be entitled to holidays with pay in accordance with the appropriate governing Memorandum of Understanding. 
1.  No employee shall be entitled to compensation for any holiday herein specified unless such an employee has been employed by the city on the day preceding and the day following such holiday. Employees who are on voluntary, unpaid leave on the day preceding or the day after the holiday shall not receive holiday pay. 
I.  Maternity Leave. Maternity leave shall be granted in accordance with Government Code Section 12945(b)(2), as amended. As currently written, state law requires the city to provide up to four (4) months leave of absence for pregnancies, childbirth or related medical conditions upon medical certification of a pregnant employee's inability to continue working (i.e., disability). Maternity leave as defined in this section is in addition to the leave requirements of the Family Medical Leave policy as outlined in the following section. 
J.  Family Medical Leave. 
1.  Statement of Policy. In accordance with the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and the California Family Rights Act (CFRA) the City of El Monte will provide family and medical care leave for eligible employees, as defined. 
2.  Definitions. 
a.  "12-Month Period" means a rolling 12-month period measured backward from the date leave is taken and continuous with each additional leave day taken. 
b.  "Child" means a child under the age of 18 years of age, or 18 years of age or older who is incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability. An employee's child is one for whom the employee has actual day-to-day responsibility for care and includes, a biological, adopted, foster or step-child. 
c.  "Serious health condition" means an illness, injury impairment, or physical or mental condition that involves: 
i.  Any period of incapacity or treatment in connection with or in consequent to a hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility; 
ii.  Any period of incapacity requiring absence from work of more than three (3) calendar days, that also involves continuing treatment by (or under the supervision of) a health care provider; 
iii.  Continuing treatment of a health care provider for a chronic or long term health condition that is incurable or so serious that, if not treated, would likely result in a period of incapacity of more than three (3) calendar days; or 
iv.  Prenatal care by a health provider. 
d.  "Continuing treatments" means: 
i.  Two (2) or more visits to a health care provider; 
ii.  Two (2) or more treatments by a health care practitioner (e.g. physical therapist) on referral from, or under the direction of a health care provider or; 
iii.  A single visit to a health care provider that results in a regimen of continuing treatment under the supervision of the health care provider (e.g. medication therapy). 
3.  Reasons for Leave. Leave is only permitted for the following reasons: 
a.  The birth of a child or to care for a newborn of an employee; 
b.  The placement of a child with an employee in connection with the adoption or foster care of the child; 
c.  Leave to care for a child, parent, or a spouse who has a serious health condition; or 
d.  Leave because of the serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of his/her position. 
4.  Employees Eligible for Leave. An employee is eligible for leave if the employee has been employed for at least six (6) calendar months. 
5.  Amount of Leave. Eligible employees are entitled to a total of four hundred eighty (480) hours of leave in any twelve (12) month period. An employee's entitlement to leave for the birth or placement of a child for adoption or foster care expires twelve (12) months after the birth or placement. 
6.  Employee Benefits While on Leave. Leave under this policy is unpaid. While on leave, employees will continue to be covered by the City of El Monte's group health insurance to the same extent that coverage is provided while the employee is on the job. Employees may make the appropriate contributions for continued coverage under the preceding benefit plans by payroll deductions or direct payments made to these plans. Employee contribution rates are subject to any change in rates that occurs while the employee is on leave. 
7.  Substitution of Paid Accrued Leaves. If an employee requests leave for any reason permitted under this policy, he/she must exhaust all accrued leaves (except sick leave) in connection with the leave. The exhaustion of accrued leave will run concurrently with the leave under this policy. If an employee requests leave for his/her own serious health condition, in addition to exhausting accrued leave, the employee must also exhaust sick leave. 
8.  Medical Verification. Employees who request leave for their own serious health condition or to care for a child, parent or a spouse who has a serious health condition must provide written certification from the health care provider of the individual requiring care. If the leave is requested because of the employee's own serious health condition, the certification must include a statement that the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of his/her position. 
a.  If the City of El Monte has reason to doubt the validity of a certification, the city may require a medial opinion of a second health care provider chosen by the city. If the second opinion is different from the first, the city may require the opinion of a third provider jointly approved by the city and the employee. The opinion of the third provider will be binding. 
b.  If an employee requests leave intermittently (a few days or hours at a time) or on a reduced leave schedule to care for an immediate family member with a serious health condition, the employee must provide medical certification that such leave is medically necessary. "Medically necessary" means there must be a medical need for the leave and that the leave can be best accomplished through an intermittent or reduced leave schedule. 
9.  Employee Notice of Leave. Although the City of El Monte recognizes that emergencies arise which may require employees to request immediate leave, employees are required to give as much notice as possible of their need for leave. If leave is foreseeable, at least thirty (30) days notice is required. In addition, if an employee knows that he/she will need leave in the future, but does not know the exact date(s) (e.g. for the birth of a child or to take care of a newborn), the employee shall inform his/her supervisor as soon as possible that such leave will be needed. If the city determines that an employee's notice is inadequate or the employee knew about the requested leave in advance of the request, the city may delay the granting of the leave until it can, in its discretion adequately cover the position with a substitute. 
10.  Reinstatement Upon Return from Leave. Upon expiration of leave, an employee is entitled to be restored to the position of employment held when the leave commenced, or to an equivalent position. 
11.  As a condition of restoration of an employee whose leave was due to the employee's own serious health condition, which made the employee unable to perform his/her job, the employee must obtain and present a fitness-for-duty certification from the health care provider that the employee is able to work. Failure to provide such certification will result in denial of restoration. 
12.  Employees must fill out the applicable forms in connection with leave under this policy. 
K.  Police Department Holidays. The Police Department, being a safety department of city government, and working twenty-four hours per day, three hundred sixty-five (365) days per year, is unable to take allowed holidays in the conventional manner. Therefore, holidays will be governed by the appropriate governing Memorandum of Understanding. 
(Ord. 2579 § 10, 2003)  
2.72.110 - Pay adjustments. 
A.  Application of Rates. Employees occupying a position in the competitive service shall be paid a salary or wage within the range established for that position's class under the pay plan as provided by Section 2.72.050. The minimum rate for the class generally shall apply to employees upon original appointment. However, the appointing power may, when circumstances warrant it, appoint at other than the first step. Lateral transfers shall not affect an employee's salary rate. 
B.  Acting Pay. Shall be governed by the appropriate governing Memorandum of Understanding. 
(Ord. 2579 § 11, 2003)  
2.72.120 - Transfer, promotion, demotion, suspension and reinstatement. 
A.  Transfer. After notice to the Human Resources Officer, an employee may be transferred by the appointing power at any time from one position to another position in the same or comparable class. If the transfer involves a change form from the jurisdiction of one supervising official to another, the incoming department head must consent thereto unless the appointing power orders the transfer for purposes of economy or efficiency. Transfer shall not be used to effectuate a promotion, demotion, advancement, or reduction, each of which may be accomplished only as provided in the personnel ordinance and in these rules. No person shall be transferred to a position for which he/she does not possess the minimum qualifications. 
1.  An employee may also initiate a transfer to another position in the same or lower classification at the same or a lower salary for which they are qualified. To accomplish such a transfer the employee must apply to the Human Resources Office. With the approval of the Department Head for whom the employee requests to work, the employee shall be transferred when the first vacancy occurs. 
B.  Promotion. It is the policy of the City of El Monte to develop the skills of current employees and to promote from within. However, if promotion from within would perpetuate adverse impact against classes protected by federal or state law, or if current employees are not sufficiently qualified to perform the current essential functions of the vacant position, the appointing authority after consulting with the Human Resources Officer, may call for an open, competitive examination. 
C.  Demotion. The appointing power may demote a regular employee whose performance falls below standard, or for other disciplinary purposes. No employee shall be demoted to a position for which the employee does not possess the minimum qualifications. Written notice of the demotion shall be given to the employee fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the effective date of the demotion and a copy shall be filed with the Human Resources Officer. In all cases of involuntary demotion, the appointing power shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 2.72.140. Any regular employee may request voluntary demotion to any vacant position for which he/she is qualified. 
D.  Reinstatement. An employee who has resigned with a good record shall be reinstated within two years to his/her former position, if vacant, or to a position in the same or comparable class. If the employee is reinstated within thirty (30) calendar days, the employee is eligible for restoration of all unpaid benefits, however, the employee's anniversary date will be set forward one month. 
(Ord. 2579 § 12, 2003)  
2.72.130 - Non disciplinary separation from the service. 
A.  Lay-off. The appointing power may abolish a position within a class in the competitive service because of lack of work or lack of funds, which, in turn, may require the layoff of one or more employees. When a position within a class is abolished thereby necessitating a layoff, the following procedures shall be followed: 
1.  An employee shall be ranked by classification grouping in accordance with his/her appointment to the specific classification. Groupings in descending order are: 
a.  Police classification grouping (ranked from highest compensated to least compensated. Refer to Appendix I). 
b.  Miscellaneous classification grouping (ranked from highest compensated to least compensated. Refer to Appendix I). 
2.  Position reductions within classification groupings shall be in inverse classification seniority order with the least senior employee appointed to the classification affected first. 
3.  An affected employee shall be allowed to displace a less senior employee within any equal or descending classification within his/her grouping by an exercise of city seniority, providing such displacing employee is fully qualified to perform the essential functions of the displaced employee. No training other than familiarization/orientation shall be conducted by the city. An employee failing to qualify after displacing a less senior employee by an exercise of city seniority shall be laid off. 
4.  An employee who, by an exercise of city seniority, displaces a less senior employee shall be compensated at the step in the new classification equal to or closest to his/her present step rate of pay provided that no increase in base pay results. 
5.  An employee last holding a position of higher rank shall have first opportunity, by classification seniority to revert to a position classification formerly held whether such employee is temporarily displaced within the classification grouping or separated from the city through voluntary layoff. 
6.  An employee laid off by the city by the above reduction in force procedure shall be recalled in accordance with city seniority to a position within his/her former classification grouping, which he/she is qualified to perform. Recall shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
7.  No person outside the competitive service (with the exception of the City Manager) shall be assigned to perform the essential functions of a position from which a regular employee was laid off, for more than sixty (60) days. Whenever possible the city shall lay off employees outside the competitive service before any layoffs of regular employees. 
B.  Resignation. An employee wishing to leave the competitive service in good standing shall file with the supervising official at least two (2) weeks before leaving the service, a written resignation stating the effective date and reasons for leaving. The resignation shall be forwarded to the Human Resources Officer with a statement by the appointing power or Department Head as to the resigned employee's service performance and other pertinent information concerning the cause for resignation. Failure to comply with this rule shall be entered on the service record of the employee and may be cause for denying future employment by the city. The resignation of an employee who fails to give notice shall be reported to the Human Resources Officer by the Department Head immediately. 
(Ord. 2579 § 13, 2003)  
2.72.140 - Disciplinary actions. 
A.  Cause and Extent. Disciplinary action may be taken against a regular employee for cause. The extent of the disciplinary action taken shall be commensurate with the offense, and the prior employment history of the employee. Exempt employees, outside the competitive service, serve at the will of the appointing power and may be disciplined at any time without cause or rights of appeal. 
B.  Kinds of Action. The disciplinary actions that may be taken are dismissal, demotion, suspension, reduction in step within a range, written reprimand or any appropriate combination of these. 
C.  Grounds for Disciplinary Action. Disciplinary action may be taken for any cause, which may include, but not be limited to the following, insofar as they relate to the employee's ability to perform the functions required by employment with the city: 
1.  Fraud in securing employment or making a false statement on an application for employment. 
2.  Incompetence, i.e., failure to comply with the minimum standard of an employee's position for a significant period of time. 
3.  Inexcusable inefficiency or neglect of duty, i.e., failure to perform duties required of an employee within his/her position. 
4.  Willful disobedience and insubordination, a willful failure to submit to duly appointed and acting supervision or to conform to duly established orders or directions of persons in a supervisory position. 
5.  Dishonesty, involving employment. 
6.  Being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs or narcotics while on duty. 
7.  Excessive absenteeism. 
8.  Inexcusable absence without leave. 
9.  Abuse of sick leave, i.e., taking sick leave without a doctor's certificate when one is required, or misuse of sick leave. 
10.  The conviction of either a misdemeanor or a felony involving moral turpitude shall constitute grounds for discipline of any employee. The record of conviction shall be conclusive evidence only of the fact that the conviction occurred. The Human Resources Officer and/or appointing power may inquire into the circumstances surrounding the commission of the crime in order to fix the degree of discipline. 
11.  Discourteous treatment of the public or a co-worker. 
12.  Improper or unauthorized use of city property. 
13.  Violation of the rules and regulations published and posted in any department. 
14.  Refusal to subscribe to any oath or affirmation which is required by law in connection with city employment. 
15.  Any willful act of conduct related to the employee's fitness for duty undertaken in bad faith, either during or outside of duty hours which is of such a nature that it causes discredit to the city, the employee's department or division. 
16.  Inattention to duty, tardiness, indolence, carelessness or negligence in the care and handling of city property. 
17.  Mental or physical infirmity or defects which render the employee unfit for the proper performance of his duties if no reasonable accommodation can be made. 
18.  Outside employment that interferes with the employee's performance of his/her city duties and which is not specifically authorized by the appointing power or City Manager. Prior to the imposition of any discipline under this provision, the employee will first be afforded the opportunity to give up the outside employment or modify it in a manner acceptable to the city. 
19.  The refusal of any employee of the city to appear when subpoenaed under oath before any Grand Jury having jurisdiction over any then pending cause or inquiry in which the investigation of government bribery or misconduct in city office is involved, shall constitute of itself sufficient ground for the discipline of such city employee. 
20.  Willful violation of any of the provisions of the ordinances, resolutions or any rules, regulations or policies which may be prescribed by the City Council or City Manager. 
21.  Improper political activity. Example: Those campaigning for the election or non-election of any candidate in national, state, county or municipal elections while on duty or in a city uniform on or off duty; or the dissemination of political material of any kind while on duty or in uniform. 
a.  Activities not affected. Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be construed to prevent any employee from becoming or continuing to be a member of a political club or organization, or from attendance at a political meeting, or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting his/her vote or from seeking or accepting election or appointment to public office, provided however, that a person holding a position in the classified service must resign his/her position in the classified service upon being elected to the office of any elective office of the city. 
D.  Disciplinary Action, Authority to Take. 
1.  The City Manager shall have authority to take disciplinary action. 
2.  Department Heads and their designees are authorized to suspend for three (3) days or less, issue written reprimands and verbal warnings of unsatisfactory performance to employees when indicated and recommend all other forms of disciplinary action. 
3.  The Human Resources Officer shall be notified of any contemplated disciplinary action prior to the time it is taken. 
E.  Procedures. 
1.  Notice of Intent. Whenever the appointing power intends to suspend, demote, decrease in pay or dismiss a regular employee, the appointing power shall give the employee a written Notice of Intent to Discipline which shall include the following: 
a.  The disciplinary action intended; 
b.  The specific charges upon which the action is based; 
c.  A factual summary of the grounds upon which the charges are based; 
d.  Notice of the employee's right to respond to the charges either orally or in writing to the appointing power; 
e.  The employee's right to review and copy all the materials upon which the intended discipline is based; 
f.  The date, time and person before whom the employee may respond within ten (10) days; 
g.  A statement that the failure to respond at within the time specified in the Notice shall constitute a waiver of the right to respond prior to final discipline being implemented. 
2.  Final Notice. If, after the response or the expiration of the employee's time to respond to the Notice of Intent, the appointing power decides to proceed with the disciplinary action, a Final Notice shall be served upon the employee either in person or by certified mail which shall set forth the reasons for the discipline imposed, and the effective date thereof. 
3.  Removal of Employee from Duty. Where retention in active work status would be detrimental to the best interest of the city, the employee or other employees, the employee may be removed from duty immediately. However, such removal shall not cause the employee loss of pay or benefits. 
4.  Appeal for Employees. 
a.  Within ten (10) working days after service upon the employee of the final notice (fifteen (15) days if service is by certified mail), the employee may appeal the disciplinary action. 
b.  Every appeal shall be taken by way of written notice of appeal filed with the Human Resources Officer prior to the expiration of the appeal period. 
c.  An appeal shall contain a notice of the employee's intent to appeal, setting forth specific facts upon which the appeal is based, a specific reference to the disciplinary action upon which the appeal is taken and the nature of the relief sought. Every notice of appeal shall be signed by the employee or the employee's representative. If the employee will be represented during the appeal hearing, the employee shall identify his or her representative in the notice. 
d.  The City Manager, upon receipt of a timely appeal, which contains all of the required information, shall submit to the employee a list containing seven (7) names from the California State Mediation and Conciliation Office, one of whom shall act as Hearing Officer. The names shall be numbered consecutively. 
e.  Within ten (10) consecutive calendar days after service of the list containing the names, the employee and then the City Manager may alternate and strike one name from the list. 
f.  Upon expiration of the said ten (10) day period, the Hearing Officer shall be deemed for all purposes to be the Judge whose name appears on the list with the lowest number next to his or her name. 
g.  If no name remains on the list, another list of seven (7) new names shall be requested. Within ten (10) consecutive calendar days after service of the new list, the same process of alternate striking shall be followed. Upon expiration of said ten (10) day period, the Hearing Officer shall be deemed for all purposes to be the Judge whose name appears on the list with the lowest number next to his or her name. 
h.  If for any reason the person who is designated as Hearing Officer is unable or unwilling to serve as such, the name on the list with the next lower number and whose name was not stricken shall be Hearing Officer. In the event that none of those named on the list are unwilling or unable to serve as Hearing Officer, the City Manager shall prepare and submit a new list to the employee containing not less than seven (7) different names from the State Mediation and Conciliation Office. The above procedures shall be followed until a Hearing Officer is selected. 
i.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the employee and the City Manager may mutually agree upon a qualified person to act as Hearing Officer. 
j.  The designated Hearing Officer shall set a time and place for the conduct of the de novo appeal hearing and shall give not less than fifteen (15) consecutive days notice thereof to the employee and to the appointing power. 
k.  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall prepare findings of fact and a determination, which shall include all of the issues presented by the appeal. The Hearing Officer shall serve a copy of the proposed findings and determination upon the employee and upon the appointing power. The findings and determination made by the Hearing Officer shall be deemed final and conclusive unless the employee or City Manager files a written appeal to the City Council within ten (10) consecutive calendar days following the service of the findings and determination upon the employee. Where a timely appeal is filed appealing the decision of the Hearing Officer to the City Council, a transcript of proceedings before the Hearing Officer shall be prepared which shall include all documents presented in evidence at the hearing, and including any document not accepted in evidence by determination of the Hearing Officer. The transcript together with the findings and determination of the Hearing Officer shall be transmitted to the City Council. The City Council shall set a time and a place for a hearing on the appeal from the decision of the Hearing Officer. The action of the City Council on the appeal shall be limited to a review of the transcript and the submission by the parties of written or oral arguments in support of and/or in opposition to the Hearing Officer's findings and determination. The City Council shall not accept any further evidence unless there is a showing of good cause that the evidence proposed to be presented was not available at the time of the hearing before the Hearing Officer through no fault of the party offering the same. The City Council may consider the evidence in such a case or may refer the matter to the Hearing Officer for a further review based upon the evidence involved. 
l.  The City Council shall act upon the appeal based upon the transcript and such written or oral arguments, which have been presented to it by the parties. The City Council may overturn the determination of the Hearing Officer; or accept the same; or modify it in whole or in part. 
m.  The action of the City Council shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
F.  Hearing Procedure. 
1.  All hearings before the Hearing Officer shall be conducted de novo and shall be closed unless the employee requests in writing five (5) days before the hearing that the hearing be open. 
2.  Subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum may be issued by either party and shall be enforced by the Hearing Officer. 
3.  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rules, which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil and criminal actions and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The Hearing Officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The Hearing Officer shall rule on the admission or exclusion of evidence. 
4.  Each party shall have these rights: To be represented by legal counsel or other person of his or her choice; to call and examine witnesses; to introduce evidence; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to suspend for reconsideration; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him or her to testify; and to rebut the evidence against him or her. If the employee does not testify in his or her own behalf, he or she may be called and examined as if under cross-examination. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
5.  The hearing shall proceed in the following order, unless the Hearing Officer for good cause, otherwise directs: 
a.  The appointing power shall be permitted to make an opening statement; 
b.  The employee shall then be permitted to make an opening statement; 
c.  The appointing power shall produce evidence; the appointing power shall have the burden of proof and burden of producing evidence showing by a preponderance of the evidence the existence of facts which support the imposition of the discipline; and 
d.  The employee may then open his or her defense and offer his or her evidence in support thereof; the employee bears the burden of proof and the burden of producing evidence for any affirmative defenses asserted; 
e.  The parties may then, in order, respectively offer rebutting evidence only, unless the Hearing Officer for good reason, permits them to offer evidence upon their original case; 
f.  Closing arguments shall be permitted and written briefs may be permitted. The appointing power shall have the right to open the closing arguments followed by the employee. The appointing power then has a right to reply. 
g.  The Hearing Officer shall determine relevancy, weight, and credibility of testimony and evidence. During the examination of a witness, all other witnesses, except the parties, shall be excluded from the hearing unless the Hearing Officer, for good cause, otherwise directs. 
G.  Appeal for Safety Employees. 
1.  There is created an Appeals Commission. The Appeals Commission shall discharge the duties as delegated to it in this section. The Appeals Commission shall consist of a five (5) member board as appointed by the City Council. Subject to the approval of the City Council, each City Councilmember and the Mayor shall nominate one member to serve on the Appeals Commission for a term in office on the Appeals Commission which is no longer than the remaining term of the City Councilmember who has nominated the member of the Appeals Commission. The method for designating the order in which City Councilmembers may nominate persons to serve as members of the Appeals Commission for vacancies which may exist or occur on the Appeals Commission from and after August 1, 1992 shall be as provided in City Ordinance No. 2374. Members of the Appeals Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. Notwithstanding the expiration date of the term of a particular member of the Appeals Commission, each Commissioner shall continue to serve at the pleasure of the City Council until his or her successor is nominated and appointed. 
2.  The members of the Appeals Commission shall be compensated at the rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per meeting; but not to exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month, in performance of their duties. 
3.  If a vacancy shall occur on the Appeals Commission otherwise than by expiration of a term, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of such term by the nomination of the City Councilmember or Mayor, who originally nominated such member, subject to the approval of the City Council. 
4.  The members of the Appeals Commission shall be qualified electors of said city. No person shall be appointed to said Board who holds any salaried public office or employment; nor shall any member, while a member of the Board or for a period of one year after he or she has ceased for any reason to be a member, be eligible for appointment to any salaried employment in the service of the city other than a city elective office. 
5.  The Appeals Commission shall meet from time-to-time at the request of the Human Resources Officer. Three (3) members of the Appeals Commission shall meet for the purpose of discharging the duties of the Appeals Commission to consider such a matter as referred to it by the Human Resources Officer and two (2) members shall be considered a quorum for the purpose of conducting business. The three (3) members of the Appeals Commission shall be designated lot as drawn by the Human Resources Officer from time to time as may be necessary to consider a particular matter of business. Not less frequently than once per year, the Appeals Commission shall conduct a meeting of its entire membership for the purpose of reviewing the administrative procedures of the Appeals Commission for considering the matters as may be referred to the Appeals Commission under this chapter. At such a meeting where all five (5) members of the Appeals Commission may be present, the Appeals Commission shall not consider any matter as may be referred to the Appeals Commission under this section. 
6.  Any safety employee in the competitive service, who has been demoted, dismissed or reduced in pay, shall be entitled to receive a written statement of the reasons for such action within three (3) days, and he or she shall have three (3) days' time thereafter within which to answer in writing thereto. A copy of such charges and answer shall be filed with the Personnel Clerk. In the event the employee files an answer, a copy of such written charges and of such answer shall be transmitted by the Personnel Clerk to the Appeals Commission. Within ten (10) days from the date of filing his or her answer to the written charges, or in the event such written charges have not been made available to him or her within the time prescribed, then within ten (10) days after the action taken to demote, dismiss or reduce the pay of the employee, he or she may file a written demand with the Personnel Clerk requesting a hearing before the Appeals Commission. The Board shall then investigate the case and conduct a hearing as provided by this chapter and by the rules. 
7.  Reductions in pay which are part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages as an economy measure or as part of a general curtailment program shall not constitute reductions in pay entitling employees to a hearing under the provisions of this section or of this chapter. 
8.  Any safety employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the Appeals Commission relative to any situation affecting his employment status or conditions of employment, except in instances where the right of appeal is prohibited by this chapter. Thereupon the Board shall make such investigation as it may deem necessary and within twenty (20) days after the request for hearing was filed by the employee, the Board shall hold a hearing, at which time it shall hear evidence for and against such employee. Hearings may be informally conducted and the rules of evidence need not apply. 
9.  Within ten (10) days after concluding the hearing, the Appeals Commission shall certify its findings and recommendations to the Council or other official from whose action the appeal was taken. Said official may then affirm, revoke or modify the action taken, as in his or her judgment shall seem warranted. The findings and recommendation of the Appeals Commission and any action taken by the Council or other appointing power shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2700 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2579 § 14, 2003)  
2.72.150 - Training of employees. 
A.  Responsibility for Training. Responsibility for developing training programs for employees shall be assumed jointly by the City Manager, Human Resources Officer, and Department Heads. Such training programs may include lecture courses, demonstrations, assignment of reading matter or such other devices as may be available for the purpose of improving the effectiveness and broadening the knowledge of municipal officers and employees in the performance of their respective duties. 
B.  Credit for Training. Participation in and successful completion of special training courses may be considered in making advancements and promotions. Evidence of such activity shall be filed by the employee with the Human Resources Officer. 
(Ord. 2579 § 15, 2003)  
2.72.160 - Reports and Records. 
A.  Personnel Records. The Human Resources Officer shall maintain a service or roster card personnel record for each employee in the service of the city showing the name, title of position held, the department to which assigned, salary, changes in employment status, and such other information as is used for Human Resources purposes. 
B.  Human Resources Action Forms. Every appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion, change of salary rate, and any other temporary or permanent change in status of employees shall be reported to the Human Resources Officer. 
C.  Destruction of Records. Prior to any document being removed from a personnel file, that employee shall be provided with fifteen (15) days notice of such action. 
D.  Personnel Files. 
1.  Viewing Files. An employee, or the employee's representative, with written consent, shall be entitled to review his/her personnel file. 
2.  Photocopy Charge. If an employee wishes to have a photocopy of any of the documents in the personnel file, he/she will pay the fee charged by the city at that time for photocopies. 
3.  Placing Documents in Personnel Files. An employee shall be provided with copies of all documents that are to be placed in his/her personnel file and shall be given thirty (30) days from the date of first receipt of the document to respond. The response shall be attached to the document. 
(Ord. 2579 § 16, 2003)  
2.72.170 - Performance evaluation and reports. 
A.  Performance Evaluation. Performance evaluation is an on-going process and the Human Resources Officer shall provide a method of reporting of individual employee performance, which may relate to quantity and quality of work, ability, reliability, discipline, attendance, and other factors. The Human Resources Officer shall prescribe forms for such performance evaluations and shall be responsible for assuring that such evaluations are adequate to provide information to both the employee and the city for the purposes set forth in this section. 
B.  Performance Reports. Department Heads shall at a minimum, annually rate the performance of each employee, provided, however, that the department heads may delegate the responsibility for rating the performance of specified employees in their departments to that employee's supervisor. Interim reports may be completed as necessary when changes in work performance occur. Each employee shall be informed in such reports of his/her strengths and weaknesses. The reports may be inspected by the employee, the employee's departmental supervisor(s), the employee's department head, the Human Resources Officer, and other management staff as appropriate, but shall not be open to any other persons, unless the employee specifically authorizes such other person to inspect the report(s), or the Human Resources Officer determines the report(s) to be relevant evidence in any hearing procedure conducted under these Rules. 
C.  Appeal of Performance Report. A regular employee shall have the right to appeal any performance report to his/her Department Head. The Department Head's decision shall be final. Notwithstanding, whether or not such an appeal was taken, the employee shall have the right to respond to the report. The response shall be attached to the report. 
(Ord. 2579 § 17, 2003)  
2.72.180 - Outside employment. 
A.  A city employee shall not engage in any employment, activity, or enterprise, which is in conflict with his or her duties, functions, or responsibilities as a city employee. 
B.  Use of City Equipment Prohibited. 
1.  No city-owned equipment, autos, trucks, instruments, tools, supplies, machines, or any other item which is the property of the city shall be used by an employee while said employee is engaged in any outside employment or activity for compensation, or otherwise, except upon prior written approval of the City Manager. This section shall not apply to city safety equipment provided to individual safety employees. 
2.  No employee shall allow any unauthorized person to rent, borrow, or use any of the items mentioned in (a) above, except upon prior written approval of the City Manager. 
3.  Violations and Penalties. Any violation of the provisions herein contained respecting outside employment or activity, and use of city property shall constitute sufficient grounds for disciplinary action. 
(Ord. 2579 § 18, 2003)  
2.72.200 - Discrimination. 
No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race, color, creed, religious belief, national origin, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, citizenship, age or handicap. 
(Ord. 2579 § 20, 2003)  
2.72.210 - Solicitation of contributions. 
No officer, agent, clerk or employee under the government of the city shall, directly or indirectly, solicit or receive or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription, contribution or political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any political purpose whatever from any one on the eligible lists or holding any position under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2579 § 21, 2003)  
2.72.220 - Right to contract for special service. 
The Council may contract with any competent agency for the performance by any such agency of such technical service in connection with the establishment of the personnel system or with its operation, as may be desired. Said contract may include the delegation to such an agency of the responsibility for the performance of the duties herein imposed upon the Personnel Clerk but shall not include the delegation to such agency of the powers and duties herein vested in the Council. 
(Ord. 2579 § 22, 2003)  
2.72.230 - Appropriation of funds. 
The Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2579 § 23, 2003)  
2.72.240 - Provisions of law and separability. 
If any provision of this chapter is held contrary to law by a court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be severed from the remaining provisions hereof and shall be deemed null and void to the extent required by the court. Other provisions of this will continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 2579 § 24, 2003)  
2.72.250 - Recission and repeal of prior rules. 
All prior and other resolutions inconsistent or in conflict herewith, and all former Personnel Rules and Regulations of the City of El Monte affecting the city personnel generally, as distinguished from Departmental Rules and Regulations, are hereby rescinded and repealed concurrent with the effective date hereof. 
(Ord. 2579 § 25, 2003)  
Chapter 2.76 - CLAIMS FOR MONEY OR DAMAGES 
Sections: 
 
2.76.010 - Statement of intent. 
It is the intent of the City Council that all claims for money or other damages filed against the city are to be processed in accordance with the California Government Code and the provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2510 § 2, 2000: prior code § 2741)  
2.76.020 - Filing of claims. 
All claims or other applications filed pursuant to California Tort Claims Act shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall date stamp the claim and immediately forward a copy of the claim to the City Attorney's Office. The City Clerk shall maintain the original of all claims. 
(Ord. 2510 § 3, 2000: prior code § 2742)  
2.76.030 - Review of claim. 
Upon receipt of a claim or other applications from the City Clerk, the City Attorney or the City Attorney's designee shall review the claim or other applications to determine whether they contain the required information. If the City Attorney determines that the claim fails to comply with the Tort Claims Act, the City Attorney shall within twenty (20) days of the date the claim or other application was presented, give written notice to the claimant setting forth how the claim fails to conform to the Government Code requirements. If the claim or other application satisfies the code requirements, the City Attorney shall request an investigation and analysis of the claim or other application from the claims administrator, if any, or from an appropriate city department head. 
(Ord. 2510 § 4, 2000: prior code § 2743)  
2.76.040 - Action on claims and other applications. 
The City Attorney may do all acts on claims or other applications required by the Tort Claims Act, including rejection of claims, denial of applications to file late claims and sending written notices to the claimant consistent with Government Code Sections 913 and 915.4, provided, however, the City Attorney may refer any claim or other application to the City Council if the City Attorney deems such referral to be appropriate. 
(Ord. 2510 § 5, 2000: prior code § 2744)  
2.76.050 - Allowance of claims. 
The City Attorney is authorized to settle any claim where the amount to be paid does not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). The City Manager is authorized to settle any claim where the amount to be paid does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). However, no payment shall be made unless the claimant signs a settlement agreement that releases the city of liability. 
(Ord. 2510 § 6, 2000: prior code § 2745)  
2.76.060 - Claims by public entities. 
Prior to bringing suit against the city of El Monte, the state of California, a department or agency of the state of California and any other local public entity must comply with the claims filing requirements of Government Code Section 905 et seq. 
(Ord. 2510 § 7, 2000: prior code § 2746)  
2.76.070 - Appearances on behalf of the city. 
The City Manager and/or the City Attorney are authorized to appear on behalf of the city before any court of competent jurisdiction to settle any matter for the amounts authorized in Section 2745 or for any other amount authorized by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2510 § 8, 2000: prior code § 2747)  
Chapter 2.80 - COMPLIMENTARY TICKET AND PASS POLICY 
Sections: 
 
2.80.010 - Purpose of policy. 
The purpose of this policy is to establish a fair and equitable process for the distribution of complimentary tickets or passes to the city in compliance with the requirements of the Fair Political Practices Commission ("FPPC") through Section 18944.1 of California Code of Regulations ("Section 18944.1"). 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
2.80.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "City" or "City of El Monte" means and includes the City of El Monte, and any other affiliated agency created or activated by the City Council, and any other departments, boards, and commissions thereof. 
B.  "City official" means and includes every official, agent, employee, or other persons as defined in Government Code Section 82048. 
C.  "City venue" means and includes any facility owned, controlled, or operated by the city. 
D.  "Immediate family" means and refers to the spouse and dependent children of the city official. The term "spouse" includes registered domestic partners recognized by state law and dependent children shall mean a child, including an adoptive child or stepchild, of a city official who is under eighteen (18) years old and who the city official is entitled to claim as a dependent on his or her federal tax return. 
E.  "Ticket" and "pass" shall mean and refer to those terms as defined in Section 18944.1, as amended from time to time. 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
2.80.030 - Application of policy. 
A.  This policy applies to the distribution of all tickets or passes that provide admission to a facility, event, show, or performance for an entertainment, amusement, recreational, or similar purposes provided by the city, or at the behest of an official of that agency. 
B.  This policy governs the distribution of complimentary tickets and passes received by the city that are either: 
1.  Gratuitously provided to the city by an outside source; 
2.  Acquired by the city by purchase at fair market value; 
3.  Acquired by the city as consideration pursuant to the terms of a contract; or 
4.  Acquired and distributed by the city in any other manner. 
C.  This policy does not apply to: 
1.  Any other item of value provided to the city or any city official, regardless whether received gratuitously or for which consideration is provided. 
2.  Tickets or passes provided to the city official by sources other than the city. 
3.  A ticket or pass received by a city official where both the city official and the city treat and report the value of the ticket or pass as income consistent with applicable state and federal income tax laws and the ticket or pass is reported as income pursuant to the provisions of this policy. 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
2.80.040 - Official duties; ceremonial roles. 
A ticket or pass provided to a city official as part of his or her official duties, or a ticket or pass provided so that the city official may perform a ceremonial role or function on behalf of the city is not a gift and is exempt from any disclosure or reporting requirements to the extent provided by Section 18944.1. This policy shall not apply to such tickets or passes. 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
2.80.050 - General provisions. 
A.  No Right to Tickets. The use of complimentary tickets or passes is a privilege extended by the city and not the right of any person to which the privilege may from time to time be extended. 
B.  Limitation on Transfer of Tickets. Tickets or passes distributed to a city official pursuant to this policy shall not be transferred to any other person, except to members of such city official's immediate family or no more than one guest solely for their attendance at the event. 
C.  Prohibition Against Sale of or Receiving Reimbursement for Tickets. No person who receives a ticket or pass pursuant to this policy shall sell or receive reimbursement for the value of such ticket or pass. 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
2.80.060 - Conditions under which tickets may be distributed. 
Subject to the provisions of this policy, complimentary tickets or passes may be distributed to public officials under any one of the following conditions: 
A.  The city official reimburses the city for the face value of the tickets or passes. 
B.  The city official treats the tickets or passes as income consistent with applicable federal and state income tax laws and the tickets or passes are reported as income pursuant to the provisions of this policy. 
C.  The distribution of tickets or passes to, or at the behest of, a city official for public use accomplishes or furthers one or more of the following governmental and/or public purposes. 
1.  Facilitating the performance of a ceremonial role or function by a city official on behalf of the city at an event, for which the city official may receive enough tickets or passes for the city official and each member of his or her immediate family. 
2.  Facilitating the attendance of a city official at an event where the job duties of the city official require his or her attendance at the event, for which the city official may receive enough tickets for each member of the city official's immediate family. 
3.  Promotion of intergovernmental relations and/or cooperation and coordination of resources with other governmental agencies, including, but not limited to, attendance at an event with or by elected or appointed public officials from other jurisdictions. 
4.  Economic or business development purposes on behalf of the city. 
5.  Promotion of city resources and/or facilities available to city residents. 
6.  Promotion of city-run, sponsored or supported community events, activities or programs. 
7.  To monitor and evaluate the value of city-run, sponsored or supported community events, activities or programs to the city including but not limited to evaluation of the venue, quality of performances and compliance with city policies, agreements and other requirements, 
8.  Promotion and evaluation of events, activities or programs at city venues, including but not limited to evaluation of the venue, quality of performances and compliance with city policies, agreements and other requirements. 
9.  Promoting, supporting and/or showing appreciation for programs or services rendered by charitable and non-profit organizations benefiting El Monte residents. 
10.  Promotion of city tourism on a local, state, national or worldwide scale. 
11.  Business retention or attraction on a local, state, national or worldwide scale. 
12.  Promotion of city recognition, visibility, and/or profile on a local, state, national or worldwide scale. 
13.  Encouraging El Monte resident and business support for and attendance at local events. 
14.  Encouraging participants in city-sponsored programs to attend local events. 
15.  Attracting or rewarding volunteer public service. 
16.  Encouraging or rewarding significant academic, athletic, or public service achievements by El Monte students, residents or businesses. 
17.  Attracting and retaining highly qualified employees in the city service. 
18.  Recognizing or rewarding meritorious service by a city employee. 
19.  Promoting enhanced city employee performance or morale. 
20.  As an incident to the above public purposes, allowing for the immediate family of the city official to accompany the city official to events to accomplish any of the purposes listed in this policy. 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
2.80.070 - Tickets distributed at the behest of a city official. 
A.  Only the following city officials shall have the authority to behest tickets or passes: City Council Members, the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager and departments heads. 
B.  Tickets or passes shall be distributed at the behest of a city official only for one or more of the public purposes set forth in Section 2.80.060.C above. 
C.  If the tickets or passes are distributed at the behest of a city official, such city official shall not sue one of the tickets or passes so distributed to attend the event. 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
2.80.080 - Posting and disclosure requirements. 
A.  Form 802 reports required by Section 18944.1 shall be maintained as a public record and subject to inspection and copying under Gov. Code Section 81008(a) and forwarded to the FPPC for posting on its website. 
B.  The city may also post this policy and form 802 reports on the city's website. 
C.  Tickets distributed by the city for which the city receives reimbursement from the city official shall not be subject to the disclosure provisions set forth herein. 
(Res. No. 9356, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.01 - SEWER SERVICE CHARGE 
Sections: 
 
3.01.010 - Establishment of sewer service charge. 
A.  The record owner of any real property parcel which is connected with and discharges sewage into the city's sewer system, shall pay a sewer service charge to the city. All record owners of real property parcels connecting to the city's sewer system shall be charged for such service in accordance with the use classifications, strength factors and rates set forth by City Council ordinance. As set forth in greater detail under Section 3.01.100, proceeds of the sewer service charge are intended to fund the operations, maintenance and capital costs associated with the city's sewer system. This sewer service charge shall remain in effect until repealed or modified by ordinance of the City Council. 
B.  Except as otherwise permitted under Section 3.01.020, below, the sewer service charge use classifications, strength factors and corresponding rates may be established, adjusted and/or amended from time to time by way of an uncodified City Council ordinance provided any such action is undertaken in compliance with applicable provisions of Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and Health and Safety Code Section 5470 et seq., as the same may be amended or renumbered from time to time. The uncodified City Council ordinance setting forth the most recent schedule of use classifications, strength factors and corresponding rates shall be maintained by the City Clerk, the El Monte Finance Division and the El Monte Engineering Division as public records available for viewing and inspection. 
C.  The record owner of any real property parcel for which the sewer service charge has been imposed shall be responsible for payment of the sewer service charge. Any agreement to the contrary between a property owner and a third party, including a tenant, will not relieve the property owner of the responsibility to pay the sewer service charge. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.020 - Calculation of sewer service charge—Changes in use classification. 
A.  The amount of the annual sewer service charge levied upon each real property parcel shall be based on flow and strength methodology patterned after the methodology used by the Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County which estimates the hydraulic loading and strength characteristics among varying classes of sewer system users. So that the established sewer service charge rates may keep up with inflation, the uncodified City Council ordinance setting such rates may provide for the annual increase of the rates at the beginning of each fiscal year; provided that any such annual inflationary increases may not exceed amounts equal to the lesser of the following: four (4) percent; or the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for all items for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area over the course of the preceding fiscal year. No such annual inflationary increases may be imposed without first holding a noticed public hearing on the matter and any increases in excess of the amounts authorized under this section shall require the conduct of a majority protest public hearing in compliance with Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution. 
B.  Whenever the land use classification of a real property parcel connected with the city's sewer system is changed, the rate of the sewer service charge imposed upon the parcel shall be adjusted in the following fiscal year and imposed in accordance with the rate of the sewer service charge then in effect for the new use classification. 
C.  Whenever a real property parcel connected with the city sewer system is lawfully divided into two (2) or more separate real property parcels, each resulting real property parcel that is connected with the city sewer system shall be subject to the sewer service charge set forth under this chapter in accordance with the rate applied to the resulting land use classification associated with each resulting real property parcel. Any adjusted sewer service charge imposed upon the resulting real property parcels shall be adjusted in the following fiscal year and imposed in accordance with the rate of the sewer service charge then in effect for use classification of each new real property parcel. 
D.  Whenever two (2) or more real property parcels are lawfully merged to form a single real property parcel connected with the city sewer system, the resulting real property parcel shall be subject to the sewer service charge set forth under this chapter in accordance with the rate applied to the resulting land use classification associated with new real property parcel. Any adjusted sewer service charge imposed upon the resulting real property parcel shall be adjusted in the following fiscal year and imposed in accordance with the rate of the sewer service charge then in effect for use classification of the new real property parcel. 
E.  If a real property parcel connects to the city's sewer system without payment of a sewer service charge, the Director is authorized to require back charges in the event that the real property parcel has been discharging into the city sewer system. The back charges may be imposed for up to four (4) years in arrears. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.030 - Collection on tax roll. 
The city elects to have sewer service charges for each fiscal year collected on the Los Angeles County tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, the ad valorem property tax. Except as provided for in Section 5473.8 of the California Health and Safety Code, the sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against each real property parcel with respect to which it has been charged. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.040 - Remedies for collection and enforcement of charges. 
The remedies for collecting and enforcing the sewer service charge set forth in this chapter shall be cumulative and may be pursued alternatively, or any thereof may be used consecutively when the City Council so determines. If any one of such remedies is, or may be, invalid, all valid remedies shall remain effectual. The costs of collection and of the enforcement of the remedies for the collection of sewer charges may be from the revenues from such charges. Any holder of any bond outstanding at any time, which bond is payable from sewer charge revenues, may compel the use of any or all of the remedies provided in this chapter. The holder of any bond payable from the sewer service charge revenues, by mandamus, may compel the City Council to increase the sewer charges to the extent which will make them sufficient to provide enough moneys for the payment of the bonds. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.050 - Compensation of county. 
Consistent with subsection (B)(1) of Section 3.01.100, the Assessor, Auditor-Controller, Tax Collector and/or other subdivision of the County of Los Angeles may be compensated for services rendered on behalf of the city in connection with the levy, collection and enforcement of the sewer service charge in accordance with an agreement between the city and such entities for the collection of taxes, assessments, or property-related fees or charges for the city. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.060 - Confirmation of charges—Written report hearing. 
A.  On or before the close of each fiscal year, the Director, shall cause a written report to be prepared and filed with the City Clerk. The written report shall contain a description of each real property parcel subject to the sewer service charge and the total sewer service charge sum to be levied upon the parcel for the upcoming fiscal year. The total annual sewer service charge sum levied upon each parcel shall be computed in conformity with the methodology and rates set forth by the uncodified City Council ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 3.01.020. The written report shall also contain all such information as may be required under Section 5473 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  The City Clerk shall give notice of the filing of the written report pursuant to Section 5473.1 of the California Health and Safety Code and shall also give notice of the time and place for a public hearing before the City Council with respect to the written report. Such public hearing shall be set no later than the first Tuesday in July of each year. If the public hearing is continued, such hearing shall be completed no later than the fifteenth day of July so as to provide sufficient time to format and forward all information and data to the appropriate county collection entities for timely placement on the upcoming property tax bill. The foregoing notwithstanding, the failure of the City Council to meet any of the internal deadlines set forth under this subsection shall not preclude the City Council from having the charge authorized under this chapter placed on the annual tax bill so long as the county deadlines for submitting all information and data can still be met. 
C.  At the time and place set forth in the City Clerk's notice of public hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the written report. If the City Council finds that protest is made by the owners of a majority of the real property parcels described in the report, then the report shall not be adopted and the charges shall be collected separately from the tax roll and not constitute a lien against any real property parcel. 
D.  Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any charge or overrule any or all obligations and shall make its determination upon each charge as described in the written report. The determination of the City Council shall be final. 
E.  No later than the tenth day of August of each year, the City Clerk, as set forth under Section 5473.4 of the California Health and Safety Code, shall file with the Director a copy of the written report approved by the City Council. The City Clerk shall endorse upon the report a statement over the City Clerk's signature that the report has been finally adopted by the City Council. No later than the tenth day of August of each year, the Director in cooperating with the Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services shall ensure that all information and data approved by the City Council pursuant to this section is forwarded to the appropriate county collecting agencies for timely placement on the annual property tax bills. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.070 - Hardship discounts for seniors, the disabled and senior rental housing. 
A.  The total annual amount of the sewer service charge levied for a given fiscal year upon the record owner of a real property parcel may be reduced by a sum equal to forty (40) percent of the total annual amount levied, if the record owner (or at least one of the record owners if more than one) qualifies for the senior and disabled persons discount set forth under this section. No discount afforded under this subsection is intended to apply to nonresidential real property parcels or nonresidential portions of mixed-use developments. 
B.  The record owner of a real property parcel shall qualify for the senior and disabled persons discount, if all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  The real property parcel contains only one dwelling unit; 
2.  The dwelling unit is the record owner's domicile; 
3.  The record owner qualifies as a low flow water user in that the record owner's household water use averages no more than two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day over a period of one month for six (6) consecutive months as of the submission date of the discount application; or the household income of the record owner is no greater than that of "lower income households" as the same are defined under Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
4.  The record owner qualifies as a "senior" in that he or she is, or will be, at least sixty-two (62) years of age prior to the end of the fiscal year for which the sewer service charge is levied; or the record owner is "disabled" within the meaning of Section 1614(a) of the Part A of Title XVI of the federal Social Security Act codified at 42 U.S.C.A. Section 1382; and 
5.  The record owner(s) timely submit(s) a senior and disabled persons discount application form referenced in subsection E of this section, below. 
If the record owner is a living trust, the senior and disabled persons discount may be claimed by a named beneficiary under the living trust provided the named beneficiary meets all of the same requirements set forth under this subsection. 
C.  The total annual amount of the sewer service charge levied upon the record owner of a real property parcel for a given fiscal year may be reduced by a sum equal to forty (40) percent of the total annual amount levied, if the real property parcel qualifies for the senior rental housing discount. 
D.  A real property parcel shall qualify for the senior rental housing discount, if all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  The real property parcel contains one or more senior residential rental buildings; 
2.  The per unit daily water usage for all dwelling units contained within each senior residential rental building averages no more than two hundred fifty (250) gallons per unit per day over a period of one month for six (6) consecutive months from the date the discount application is submitted; and 
3.  The record owner(s) of the real property parcel timely submit(s) the senior rental housing reduction application form referenced in subsection E of this section. 
For purposes of calculating the average daily water usage per unit, the water usage of all dwelling units within a senior residential rental building (including those dwelling units which may be occupied by on-site managerial or maintenance staff) shall be factored into the wage usage calculation. 
E.  On or before the close of business on June 15th of each fiscal year, a record owner seeking to claim the senior and disabled persons discount or the senior rental housing discount for the following fiscal year must file with the Director an application form requesting the discount along with any and all required documentation and/or data establishing the record owner's eligibility. If June 15th falls on a date in which the city of El Monte is not open for business, the deadline shall be extended to the close of business of the next business day. The Director shall prepare a form for such applications; may require that all applications be submitted on the designated form; and may request such confirming documentation and/or data as the Director deems necessary to verify an applicant's qualifications for any of the discounts afforded under this section. Each applicant shall be required to sign the application and by such signature the applicant shall represent, under penalty of perjury, that all information, documentation and data supplied by the applicant is true and correct. In establishing the proper documentation and/or data that must be presented to ascertain water usage, the Director must rely on documentation and/or data that reliably establishes the applicant's water usage over a period of six (6) consecutive months or more immediately preceding the month in which the application is submitted. Such documentation may include, but need not be limited to the applicant's water bills or such other documentation and/or data as the Director deems reasonably necessary for the reliable calculation of water usage. With respect to the sewer service charges levied for the 2008-2009 fiscal year, the first year in which the sewer service charge is levied, persons eligible for the hardship discounts afforded under this section shall be authorized to claim such discounts utilizing the procedures set forth under Section 3.01.090(C) (Reconsideration and appeal), except that such first-year appeals shall be heard by the Director instead of an administrative hearing officer. 
F.  Upon receiving an application pursuant to this section, the Director shall conduct an investigation and determine whether the applicant qualifies for a reduction as provided in this section. The decision of the Director may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.01.090 of this chapter. The timely filing of an application with the Director and the submission of a timely appeal in accordance with Section 3.01.090 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. 
G.  Discounts afforded under this section shall be subsidized with general fund or other nonsewer charge fund proceeds; such discounts shall not be subsidized by proportional or corresponding increases in the annual amount of the sewer service charge paid by noneligible sewer system users. Each fiscal year, the Director shall transfer from the city's general fund to the sewer charge fund monetary sums equal to the total amount of the discounts granted pursuant to this section. 
H.  City reserves the right to amend by ordinance the qualifying criteria for any sewer service charge discount afforded under this section. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.080 - Constitutional and statutory exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a sewer service charge upon any person or real property parcel when the imposition of such charge upon such person or real property parcel would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California. 
B.  Any person who claims to be exempt from the sewer service charge pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the Director for such exemption on or before June 15th of each fiscal year along with any and all required documentation and/or data establishing the record owner's eligibility for the exemption. If June 15th falls on a date in which the city of El Monte is not open for business, the deadline shall be extended to the close of business of the next business day. The Director shall prepare a form for such applications; may require that all such applications be submitted on the designated form; and may request such corroborating documentation and/or data as the Director deems necessary to verify an applicant's qualifications for the exemption. Each applicant shall be required to sign the application and by such signature the applicant shall represent, under penalty of perjury, that all information, documentation and data supplied by the applicant is true and correct. With respect to the sewer service charges levied for the 2008-2009 fiscal year, the first year in which the sewer service charge is levied, persons eligible for an exemption recognized under this section shall be authorized to claim any refund due utilizing the procedures set forth under Section 3.01.090(C) (Reconsideration and appeal), except that such appeals shall be heard and decided by the Director instead of an administrative hearing officer. 
C.  Upon receiving an application pursuant to this section, the Director shall conduct an investigation and determine whether the applicant as provided in this section. The decision of the Director may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.01.090 of this chapter. The timely filing of an application with the Director and the submission of a timely appeal in accordance with Section 3.01.090 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. 
D.  Exemptions afforded under this section shall be subsidized with general fund or other nonsewer charge fund proceeds; such exemptions shall not be subsidized by proportional or corresponding increases in the annual amount of the sewer service charge paid by noneligible sewer system users. Each fiscal year, the Director shall transfer from the city's general fund to the sewer charge fund monetary sums equal to the total amount of the discounts granted pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.090 - Reconsideration and appeal. 
A.  The procedures of this section shall be available to: (1) the record owner(s) of a real property parcel that is not connected to, or is temporarily disconnected from, the city sewer system, provided such nonconnection or disconnection occurred lawfully or is otherwise permitted under the El Monte Municipal Code or the laws of the state of California; (2) the record owner(s) of a real property parcel who contend(s) that an incorrect use classification or strength factor has been applied to the real property parcel in calculating the amount of the sewer service charge due for a given fiscal year; (3) the record owner(s) of any real property parcel who dispute(s) the basis for the denial of any discount or exemption afforded under Sections 3.01.070 and/or 3.01.080, excluding denials based on the late submission of a discount application; and (4) the record owner(s) of a real property parcel who for any other reason contend(s) the amount determined and charged upon the real property parcel pursuant to Section 3.01.060 (Confirmation of charges—Written report hearing) is incorrect or has been erroneously or illegally collected. 
B.  Following the City Clerk's issuance of notice of the written report referenced under Section 3.01.060(B) but no less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing referenced under Section 3.01.060(B) and (C), the record owner(s) of a real property parcel may submit to the City Clerk an application requesting the reconsideration of any calculation or determination reflected in the written report which relates to any of the matters enumerated under subsection A of this section, above. Any reconsideration request submitted after the time period set forth under this subsection shall be treated as an appeal and shall be subject to the appeal provisions of subsection C of this section. The Director may require that reconsideration requests be made in a specific format (or on a specific form) and the Director may further request that additional supporting documentation and/or data be provided by the applicant. Upon receiving an application pursuant to this subsection, the Director shall conduct an investigation. Based on the Director's examination of the application, any documentation and data submitted by the applicant and such other additional evidence as the Director may obtain, the Director shall render a decision which either affirms or amends the prior calculation or determination. Any such amendment to a prior calculation or determination shall be reflected as an amendment to the written report submitted for City Council approval at the conclusion of the public hearing called for under Section 3.01.060. The record owner(s) of a real property parcel may appeal the Director's decision as to a reconsideration request pursuant to the procedures set forth under subsection C of this section, below. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided under this subsection, the proceeds of the charges established under this chapter 3.01, including all interest accrued thereupon (the "sewer charge proceeds") may not be used to pay costs and expenses entirely unrelated to the operation, maintenance or capital costs of the city's sewer system. The foregoing notwithstanding, sewer charge proceeds may be used to reimburse the city's general fund or other special funds of the city for the payment of indirect costs that benefit and are therefore properly allocable to the city sewer system. The total aggregate sum of sewer charge proceeds that may be used to reimburse the city's general fund or any special fund for the payment of indirect costs during any one fiscal year may not exceed an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the total sewer charge proceeds collected by the city during the fiscal year immediately preceding the fiscal year in which the reimbursement to the general fund and/or special fund is made. For purposes of this chapter, the term "indirect costs" means those costs and expenses charged against the general fund or any other special fund of the city that are not readily identifiable with the operation, maintenance or construction functions of the sewer enterprise but are necessary for the general operation of the sewer enterprise and the conduct of the activities it performs. For purposes of illustration, "indirect costs" may include the cost of insurance coverage that extends to sewer enterprise facilities, equipment and personnel, human resources administration for personnel who serve the sewer enterprise, financial management, accounting, procurement, payroll, treasury, legal services, city management and other general and administrative costs which benefit the sewer enterprise. The sewer charge proceeds may not be loaned to the city's general fund or any other special fund of the city wherein such inter-fund loan is not repaid in full to the sewer fund within the same fiscal year in which the inter-fund loan was originally made. 
D.  Any refund an applicant may be entitled to shall be returned to the applicant as a cash refund. The payment of such cash refunds by the city shall not relieve the record owner(s) of the obligation to remit any unpaid sums stated on the record owner(s) property tax bill. Refunds are intended to reimburse a record owner for overpaid sewer service charge sums that have already been paid by the record owner for the fiscal year in question; or to offset the out-of-pocket cost to the record owner for the pending payment of an unpaid or partially paid property tax bill that includes sewer service charges sums that are in excess of the sums later determined to be appropriate by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 3, 10-18-2016)  
3.01.100 - Sewer charge fund. 
A.  There is established a "sewer charge fund." All monies collected from the sewer service charge levied pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the sewer charge fund. 
B.  Monies deposited into the sewer charge fund, as well as all interest accrued by monies deposited into the sewer charge fund, shall be used for the following purposes only: 
1.  Paying the costs and expenses of operating and maintaining the city's sewer system, including, but not limited to, costs and expenses incurred in receiving, transporting, and pumping, sewage through the city's sewer system, and any fees or charges paid to another entity for transporting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage from the city's sewer system, and the costs and expenses of billing, collecting and administering the sewer service charge; 
2.  Paying all or any portion of the costs and expenses of extending, constructing, reconstructing, repairing or improving the city's sewer system or any part thereof; 
3.  Paying the costs and expenses of complying with state or federal laws relating to the city's sewer system including any legal and administrative costs; 
4.  Paying any other costs or expenses incurred by the city as a result of providing sewer services to real property with the city; and 
5.  Paying any debt service and incidental expenses associated with the financing of capital improvements to the city sewer system. 
As provided under Health and Safety Code Section 5471, sewer service charge proceeds may not be used for the acquisition or construction of new local street sewers or laterals, but may be used for the acquisition or construction of main trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided under this subsection, the proceeds of the charges established under this Chapter 3.01, including all interest accrued thereupon (the "sewer charge proceeds") may not be used to pay costs and expenses entirely unrelated to the operation, maintenance or capital costs of the city's sewer system. The foregoing notwithstanding, sewer charge proceeds may be used to reimburse the city's general fund or other special funds of the city for the payment of indirect costs that benefit and are therefore properly allocable to the city sewer system. The total aggregate sum of sewer charge proceeds that may be used to reimburse the city's general fund or any special fund for the payment of indirect costs during any one fiscal year may not exceed an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the total sewer charge proceeds collected by the city during the fiscal year immediately preceding the fiscal year in which the reimbursement to the general fund and/or special fund is made. For purposes of this chapter, the term "indirect costs" means those costs and expenses charged against the general fund or any other special fund of the city that are not readily identifiable with the operation, maintenance or construction functions of the sewer enterprise but are necessary for the general operation of the sewer enterprise and the conduct of the activities it performs. For purposes of illustration, "indirect costs" may include the cost of insurance coverage that extends to sewer enterprise facilities, equipment and personnel, human resources administration for personnel who serve the sewer enterprise, financial management, accounting, procurement, payroll, treasury, legal services, city management and other general and administrative costs which benefit the sewer enterprise. The sewer charge proceeds may not be loaned to the city's general fund or any other special fund of the city wherein such inter-fund loan is not repaid in full to the sewer fund within the same fiscal year in which the inter-fund loan was originally made. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2899, § 3, 10-18-2016)  
3.01.110 - Sewer charge review. 
Within sixty (60) calendar days following July 1, 2025, the City Council shall form an ad hoc Sewer Fund Oversight Committee (hereinafter, the "Committee") tasked with studying the operations, maintenance and capital replacement needs for the city sewer system. Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date of its formation, the Committee shall conduct its first meeting and shall thereafter meet as frequently as the Committee and/or the City Council deem necessary or desirable. Within one year from the date of its first meeting, the ad hoc committee shall develop and prepare a written report to the City Council which evaluates both the short-term and long-term operations, maintenance and capital replacement needs of the city sewer system; and makes recommendations as to potential adjustments to the sewer service charges rates then in existence. Upon the receipt of the written report, the City Council shall have one year to decide whether or not to adjust the sewer service charge rates in accordance with all or some of the recommendations set forth in the written report of the Sewer Fund Oversight Committee; and shall evidence such determination by uncodified City Council ordinance. If the City Council elects to adjust the sewer service charge rates, the City Council shall comply with all such procedures as may be required for such adjustment including those procedures set forth under Article XIIID, Section of the California Constitution. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City Council from forming such other ad hoc committees as may be desirable to study and make recommendations as to the operations, maintenance and capital replacement need of the city sewer system. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.01.120 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrase shall have the meanings set forth as follows: 
"City" means the City of El Monte. 
"Director" means the Deputy City Manager for Community Development or designee. 
"Domicile" means a natural person's fixed habitation, wherein the natural person remains and resides for at least eight (8) months out of a given fiscal year. 
"Dwelling unit" means a building or structure or portion or a building or structure composed one or more rooms, designed, zoned and lawfully used for human habitation as a separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single person or family maintaining a household within the individual dwelling unit. Provided all of the foregoing requirements are met, a "dwelling unit" may include a traditional detached single-family home; a single-family home that is attached to one or more single-family homes such as a townhome, duplex, triplex or quadriplex; a dwelling unit within a planned unit development; an individual apartment unit within an apartment building or apartment complex; an individual residential unit within a condominium complex or condominium building; or an individual residential unit within a building or structure lawfully permitted for a mix of both residential and nonresidential uses. 
"Fiscal year" means the fiscal year for the city of El Monte which commences July 1st of each calendar year and concludes on June 30th of the subsequent calendar year. 
"Real property parcel" means any single parcel of real property located within the city of El Monte that has its own individual assessor's parcel number. The term "real property parcel" is inclusive of parcels used for residential and/or nonresidential purposes, including but not limited to industrial, commercial, manufacturing, warehouse, retail, services, office and the like. As to residential purposes, the term "real property parcel" is inclusive of the following types of dwelling units provided each such dwelling unit has its own assessor's parcel number separate and apart from any other dwelling unit(s) to which it is attached or which are included within the same building, structure or complex: a dwelling unit that is attached to one or more other dwelling units such as a townhome, duplex, triplex or quadriplex; an individual dwelling unit within a condominium building or complex; or an individual dwelling unit within a building that is part of a mixed-use development. 
"Record owner" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 53750 of the California Government Code as the same presently exists or as the same may be amended from time to time by the California legislature. 
"Senior residential rental building" means a single building or structure designed and lawfully used for human habitation which satisfies all of the following requirements: (1) the building or structure is composed of three (3) or more dwelling units; (2) the building or structure including all dwelling units and common areas within the building or structure is owned by a single record owner; (3) each dwelling unit within the building or structure is a rental unit; (4) the building or structure as well as the real property parcel upon which the building or structure is located is subject to a duly recorded land use covenant that restricts all dwelling unit tenancies to resident tenancies for persons who are fifty-five (55) years of age or older; and (5) the age covenant is valid, lawful and actively enforced by the record owner(s) of the real property parcel and/or the managers or operators of the senior residential rental building. Requirement (4) of this definition shall not be interpreted to exclude buildings or structures whose age covenants permit a named tenant who is fifty-five (55) years of age or older to share occupancy of a dwelling unit with a non-age-qualified spouse; or with one live-in provider of essential health care services provided such health care provider is duly licensed to provide such services by the state of California. Requirements (3) and (4) of this definition shall not be interpreted to exclude buildings or structures in which no more than one dwelling unit is reserved for, or otherwise occupied by, on-site managerial or maintenance staff. The foregoing notwithstanding, the term "senior residential rental building" does not include "hotels" as defined under Section 3.16.020 of the El Monte Municipal Code or "residential hotels" as defined under Section 50519 of the California Health and Safety Code and such facilities shall not be eligible for any discounts afforded certain senior residential rental buildings under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2723 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - County system. 
The city elects to avail itself of the provisions of Sections 51500 et seq. of the Government Code of the state, wherein provision is made that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the Assessor and the Tax Collector of the city shall be performed by the County Assessor and the County Tax Collector. 
(Prior code § 2500)  
3.04.020 - Insufficient funds; dishonored checks. 
A.  Any person who issues a check or other like instrument shall be required to pay a penalty to the city in an amount no less than thirty dollars ($30.00) if all of the following conditions apply: 
1.  The check or other like instrument is made payable to the city or any city department, division, official, officers or employee acting on behalf of the city or is made payable to the city Community Redevelopment Agency or any official, officer or employee acting on behalf of the city Community Redevelopment Agency; and 
2.  The check or other like instrument is issued and submitted for any purpose, including but not limited to the payment of any tax, assessment, property-related fee, development fee, charge, surcharge, utility bill, fine, penalty, exaction, levy, rent, reimbursement, criminal or civil judgment required under the El Monte Municipal Code or the laws, statutes or regulations of the State of California or any subdivision thereof or the federal government of the United States of America or any subdivision thereof; and 
3.  The check or other like instrument is returned by a banking institution for insufficient funds, for nonsufficient funds, for stop payment, for referral to maker or for any other reason wherein the check or other like instrument is dishonored by a banking institution. 
B.  The penalty imposed pursuant to this section, is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other penalties or fines that may be due or that may accrue for non-payment or untimely payment of any sums owed under the El Monte Municipal Code or the laws, statues and regulations of the State of California or the federal government of the United States or that may be due or that may accrue pursuant to contract. The applicable penalty amount shall be imposed for each check or other like instrument that meets the conditions of subsection (A) of this section, above. 
C.  By resolution approved by a majority of the City Council quorum, the City Council may set the amount of the penalty imposed under this section in excess of thirty dollars ($30.00). In the absence of any such resolution, the applicable penalty amount shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(Prior code § 1223) 
(Ord. No. 2746, § 3, 6-16-2009)  
Chapter 3.08 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of El Monte." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 6801.1)  
3.08.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing in which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 6801.2)  
3.08.030 - Tax liability. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 6801.3)  
3.08.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
B.  The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. 
C.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
5.  Subsections (C)(1)—(4) of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
D.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
1.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Act of 1935; 
2.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
3.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
E.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
a.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
b.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (E)(2)(a) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior code §§ 6801.4—6801.8)  
3.08.050 - Administration. 
The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 6801.9)  
3.08.060 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 6801.10)  
Chapter 3.12 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance. 
(Prior code § 6501)  
3.12.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Prior code § 6502)  
3.12.030 - Operative date. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Prior code § 6503)  
3.12.040 - Purpose. 
The City Council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followedby the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6504)  
3.12.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance enacting this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6505)  
3.12.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6506)  
3.12.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations so be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 6507)  
3.12.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 6508)  
3.12.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 6509)  
3.12.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6501, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 6510)  
3.12.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6511)  
3.12.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6361.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Prior code § 6513)  
3.12.130 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6515)  
3.12.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state of this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 6516)  
3.12.180 - Credit for certain sales and use taxes in the Peck-Ramona Triangle project area of the downtown El Monte redevelopment project. 
Any person subject to a sales tax or a use tax under the provisions of this chapter shall be granted a credit against the payment of tax owed under this chapter in the amount of sales tax or use tax paid, if any, to the El Monte community redevelopment agency pursuant to a certain ordinance of the El Monte community redevelopment agency entitled, "An Ordinance of the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency Enacting a Sales and Use Tax Affecting the Privilege of Selling at Retail, Storage, Use or Other Consumption of Tangible Personal Property Purchased from a Retailer for Storage, Use or Consumption in the Peck-Ramona Triangle Project Area of the Downtown El Monte Redevelopment Project." 
(Prior code § 6517C)  
3.12.190 - Credit for certain sales and use taxes in the project area of the El Monte Center redevelopment project. 
Any person subject to a sales tax or a use tax under the provisions of this chapter shall be granted a credit against the payment of tax owed under this chapter in the amount of sales tax or use tax paid, if any, to the El Monte community redevelopment agency pursuant to a certain ordinance of the El Monte community redevelopment agency entitled, "An Ordinance of the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency Enacting a Sales and Use Tax Affecting the Privilege of Selling at Retail, Storage, Use or Other Consumption of Tangible Personal Property Purchased from a Retailer for Storage, Use or Consumption in the Project Area of the El Monte Center Redevelopment Project." 
(Prior code § 6517D)  
3.12.200 - Credit for certain sales and use taxes in the project area of the Amendment No. 1 lands of the El Monte Center redevelopment project. 
Any person subject to a sales tax or a use tax under the provisions of this chapter shall be granted a credit against the payment of tax owed under this chapter in the amount of sales tax or use tax paid, if any, to the El Monte community redevelopment agency pursuant to a certain ordinance of the El Monte community redevelopment agency entitled, "An Ordinance of the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency Enacting a Sales and Use Tax Affecting the Privilege of Selling at Retail, Storage, Use or Other Consumption of Tangible Personal Property Purchased from a Retailer for Storage, Use or Consumption in the Project Area of Amendment No. 1 Lands of the El Monte Center Redevelopment Project (Valley Boulevard Projects)." 
(Prior code § 6517E)  
Chapter 3.14 - TEMPORARY TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.14.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "El Monte Temporary Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance." The city of El Monte hereinafter shall be referred as "city." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.020 - Automatic expiration date: March 31, 2029. 
The chapter and the transactions and use tax imposed hereunder shall expire at 11:59 pm on March 31, 2029, unless an extension or re-authorization of this chapter is approved by the voters of the city at an election called for that purpose or unless repealed in the manner prescribed by applicable law. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2826, § 2, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 2919, § 1, 7-25-2017) 
Editor's note— This chapter and the transactions and use tax imposed under this chapter was first enacted by a vote of the people held on November 4, 2008 and was originally approved as Measure GG. As originally adopted the transaction and use tax was set to expire on March 31, 2014. With the passage of Ordinance No. 2793 as Measure GG at a special municipal election held June 5, 2012, the transaction and use tax imposed under this chapter was extended by an additional five (5) years and was set to expire on March 31, 2019. With the passage of this Ordinance No. 2919 as Measure EM at a special municipal election held November 7, 2017, the transaction and use tax imposed under this chapter was extended further to March 31, 2029.  
3.14.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date of this chapter, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of 0.50 percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of 0.50 percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code; 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.100 - Seller's permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contact or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.14.140 - Mandatory fiscal oversight committee. 
The City Council shall also establish a Transactions and Use Tax Fiscal Oversight Committee ("Oversight Committee"). Prior to the start of each city fiscal year, the Oversight Committee shall endeavor to analyze projections for the tax revenues generated pursuant to this chapter and make non-binding, written recommendations to the City Council by or before the date the City Council approves the city's upcoming, annual general fund budget. The foregoing notwithstanding, the issuance of written recommendations by the Oversight Committee shall not be a condition precedent to the City Council's ability to approve the city's annual general fund budget in any given year. The Oversight Committee shall consist of at least three (3) members and shall have such composition, structure and additional responsibilities as the City Council may prescribe by resolution. The committee may not include more than two (2) members of the City Council. Appointment to the Oversight Committee shall be in accordance with Government Code 40605 and committee members shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing official set forth under Government Code Section 40605. The El Monte Finance Department shall be the division responsible for providing administrative support as well as analytical and technical assistance to the Oversight Committee. 
(Ord. 2725 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2919, § 2, 7-25-2017)  
Chapter 3.16 - UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax of the City of El Monte." 
(Prior code § 6600.1)  
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and terms are hereafter defined and shall have the meaning thus ascribed: 
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means a person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or nor received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax Administrator" means the City License Officer. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit or right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired. 
(Prior code §§ 6600.2—6600.7)  
3.16.030 - Imposition and rate. 
Tax imposed for the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the Tax Administrator. 
(Prior code § 6601)  
3.16.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  The tax enacted by this chapter shall not be imposed upon any person or agency defined in the following subsections: 
1.  Exempted by Law. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided; 
2.  Foreign Agencies. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  Procedure. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. 
(Prior code §§ 6602—6602.1, 6602.3—6602.4)  
3.16.050 - Collection procedure—Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 6603)  
3.16.060 - Registration. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the Tax Administrator and obtain from him or her a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Prior code § 6603.1)  
3.16.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
The Tax Administrator shall prepare and revise from time-to-time one or more tax reporting forms to be completed by operators and submitted to the city together with each remittance of the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax as imposed by this chapter shall be remitted to the city in monthly installments unless a shorter remittance period is ordered by the Tax Administrator. On or before the last day of the month following the close of the reporting month, each operator shall transmit to the Tax Administrator the tax as impounded under this chapter during the preceding or reporting month, together with such completed forms which identify the total rents charged and received by the operator. A completed form shall include a statement by the operator which identities and describes the posted room rates, as such term is defined by the Civil Code Section 1863, which were applicable during the reporting period. At the time the completed form is submitted to the Tax Administrator, the full amount of the tax collected shall also be remitted to the Tax Administrator. Returns and tax payments are due immediately upon cessation of business by an operator for any reason. All taxes collected by operators under this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city. The Tax Administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any operator, provided the Tax Administrator has first determined that a shorter reporting period is necessary or appropriate in order to insure prompt remittance of the tax and/or submission of accurate tax reporting information. In particular cases, the Tax Administrator may determine that the submission of supplemental accounting, rent cash receipt, transient occupancy tax trust account deposit records, occupancy reports, and other operator business records are necessary or appropriate in connection with the submission of a report (or series of reports) by an operator. 
(Ord. 2497 § 1, 1999: Ord. 2496 § 1, 1999: prior code § 6603.2)  
3.16.080 - Penalties and interest. 
Penalties shall apply and interest be due as provided in the following subsections: 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provision of this chapter shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Prior code §§ 6603.3—6603.3.5)  
3.16.090 - Tax administrator determinations. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Tax Administrator shall give not less than five (5) days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the Tax Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.16.100. 
(Prior code § 6603.4)  
3.16.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Prior code § 6603.4.1)  
3.16.110 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 6603.5)  
3.16.120 - Refunds. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in the following subsections provided a claim in writing therefor stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator. 
(Prior code § 6603.6)  
3.16.130 - Credits. 
An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected as not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(Prior code § 6603.6.1)  
3.16.140 - Claims. 
A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in Section 3.16.120, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(Prior code § 6603.6.2)  
3.16.150 - Proof. 
No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this chapter unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Prior code § 6603.6.3)  
3.16.160 - Action to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 6603.7)  
3.16.170 - Audits. 
The city may, for good cause, conduct an audit of the books and records of a motel. If there is substantial deviation in the amount of taxes as a result of the audit, the cost of the audit is to be borne by the operator together with the imposition of appropriate penalties. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
3.16.180 - Violations. 
No person shall fail or refuse to register as required by this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made by this chapter, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Administrator. No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report, return or claim shall make any false or fraudulent report, return or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination required by this chapter to be made of any amount due. No person shall fall or refuse to pay any sum required by this chapter to be paid. 
(Prior code § 6603.8)  
Chapter 3.20 - UTILITY USERS TAX—GAS AND ELECTRICITY SERVICE[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2768, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 2011, changed the title of Ch. 3.20 from "Utility Users Tax" to "Utility Users Tax—Gas and Electricity Service". 
 
3.20.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "1991 City of El Monte Utility User Tax Ordinance." 
(Prior code § 6270)  
3.20.020 - Authority and purpose. 
This chapter was enacted in 1991 by the City Council of the city of El Monte and later amended by the City Council, and has been further amended by the City Council and the people of the city of El Monte upon the approval of the voters of city of El Monte Ordinance No. 2452, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 37100.5, Government Code Sections 53723 and 53724 and other applicable law for the purpose of providing a source of general municipal tax revenues to be used for the current and usual general municipal governmental expenses of the city. 
(Prior code § 6270.1)  
3.20.030 - Tax imposed. 
The general taxes imposed by this chapter have been approved by a majority vote of the voters of the city voting in an election on the issue conducted on March 4, 1997. 
(Prior code § 6270.2)  
3.20.040 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions of the words and phrases set forth in this section shall govern the application and administration of the provisions of this chapter: 
"City" means the city of El Monte. 
"Cogenerator" means any corporation or person employing cogeneration (as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 218.5) for producing power for the generation of electricity for self use or sale to others from a qualified cogeneration facility (as defined in the federal Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and federal regulations thereunder). 
"Electrical corporation" means a corporation or person as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 218. 
"Exempt wholesale generator" has the same meaning as set forth in the Federal Power Act (15 United States Code Sections 79z-5a) and the federal regulations thereunder. 
"Gas" means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel, including propane, which may be substituted therefor. 
"Gas corporation" means a corporation or person as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 222. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Nonutility supplier" means: (1) a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation franchised to serve within the city, which generates electricity in capacities of fifty (50) kilowatts, or more, for its own use or for sale to others, and includes but is not limited to any publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity; (2) an electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other supplier of electricity which is not franchised by the city to use or occupy any public right-of-way, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electric service users within the city; and (3) a gas supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a gas corporation franchised to serve within the city, which sells or supplies gas to users within the city. 
"Person" means, without limitation, any natural individual, form, trust, common law trust, estate, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (foreign or domestic), cooperative, or receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
"Service(s)" means the utility and other compensated activities provided by a service supplier to a service user. The use of the word "service" as used in a particular section of this chapter, refers to the particular utility and other compensated activities which are paid for by the service user to the service. 
"Service supplier" means any entity or person required to collect (or self-collect) and remit any tax imposed under this chapter. 
"Service user" means a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. In general, a service user is the person in whose name a service supplier delivers the services and other compensated activities provided by a service supplier and who is responsible for paying for the cost of such services. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Tax Collector" means the Director of Finance of the city. 
(Prior code § 6270.3) 
(Ord. No. 2768, § 2, 1-4-2011)  
3.20.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax (or any portion of such a tax as specified in this section) which is approved, imposed and levied by the city pursuant to this chapter shall apply to: 
1.  Charges imposed by the service supplier relating to late payments by the service user, returned check fees and other late collection penalties, interest charges and the like of the service supplier; 
2.  The city and other public agencies; 
3.  Any person or service user in the event that the imposition of such tax upon that person or service user would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California; 
4.  Any individual residential service user who resides in the city who is at least sixty-two (62) years of age or older, provided the combined adjusted gross income as used for federal income tax reporting purposes of all members of the household does not exceed the limits for "very low family income" set by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in its document entitled "Revised Income Limits for Public Housing and Section 8 programs and Medium Family Incomes" for Los Angeles County; 
5.  An individual residential service user who is also a "disabled person" for the purpose of satisfying the eligibility criteria of the United States Social Security Administration as a person who is eligible to receive "Supplemental Income" as a blind or disabled person; and 
6.  The amount of the taxes imposed by this chapter on any person or service user, during the twelve (12) months preceding the date of submission of an application to the Tax Collector for approval of an exemption, which is equal to the difference between the sum of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) and the aggregate amount of all taxes imposed by this chapter which have been paid by the service user to the city during the twelve (12) months preceding the date of submission of an application for such an exemption (See Section 3.20.051); 
7.  Notwithstanding any provision of Section 3.20.080 to the contrary, no service user shall pay the tax imposed by Section 3.20.080 on "multichannel video programming distributor services," as this term is defined in 47 United States Code Section 522(12), which are provided to the service user by a multichannel video programming distributor which holds a "franchise," as this term is defined in 47 United States Code Section 522(9), which has been initially authorized by the city pursuant to Section 7630, et seq., of this code; and 
8.  The city may hereafter establish other classifications of persons or services which may be declared to be exempt, in whole or in part, from the levy, payment and collection of any tax which is otherwise imposed by this chapter. Such other classifications shall be described by resolution of the City Council and the resolution shall also contain a description of the duration of the exemption and any special tax administrating eligibility verifications and other procedures applicable to the granting of the exemption authorized by resolution of the City Council pursuant to this subsection (A)(8). 
B.  The exemptions authorized by subsections (A)(3)—(8) of this section shall not relieve the service supplier from the duty to collect the applicable tax amount from any service user who may be eligible to claim such an exemption or relieve any service user from the duty and liability to pay the applicable tax amount to the service supplier, unless an exemption has been applied for by the service user and granted by the Tax Collector in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any service user exempt from the payment of any of the taxes imposed by this chapter because of the provisions of subsections (A)(2)—(3) of this section may file an application with the Tax Collector for approval of an exemption. Such an application shall be submitted by the service user/applicant upon a form supplied by the Tax Collector and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption. 
C.  The Tax Collector shall review all such applications and shall certify as exempt those applicants determined to be qualified hereunder. The Tax Collector shall notify all service suppliers affected that such exemptions have been approved. Upon the receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall not be required to continue to bill any further tax imposed by this chapter on such exempt service user until further notice by the Tax Collector is given. The service supplier shall eliminate such exempt service user from its tax billing procedure no later than sixty (60) days after the receipt of such notice from the Tax Collector. 
D.  All exemptions authorized under this section shall continue for so long as the prerequisite facts supporting the initial eligibility for exemption shall continue; provided, however, the exemption shall automatically terminate upon the earlier date of any change in the service address (or residence in the case of an individual), assignment of a different customer account number by the service supplier or by virtue of a discontinuance, suspension, termination of service to the person who has otherwise been found to be eligible for such an exemption; provided however, that such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or residence in the city. 
E.  The Tax Collector shall have the power and right to demand evidence of the continued eligibility of a service user for an exemption under the provisions of subsections (A)(3)—(8) of this section. Such evidence may include, but need not be limited to, copies of business records, letters, statements from public agencies such as the Social Security Administration, copies of income tax returns, and such other evidence concerning the service user or other members of this household which may tend to prove or disapprove such eligibility. The failure of a service user to provide such evidence within thirty (30) days following a written by the Tax Collector, shall be grounds for the cancellation of service user's eligibility for exemption under the provisions of this section, effective ten (10) days following the date of mailing of a notice of cancellation by the Tax Collector. 
F.  Any person or service user who has been confirmed to be exempt from payment of any amount of tax(es) approved in this chapter, pursuant to this section, shall notify the Tax Collector within ten (10) days of any change in the facts or circumstances which might disqualify such person or service user from further eligibility to either claim or maintain such an exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of an exemption authorized by this section when the basis for such exemption either does not exist or ceases to exist. 
G.  If the Tax Collector determines that an application for exemption is incomplete, or that the applicant has failed to truthfully set forth facts in support of the claim for exemption or if the applicant is not eligible for an exemption, then in such event, the application for the exemption shall be denied in a written notice mailed to the applicant. The applicant shall thereafter have a right to file an amended application for an exemption or to appeal the Tax Collector's decision to the City Administrator within ten (10) days after the date of mailing of the Tax Collector's notice of denial. In the case of an appeal, the City Administrator shall review the facts in consultation with the City Attorney and the City Administrator shall render a final written determination on such appeal. 
H.  The Tax Collector shall annually prepare a list of the service users who have submitted applications and been found to be exempt by the Tax Collector under the provisions of subsections (A)(3)—(8) of this section, and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. The list shall contain the name of the service user, together with the current address to which such is supplied. 
I.  The Tax Collector shall adopt and thereafter may modify from time to time as appropriate, additional written procedure for the administration of this section, as provided in Section 3.20.170. 
(Ord. 2695 § 2 (part), 2007; prior code § 6270.4)  
3.20.051 - Alternative tax payment option. 
A.  Any person or service user subject to any tax imposed under this chapter and/or Chapter 3.22 (Communication Users' Tax) may opt to pay a fixed tax sum of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) per calendar year. This fixed tax sum shall be paid in lieu of any actual, aggregate tax sums which would otherwise be collected on behalf of the city by a service supplier in amounts that would otherwise be due pursuant to this chapter and/or Chapter 3.22 during any given calendar year. The fixed tax sum shall be paid directly to the city by the person or service user in bi-annual increments of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) which shall be due and payable on or before the close of business on January 1st and July 1st of each calendar year. If January 1st or July 1st falls on a date in which the city is closed for business, the applicable deadline shall be extended to the close of business on the next business day in which the city is open for business. 
B.  In order to qualify for the tax payment alternative set forth under this section, a prospective applicant must submit, under penalty of perjury, true and correct documentation (e.g., utility bills and other like documentation) demonstrating to the reasonable satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that over the twelve (12) consecutive months immediately preceding the submission of the application, the aggregate amount of taxes collected from, or otherwise paid by, the applicant pursuant to this chapter and/or Chapter 3.22 exceeded the sum of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00). 
C.  If approved by the Tax Administrator, participation under the alternative payment procedures set forth under this section shall become effective upon January 1st or July 1st, which ever date most immediately follows the date upon which the application was approved; the first incremental payment of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be due and payable at this time. Consistent with subsection A of this section, above, incremental payments of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be due and payable to the city on January 1st and July 1st of each calendar year until such time as the applicant opts out of or the applicant's participation is terminated, all in accordance with subsections D and E of this section, below. 
D.  An applicant may opt out of the alternative payment procedures afforded under this section at any time, provided such request is submitted to the Tax Administrator in writing; thereafter, the applicant shall be taxed, and such tax collected, in the manner otherwise provided under this chapter and/or Chapter 3.22 effective January 1st or July 1st whichever date most immediately follows the date upon which the Tax Administrator receives the written request to opt out of the alternative payment procedures set forth under this section. 
E.  Notwithstanding, any other provisions set forth under this chapter or Chapter 3.22 relating to the disposition of delinquencies and/or the imposition of collection penalties, the Tax Administrator may unilaterally terminate an applicant's participation under the alternative payment procedures set forth herein in the event the applicant fails to timely pay any or all sums due under this section. Such termination shall become effective thirty (30) days from the date the Tax Administrator issues written notice of any delinquency to the delinquent applicant, unless all delinquent sums owed are actually received by the city prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day grace period. In the event of termination, a terminated applicant shall be barred from reapplying under this section for a period of one year. Upon the effective date of the termination, the applicant shall be taxed, and such tax collected, in the manner otherwise provided under this chapter and/or Chapter 3.22. 
F.  The terms "person," "service user" and "service supplier" as used in this section include all persons, service users and service suppliers within the meaning of this chapter and within the meaning of Chapter 3.22. For purposes of this section, the terms "person," "service user," and "service supplier" shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing meaning in the event of any conflict or inconsistency as between the meanings set forth under this chapter and the meanings set forth under Chapter 3.22. 
(Ord. 2695 § 2 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2768, § 4, 1-4-2011) 
Editor's note— The inclusion of § 3.20.051 (Alternative Tax Payment Option) under Chapter 3.20 (Utility Users Tax — Gas and Electricity) represents an effort to harmonize non-repealed portions of Chapter 3.20 with the addition of the new Chapter 3.22 (Communication Users' Tax). Section 3.20.051 was adopted by way of Ordinance No. 2695 which was in turn approved by El Monte voters as Measure "A" at the General Municipal Election of November 6, 2007 in accordance with Proposition 218.  
3.20.060 - Jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
This limitation/exemption has been consolidated with other exemptions. See now Section 3.20.050, Exemptions. 
(Prior code § 6270.5)  
3.20.070 - Exemptions for senior and disabled persons and other persons. 
This limitation/exemption has been consolidated with other exemptions. See now Section 3.20.050, Exemptions. 
(Prior code § 6270.6)  
3.20.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The telecommunication services user tax previously set forth under this § 3.20.080 was repealed and substituted by Ordinance No. 2695 which established a new Chapter 3.22 (Communications Users' Tax) which sets forth a revised rate and methodology for the levying the tax previously covered under Chapter 3.20 in general and § 3.20.080 in particular. Ordinance No. 2695 was approved by El Monte voters at the General Municipal Election of November 6, 2007 as Measure "A" in accordance with Proposition 218.  
3.20.090 - Electricity service user tax. 
A.  There is approved, imposed and levied by the city a tax upon every person using electricity, including cogenerated electricity, in the city. The tax approved and levied by this section shall be at the rate of seven (7) percent of the charges made for such electricity (or cogenerated electricity, as applicable) and for any supplemental services provided by a service supplier or nonutility supplier to a service user related to the provision of electricity. The tax shall be paid by the service user/person paying for such electricity or supplemental services. 
B.  The word "charges," as used in this section, shall include charges payable by the service user for: (1) metered energy; (2) minimum charges for services, customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, standard investment or competitive transition charges, and all other annual and monthly charges or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission, whether or not such charges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. The words "charges for supplemental services related to the provision of electricity" as used in this section shall include charges payable by the service user for wheeling, transmission (including congestion charges), distribution, and stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage, support, regulation, emergency, or other similar services. The word "charges" as used in this section shall also include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration payable by the service user to the service supplier in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity. 
C.  As used in this section, the words or term "using electricity" shall not be construed to mean the storage of electrical energy by a person in a battery that he owns or possesses for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the electricity was received; provided, however, the term shall include the receiving of such electricity for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such electricity of an electrical corporation or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale. 
D.  The tax approved in this section shall be collected from the service user by the electricity service supplier or nonutility supplier who provides such service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail, to the Tax Collector, and must be received by the Tax Collector on or before the last day of the following month. 
E.  The tax approved by this section on electricity provided to the service user by a self-production or by a nonutility supplier or an electric utility not otherwise collecting and remitting the tax to the Tax Collector under this section in the case of one or more of its customers shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.110C. 
F.  The tax approved, imposed and levied by this section on cogenerated electricity shall be calculated at the rate specified in subsection A of this section on the value of the cogenerated electricity consumed by the service user in the city. For the purpose of this subsection, the value of cogenerated electricity consumed by the service user in the city shall be determined by reference to the electric utility supplier's combined "Avoided Cost Energy Pricing and Avoided Cost Capacity Pricing" reporting procedure which is filed with the California Public Utilities Commission or by such successor formula authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission. The cogenerated electricity service user shall pay the tax approved by this section to the Tax Collector in the manner provided in Section 3.20.110C. 
1.  If the cogenerator sells the energy for consumption by other service users in the city, the value of the cogenerated electricity sold to each such service user in the city shall be based upon the actual charges made for such service, and the amount of the tax approved by this section shall be collected from the service user by the cogenerator/nonutility supplier. The cogenerator shall install and maintain an appropriate metering system for meaning the number of kilovolts of cogenerated electricity provided to the service user such that the cogenerator and the Tax Collector may verify compliance with the obligation of the service user to pay the tax amount approved by this subsection F. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail, to the Tax Collector, and must be received by the Tax Collector on or before the last day of the following month. The tax on cogenerated electricity provided by a nonutility supplier shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.110C. 
2.  Whether the cogenerator consumes or sells the cogenerated electricity, the service user of the cogenerator shall also pay the tax on all "charges for supplemental services" related to the provision of cogenerated electricity which includes the analogous matters covered in the definition of this term as found in subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
(Prior code § 6270.8)  
3.20.100 - Gas service user tax. 
A.  There is approved, imposed and levied by the city a tax upon every person using gas in the city, which is delivered to a service user through a pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport. The tax approved, imposed and levied by this section shall be at the rate of seven (7) percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such as, and shall he paid by the person using such gas; provided, however, that the tax shall not apply to any charge for gas storage services when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the location where such stored gas is ultimately used. The word "charges" as used in this section shall include: (1) the commodity charges payable by a service user for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user, which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or by mobile vehicle transport; (2) gas transportation charges (including interstate charges), customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges for gas services or programs, which are authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. The words "cost of gas owned by the service user" as used in this section shall include the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas. The word "charges" as used in this section shall also include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration payable by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas. 
B.  There shall be excluded from the calculation of the tax approved in this section: (1) charges payable by a service user for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system or by mobile vehicle transport; (2) the cost of gas used in the city by: (i) a cogenerator in the production of cogenerated electricity; (ii) an electric corporation; (iii) a public agency that supplies or sells electricity; or (iv) an exempt wholesale generator; and (3) charges payable by a service user at the time of sale of propane or other alternate hydrocarbon fuel which is to be used by the service user in motor vehicles or charges for propane or other alternate hydrocarbon fuels payable by the service user where the quality of the propane or alternate hydrocarbon fuel at each time of delivery is twenty five (25) gallons or less. 
C.  The tax that is calculated on charges for gas provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier not otherwise remitting the tax to the Tax Collector under this section shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.110C. All other taxes on charges for gas approved by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail, to the Tax Collector, and must be received by the Tax Collector on or before the last day of the following month. 
D.  Where a gas service supplier is providing commodity transportation service to a service user but the service user has purchased the commodity from a third party, then the commodity transporting service supplier shall collect the tax imposed by this section from the service user, which shall be calculated as follows: 
1.  Seven (7) percent of the commodity transportation charges, including interstate transportation charges to the extent not included in the commodity charge, transition charges or any other charges for gas services or programs, which are authorized by the California Public Utility Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; plus, 
2.  Seven (7) percent of the imputed value of the transported commodity (net of the amount described in subsection (D)(1) of this section as calculated in accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 6353(a) (b) and (c), or at the election of the service user, seven (7) percent of the actual charges for the transported commodity (net of the amount described in subsection (D)(1) of this section). 
E.  If the service user elects to pay the tax approved by this section based upon the actual charges for the transported commodity as provided in subsection (D)(2) of this section, the service user must: 
1.  Give thirty (30) days prior written notice to the Tax Collector of the exercise of such an election; and, 
2.  Submit to the Tax Collector an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter to reflect the difference between the tax based upon the imputed value in accordance with the Public Utilities Code Section 6353 (a) (b) and (c) and the actual charges of the transported commodity. A credit, if approved by the Tax Collector, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill relating to the tax imposed by this section that becomes due. 
(Prior code § 6270.9)  
3.20.110 - Duty of each service supplier to collect tax amounts payable—Procedures. 
The duty of each service supplier (including certain direct purchases of electricity or gas services) to collect and remit to the city the tax amounts approved and levied by any provisions of this chapter from each service user who is a customer of the service supplier shall be performed as follows: 
A.  The tax shall be collected by the service supplier insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the charges made in accordance with the regular service billing practice of the service supplier. In the event that any amount paid by a service user to a service supplier includes less than the full amount of the charge and tax imposed by this chapter which accrued during the billing period, such an amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility service charges: first (or net of the amount of the tax imposed under this chapter) until such other charges of the service supplier have been fully satisfied; and second, any remaining balance shall be applied to the tax amount due from service user under this chapter. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of a refusal to pay a tax amount approved by this chapter, Section 3.20.140E shall apply. 
B.  The duty of the service supplier to collect the tax approved by this chapter from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service user receives more than one billing from the service supplier relating to one or more billing periods or relating to one or more separate service accounts, the duty of the service supplier to collect the amount of the tax approved by this chapter from the service user shall arise separately for each billing period and/or for each separate account payable by that service user. 
C.  Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Section 3.20.090 or Section 3.20.100 hereof, which produces electricity or gas for self-use, as applicable, or any service user who purchases gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier which does not collect the applicable tax amount approved and levied by this chapter from the service user, or any such service user who does not otherwise pay the full tax due for the use of such gas or electricity (as applicable), shall report said fact to the Tax Collector and shall remit the tax due directly to the Tax Collector within thirty (30) days of use of such gas or electricity. In lieu of paying the actual amount of any of the taxes referenced in the first sentence of this section, the service user may, at its option, remit to the Tax Collector within thirty (30) days of such use an estimated amount of the tax payable based upon an average monthly estimated payment pattern for use of comparable amounts of gas or electricity (as applicable), provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, to the Tax Collector within sixty (60) days following the end of each calendar quarter. A credit, if approved by the Tax Collector, may he applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. The Tax Collector may require the service user to identify its nonutility supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the cost of price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide satisfactory evidence relating to the calculation of the tax, or, if the Tax Collector may determine the amount of the tax payable by applying the tax rate to the equivalent service charges which the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used had been provided by a gas corporation or electrical corporation, as applicable, which is a primary provider of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be prepared by the Tax Collector. 
D.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the city from directly billing any service user or directly collecting from any service user the amount of any tax approved by this chapter in accordance with such direct tax billing and/or direct tax collection procedure as may be provided by rule or regulation of the Tax Collector approved by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 6270.10)  
3.20.120 - Filing of tax return by service suppliers and payment of taxes collected. 
Each service supplier (and each service user subject to Section 3.20.110C shall prepare and file a written tax return to the Tax Collector on forms provided by the Tax Collector. The amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax Collector once per month or on such other schedule of reporting and payment as may be authorized by the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector is authorized to specify such additional information as deemed necessary to determine if the tax is being calculated and collected by the service supplier in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. 
(Prior code § 6270.11)  
3.20.130 - Failure to remit tax amount collected. 
Taxes collected by a service supplier from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Collector on or before the due date provided in this chapter are delinquent. Taxes owned by a service user subject to Section 3.20.110C are delinquent if not received by the Tax Collector on or before the due date. Should the due date for the remittance of any tax/return and/or tax amount payable to the Tax Collector occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the tax return and the corresponding tax amount must be received by the Tax Collector on the first regular business day of the city following a Saturday/Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(Prior code § 6270.12)  
3.20.140 - Administration of tax collection—Penalties and assessments. 
A.  Civil penalties for delinquency in either the filing of a tax return and/or the remittance to the city of any tax amounts collected by a service supplier, or any deficiency determination thereof, shall attach and be paid by the service supplier at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the total tax amount imposed by the provisions of this chapter during the period of such delinquency. 
B.  The Tax Collector shall have the power to impose additional civil penalties upon any service supplier or other person required to collect and remit tax amounts pursuant to the provisions of this chapter (in addition to the amount assessable under subsection A of this section) for fraud and negligence in reporting or remitting to the city of any tax amounts at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the tax amount imposed by the city, or as recomputed by the Tax Collector during the period of time that such fraud or negligence is alleged to have occurred. 
C.  Each penalty amount imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax amount required to be remitted to the Tax Collector. 
D.  Whenever the Tax Collector determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a service supplier or other person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax Collector deems it in the best interest of the city, the Tax Collector may relieve such service supplier or other person of any further obligation to collect the tax amounts due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax owed for a period of two (2) or more consecutive billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved from the further obligation to collect the tax amounts owed by such user which correspond to the period of such delinquency; provided however, that the service supplier has first provided the city with the name and address of such a service user and the amount of the tax owed under the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  The Tax Collector shall notify each nonpaying service user as identified in subsection D of this section that the Tax Collector has assumed the responsibility to collect the tax amounts due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the service supplier or other person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed its address to the last known address. If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Collector within fifteen (15) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars ($5.00). The penalty shall become a part of the tax required to be paid. 
F.  The Tax Collector may make an assessment for any tax amount not paid or remitted by a service user or other person required to pay or remit such tax amount to the city. A notice of the assessment shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes and penalties imposed and the time and place when such assessment shall be submitted to the City Council for confirmation or modification. The City Clerk shall mail a copy of such notice to the service supplier and to the service user at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing and shall post such notice for at least five (5) continuous days prior to the date of the hearing. Any interested party having any objections may appear and be heard at the hearing provided his objection is filed in writing with the City Clerk prior to the time act for the hearing. At the time fixed for considering such assessment, the City Council shall hear the same, together with any objections filed as provided in this subsection, and thereupon may confirm or modify such assessment by motion. 
(Prior code § 6270.13)  
3.20.150 - Records. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the Tax Collector, which records the Tax Collector, or the Tax Collector's designated representative, shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. The Tax Collector, or the Tax Collector's designated representative, is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information. 
B.  The Tax Collector, or the Tax Collector's designated representative, may request from a person providing transportation services of gas or electricity to service users within the city a list of the names and addresses of its transportation customers within the city pursuant to Section 6254(e) of Chapter 2.56 of Division 3 of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
C.  If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the Tax Collector, or the Tax Collector's designated representative, access to such records, then the Tax Collector may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access. 
(Prior code § 6270.14)  
3.20.160 - Refunds and claims. 
Whenever the amount of any tax imposed under this chapter has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Collector, it may be refunded as provided in this section. 
A.  The Tax Collector may refund any tax amount that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Collector under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant has submitted a written claim for a refund of the tax amount paid to the Tax Collector within one year of the date of the overpayment or the date of erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such a tax refund claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written record showing entitlement thereto. The submission of a written tax refund claim, which complies with the claim filing procedures of Government Code Section 910, et seq. shall be a prerequisite to the initiation of any legal proceeding to recover a refund of any tax amount or assert any other challenge to the validity of any tax approved and levied by this chapter. The City Council shall act upon each tax refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 9110.4. If the City Council fails or refuses to act on a tax refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 910.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Council on the last day of the period within which the City Council is required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Section 9101.4. It is the intent of the City Council that any tax refund claim which may have arisen prior to the commencement of the one-year tax refund claim period of this section and which is not otherwise barred by the applicable statute of limitation or claim procedure found elsewhere in this title shall be filed with the Tax Collector in accordance with the tax refund claim procedure applicable to any such claim arising prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
B.  Notwithstanding other provision of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, orders the service supplier to pay a refund to one or more service users of charges for past services, the taxes paid by each such affected service user pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to each such affected service user by the service supplier; provided however, the service supplier shall be entitled at its option to claim a credit for the amount of such refunded tax against the amount of the tax which is due and payable to the city with the next monthly return following the date of payment of such refunded charges for past services. 
(Prior code § 6270.15)  
3.20.170 - Additional powers and duties of tax collector. 
A.  The Tax Collector shall have the power and duty, and is directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city may adopt rules and regulations by resolution of the City Council which are not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Collector's office. 
C.  The Tax Collector may enter into administrative agreements to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter, so that collection of any tax imposed herein may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to Section 3.20.110C) as long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Collector's office. 
D.  The Tax Collector, or designee, shall provide prompt written notice to all service suppliers of any change in the city's boundaries following any annexation or other change in the city's boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address along with a copy of the final annexation order from the Local Agency Formation Commission. 
(Prior code § 6270.16)  
3.20.180 - Actions to collect tax amounts payable to the city. 
The amount of any tax required to be paid by a ser vice user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any amount of a tax collected from a service user by a service supplier which has not been remitted to the Tax Collector shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the service supplier. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to pay such an amount upon entry of judgment in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such sum, including reasonable attorneys fees, costs and interest. 
(Prior code § 6270.17)  
3.20.190 - Termination or suspension of taxes by resolution of the city council. 
Upon written notification from the Tax Collector that the City Council has authorized a termination or suspension of any tax approved under this chapter, each service supplier shall implement the direction of the City Council terminating or suspending the tax for the period of time indicating in such a written notice, commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such an action authorized by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 6270.18)  
3.20.200 - Operative date of this chapter, including amendments to this chapter after voter approval of Ordinance 2452 on March 4, 1997. 
A.  The taxes imposed under Ordinance No. 2324, dated August 27, 1991, and this chapter, together with certain additional telephone service charges as described in Urgency Ordinance No. 2332, dated September 24, 1991, because applicable to utility bills transmitted to service users on or after sixty (60) days following the passage of Ordinance No. 2324, or as soon thereafter as was practicable. The additional amount of taxes imposed by Ordinance No. 2355, dated September 8, 1992, and this chapter, became applicable upon passage of Ordinance No. 2355, and the additional amount of the taxes imposed under Ordinance No. 2355 on or after sixty (60) days from the date of final passage or as soon thereafter as was practicable for the imposition of the tax rates authorized by Ordinance No. 2355 and this chapter. 
B.  The amendment of this chapter authorized by Ordinance No. 2452 was approved by the voters on March 4, 1997 and each of the amendments of this chapter by said ordinance shall become operative immediately upon acceptance by the City Council of the certified results of the March 4, 1997 municipal election confirming that Ordinance No. 2452 amending this chapter has been approved by a majority vote of the electorate in accordance with Government Code Section 53723. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6270.19)  
3.20.210 - Maximum tax rate. 
No person shall pay a tax of more than seven (7) percent to the city of any services, subject to a tax under this chapter, nor shall any person pay in the aggregate more than seven (7) percent in taxes to the city of all services subject to tax under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6270.20)  
3.20.220 - Temporary reduction in the rate of any tax approved in this chapter. 
Each of the tax rates approved, imposed and levied by Sections 3.20.090, 3.20.100 and 3.20.110 on the operative date of Ordinance No. 2452 which adds this section to this chapter, may be temporarily reduced and levied at a rate of less than seven (7) percent by resolution of the City Council. Each such temporary reduction of the tax rate shall be in effect and may be levied at a reduced rate only for a period of time authorized in the City Council resolution and upon the end of the temporary period of the tax rate reduction authorized in the resolution, the tax shall be levied at the full amount of the rate in effect on the operative date of Ordinance No. 2452 which adds this section to this chapter. No such temporary reduction in a tax rate approved by a resolution of the City Council shall require the approval of the voters of the before the temporary tax rate reduction may take effect for the term as specified in the resolution. 
(Prior code § 6270.21)  
Chapter 3.22 - COMMUNICATION USERS' TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.22.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Communication Users' Tax Law" of the city. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.020 - Adoption; charter authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers of the city of El Monte as authorized by Section 6 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State of California. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section: 
"Ancillary telecommunication services" means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services: 
1.  "Conference bridging service" means an ancillary service that links two (2) or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge. 
2.  "Detailed telecommunications billing service" means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer's billing statement. 
3.  "Directory assistance" means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information. 
4.  "Vertical service" means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services. 
5.  "Voice mail service" means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service 
"Billing address" means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer. 
"City" means the city of El Monte. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the city of El Monte as defined under Chapter 2.12 of the El Monte Municipal Code or designee. 
"Communication services" means "telecommunication services" and "ancillary telecommunication services." 
"Mobile telecommunications service" has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Person" means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
"Place of primary use" means the street address representative of where the customer's use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. 
"Post-paid telecommunication service" means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service. 
"Prepaid telecommunication service" means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount. 
"Private telecommunication service" means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications). 
"Service address" means either: 
1.  The location of the service user's communication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or 
2.  If the location in subsection 1 of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user's place of primary use; or 
3.  For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" means the location associated with the service number. 
"Service supplier" means any entity or person, including the city, that provides communication service to a user of such service within the city. 
"Service user" means a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Tax Administrator" means the Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services or designee. 
"Telecommunications services" means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used, and includes broadband services (e.g., T-l, digital subscriber line (eDSL), fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless broadband, including Wi-Fi, WiMAX, and Wireless MESH) to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of such broadband services, now or in the future. The term "telecommunications services" includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value-added, and includes video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with "telecommunication services." "Telecommunications services" includes, but is not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; broadband service (to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of such service); mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 911 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to prerecorded or live service). "Telecommunication services" shall not include digital downloads that are not "ancillary telecommunication services," such as books, music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.040 - Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State. 
B.  Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision thereof with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the Tax Administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the Tax Administrator, such service user shall give the Tax Administrator timely written notice of any change in service suppliers so that the Tax Administrator can properly notify the new service supplier of the service user's tax-exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of the communication users' taxes collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance. 
C.  The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.22.160 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.22.160 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. 
D.  Any service user who qualifies as a "claimant" under the "Gonsalves-Deukmejian-Petris Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Law" (Chapter 1, commencing with Section 20501, of Part 10.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California) shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter and any such tax paid by any such service user is subject to refund under subsection B of this section, above. In the event that the "Gonsalves-Deukmejian-Petris Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Law" is repealed or otherwise ceases to exist in a substantially similar form, the exemption granted under this subsection shall automatically terminate. 
E.  Any person or service user subject to taxation under this chapter may invoke the provisions of Section 3.20.051 relating to alternative payment options. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.050 - Communication users' tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six and one-half (6.5) percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city's boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services. 
B.  "Mobile telecommunications service" shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including but not limited to post-paid communication services, prepaid communication services, and private communication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multijurisdictional taxation. 
C.  The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection A of this section, above. 
D.  As used in this section, the term "telecommunication services" shall include, but are not limited to charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three (3) way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and page, instant and text messaging. "Telecommunication services" shall not include digital downloads that are not "ancillary telecommunication services," such as books, music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products. 
E.  To prevent actual multijurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or local jurisdiction on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or local jurisdiction; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section. 
F.  The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2768, § 5, 1-4-2011) 
Editor's note— Please also refer to § 3.20.051 (Alternative tax payment option) of Chapter 3.20 (Utility Users Tax — Gas and Electricity) of Title 3 (Revenue and Finance), as the provisions of § 3.20.051 may also be applied to the tax levied pursuant to this chapter.  
3.22.060 - Bundling taxable items with nontaxable items. 
Except as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, if any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier's books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.070 - Substantial nexus/minimum contacts. 
A.  For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, "substantial nexus" and "minimum contacts" shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the communication users' tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter within the city or distributed from a location within the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail. 
B.  The city shall make available, upon request, an accurate description of its jurisdictional boundaries based on street addresses and/or ZIP Plus Four, in an electronic format. If a service supplier relies upon such information provided by city, it shall not be responsible for any errors in taxation that may result. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.080 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
A.  Collection by Service Suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
1.  The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 3.22.120 shall apply. 
2.  The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. 
B.  Filing Return and Payment. Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms approved by the Tax Administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the Tax Administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.090 - Collection penalties—Service suppliers. 
A.  Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging moneys between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this section shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city's account on the following business day. 
B.  If the person required to collect and/or remit the communication users' tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer's billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, the Tax Administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of seventy-five hundredths (0.75) percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid. 
C.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator. 
D.  For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
E.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Tax Administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public agencies imposing a communication users' tax, or otherwise legally established, to create a central payment location or mechanism. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.100 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person's noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C). 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.110 - Deficiency determination and assessment—Tax application errors. 
A.  The Tax Administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any service user or service supplier required to pay or collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing herein shall require that the Tax Administrator institute proceedings under this Section 3.22.110 if, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit. 
B.  The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person or entity allegedly owing the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of seventy-five hundredths (0.75) percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person or entity allegedly owing the tax may request in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the matter. 
C.  If the person or entity allegedly owing the tax fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. If the person or entity allegedly owing the tax requests a hearing, the Tax Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the Tax Administrator to such person or entity at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the Tax Administrator desires said person or entity to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced. 
D.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the Tax Administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the Tax Administrator shall issue a final assessment (or nonassessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to the person or entity owing the tax. The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.22.160 of this chapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.22.160 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. Both the Tax Administrator and the City Manager may designate an independent Hearing Officer to conduct any of the hearings or other proceedings contemplated under this section and such Hearing Officer shall render a decision in the manner provided herein. 
E.  Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be fifteen (15) percent on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of seventy-five hundredths (0.75) percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection. 
F.  All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.120 - Administrative remedy—-Nonpaying service users. 
A.  Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain name service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall require that the Tax Administrator institute proceedings under this Section 3.22.120 if, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit. 
B.  In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of seventy-five hundredths (0.75) percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid. 
C.  The Tax Administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the Tax Administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address. 
D.  If the service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the Tax Administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the total tax that is owed. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.130 - Additional powers and duties of the Tax Administrator. 
A.  The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. 
C.  Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office, and are voidable by the Tax Administrator or the city at any time. 
D.  The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The Tax Administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three (3) years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 3.22.110 of this chapter for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the Tax Administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness. 
E.  Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed forty-five (45) days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of seventy-five hundredths (0.75) percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof. 
F.  The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter. 
G.  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the Tax Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the noncollection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.140 - Records. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time. 
B.  The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection. 
C.  The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. 
D.  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the Tax Administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (2) upon request of the Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city. 
E.  If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following: (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.150 - Refunds. 
Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, it may be refunded as provided in this section: 
A.  The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this chapter from a service user or service supplier, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the Tax Administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this section. 
B.  The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the city pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. The Tax Administrator, or the City Council where the claim is in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the Tax Administrator/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Council on the last day of the period within which the City Council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The Tax Administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913. 
C.  Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection A of this section, the Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, give written permission to a service supplier, who has collected and remitted any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, to claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due the city upon a subsequent monthly return(s) to the Tax Administrator, provided that: (1) such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous collection of said tax; (2) the Tax Administrator is satisfied that the underlying basis and amount of such credit has been reasonably established; and (3) in the case of an overpayment by a service user to the service supplier that has been remitted to the city, the Tax Administrator has received proof, to his or her satisfaction, that the overpayment has been refunded by the service supplier to the service user in an amount equal to the requested credit. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsections A through C of this section, above, a service supplier shall be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment whenever such overpayment has been received by the city within the three (3) years next preceding a deficiency determination or assessment by the Tax Administrator in connection with an audit instituted by the Tax Administrator pursuant to Section 3.22.130(D). A service supplier shall not be entitled to said credit unless it clearly establishes the right to the credit by written records showing entitlement thereto. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a credit against an underpayment pursuant to this section qualify a service supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the one-year written claim requirement of this section. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.160 - Appeals. 
A.  The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.22.150 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.22.150 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b)). Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. 
B.  If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.22.150 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator; he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier. 
C.  The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent Hearing Officer selected by the City Manager, no more than forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the Tax Administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken. 
D.  Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city's files, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
E.  All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.170 - No injunction/writ of mandate. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.180 - Notice of changes to chapter. 
If a tax under this chapter is added repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.190 - Future amendment to cited statute. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.200 - No increase in tax percentage or change in methodology without voter approval. 
A.  Regarding Section 3.22.050, the city may not increase the tax percentage or change a methodology for calculating the tax so as to result in an increase in a tax imposed on a person, without voter approval. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, pursuant to Government Code Section 53750, the city may make the following changes without voter approval: 
1.  Reduce the percentage rate, and at any time thereafter increase such percentage rate, so long as the subsequent increase does not exceed the rate previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter; 
2.  Change the methodology so as to reduce the amount of the tax being levied, and at any time thereafter change the methodology, so long as the subsequent change in methodology does not result in an increase in the amount being levied under the methodology previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter; 
3.  Change a methodology or definition so as to avoid or eliminate a discriminatory tax on taxpayers that are similarly situated, so long as the change does not result in an increase in the amount levied on such class of similarly situated taxpayers under the methodology or definition previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter; 
4.  Establish a class of persons that is exempt or excepted from one or more taxes hereunder, and at any time thereafter, discontinue such exemption or exception; 
5.  Decide that all or a part of a tax imposed under Section 3.22.050 should not be enforced for administrative reasons, and at any time thereafter, decide to enforce the full amount of such tax as previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter; or 
6.  Establish, and at any time thereafter change, the value and/or apportionment (including a "safe harbor" percentage) of taxable and nontaxable services that are bundled or packaged under a combined charge, in response to changes in the marketing of combined services and the components thereof, or in reevaluating the values thereof (See Section 3.22.060). 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.210 - Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance, and expenditure. 
The city shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this chapter have been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.220 - Interaction with prior tax. 
A.  Satisfaction of Tax Obligation by Service Users. Any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.22.050 of this code with respect to any charge for a communication service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.20.080 of this code with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to April 1, 2008, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.20.080 of this code with respect to any charge for a service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.22.050 of this code with respect to that charge. The intent of this section is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior telephone and video users' tax to the new communication users' tax (which transition period ends April 1, 2008) and to permit communications service providers, during that transition period to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax. 
B.  Collection of Tax by Service Providers. Service providers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this chapter as soon as feasible after the effective date of the chapter, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
C.  For purposes of this section, the term "this code" refers to the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3.22.230 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2695 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 3.24 - PURCHASING SYSTEM* 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 54201 et seq. of the California Government Code. By adoption of this chapter (here is established a purchasing system, for city purchases and contracts (including rentals and leases): (1) to provide guidance and direction regarding the procurement of supplies, materials, equipment, and services; (2) to procure supplies, materials, equipment and general services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed and professional services based upon demonstrated competence, professional qualifications and suitability for the project in general; (3) to exercise positive financial control over purchases; and (4) to clearly define and delegate authority for the purchasing function. This chapter and the policies it implements shall be enforced by the Purchasing Officer and shall be complied with by all departments and divisions of the city when procuring supplies, services and/or equipment. This chapter and the policies it implements are intended to promote prudent review and decision making with respect to the purchasing of supplies, materials, equipment and services. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, work and/or services which fall within the definition of the term "public project" as set forth under the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (California Public Contract Code Section 22000 et seq.), to wit, the Act, shall be governed by the procedures prescribed under Section 3.24.080 of this chapter. The definition of the term "general services" as set forth in this chapter may in certain instances overlap with the definition of the term "public project" and where such is the case the work or services in question shall be awarded and contracted in accordance with those provisions of this chapter, to wit Section 3.24.080, governing "public projects." The remaining provisions of this chapter shall only apply to the procurement of such work or services to the extent they are applicable and to the extent such provisions do not conflict with the requirements of the Act or Section 3.24.080. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.020 - Purchasing officer—Duties and responsibilities. 
A.  The City Manager shall designate one city employee to act as the city's Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Officer shall exercise all powers and duties conferred to under this section. 
B.  The Purchasing Officer shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
1.  Coordinate and manage the procurement of supplies, materials, equipment and services required by any city department or division in accordance with the purchasing procedures set forth under this chapter and under the Purchasing Procedures Manual; 
2.  Operate and maintain warehouse and storage facilities for supplies, materials, and equipment used by more than one city department or division, and maintain proper inventory control records of the contents thereof; 
3.  Review requests for purchases to determine if they are reasonable in quantity and quality in relation to known needs of the requesting department or division, to ascertain that they are within budgetary allotments, and to determine whether supplies already on hand in the warehouse or in other departments or divisions can be used to satisfy the request; 
4.  Oversee and administer emergency purchases in the manner prescribed herein and in the Purchasing Procedures Manual; 
5.  Prepare and maintain standard specifications for supplies, materials and equipment whenever practical, and to consolidate and schedule orders for all standard items; 
6.  Maintain a bidder's list, vendor's catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing office; 
7.  Promote and maintain good relations with vendors with the objective of optimizing the price and quality of materials, services and equipment for the benefit of the city; 
8.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of the procedures provided for in this chapter; 
9.  Supervise the inspection of all supplies, materials, equipment and services purchased to insure conformance with specifications; 
10.  Oversee compliance with the city-adopted Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Procedures set forth under this chapter, including but not limited to, the development and maintenance of contractor lists as set forth under Section 3.24.080; 
11.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies, materials and equipment between departments and divisions as needed and the sale/disposal of all supplies, materials and equipment which cannot be used by any department or division which have become unsuitable for city use, in compliance with the adopted procedures; 
12.  Cause to be distributed to each department or division from available warehouse or stockroom items on hand, supplies, materials and equipment when requisitioned. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.030 - Departments and divisions—Duties and responsibilities. 
City departments and divisions are charged with the following responsibilities in the purchasing process: 
A.  The submittal of forms as specified in the Purchasing Procedures Manual; 
B.  The anticipation of departmental or division requirements sufficiently in advance to allow adequate time to procure supplies, materials, equipment and services in accordance with purchasing procedures set forth herein and in the Purchasing Procedures Manual; 
C.  The communication and coordination of contemplated purchases with the Purchasing Officer; 
D.  Informing the Purchasing Officer of any vendor relations problems, shipping problems and any other situations which could affect the purchasing function; 
E.  The provision of adequate supporting documentation when emergency or single-source purchases are necessary or when cooperative purchases are desirable. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.040 - General procurement procedures. 
A.  Deputy City Manager Approval. With respect to each city department, the Deputy City Manager for that department shall have the authority to approve any individual procurement of supplies, materials, equipment, general services costing fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less. All such procurements shall be made in compliance with the informal purchasing procedures set forth in the Purchasing Procedures Manual. 
B.  City Manager Approval. The City Manager shall have the authority to approve any individual procurement of supplies, materials, equipment or general services costing in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) but below thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). All such procurements shall be made in compliance with the informal purchasing procedures set forth in the Purchasing Procedures Manual. 
C.  City Council Approval. The City Council must approve: 
1.  Any individual procurement of supplies, materials, equipment or general services costing in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) but not exceeding one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00). All such procurements shall be made in compliance with the informal purchasing procedures set forth in the Purchasing Procedures Manual; and 
2.  Any individual procurement of supplies, materials, equipment or general services costing in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00). All such procurements shall be made in compliance with the formal competitive bidding requirements set forth under this chapter and under the Purchasing Procedures Manual. 
Procurements (excluding leases) made pursuant to subsection A of this section may be accomplished by either a written purchase order or by a written agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney. All other procurements (including leases) shall be by written agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney. During any given fiscal year, procurements of identical supplies, equipment, materials or general services may not be broken-up into multiple procurements for the purpose of evading the more stringent approval requirements of subsection B or C of this section. The City Council reserves the right to disapprove any orders placed with such intent where it is determined that the accountability and expenditure control benefits of complying with the more stringent approval requirements outweigh the immediate convenience of avoiding such requirements or where such action runs contrary to the spirit of fiscal accountability which is the underlying objective of this chapter. 
D.  All written agreements required under this section must be submitted to and approved by the appropriate authorizing officer or body and to the City Attorney before being presented to the vendor or general services provider as the city's proposed agreement. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.050 - Formal purchasing procedures. 
A.  Procurements Exceeding One Hundred Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($125,000.00). The procurement of supplies, materials, equipment or general services subject to Section 3.24.040(C)(2), shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder in compliance with the formal competitive bidding procedures prescribed under this section and under the Purchasing Procedures Manual. All procurements subject to this section shall be made by written agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
B.  Notice Inviting Bids. The Purchasing Officer shall issue a notice inviting bids for all purchases or sales subject to this section. In addition to such other requirements as may be set forth in the Purchasing Procedure Manual, such notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the supplies, materials, equipment or general services to be procured; where bid forms and specifications may be secured; and the final time and place for submitting bids. 
C.  Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten (10) days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city, or if there is none it shall be posted in at least three (3) public places in the city that have been designated by the City Council by resolution as the places for posting public notices. 
D.  Bidders' List. The Purchasing Officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list or who have requested their names to be added thereto. 
E.  Bidder's Security. When deemed necessary, the Purchasing Officer shall require bidders' security. If bid security is prescribed, the same type and rate of security shall be required of each bidder, and no contract may be awarded to any bidder failing to post the required bid security. Bidders are entitled to the return of bid security upon execution of the contract or within twenty-one (21) calendar days following the re-advertisement of bids; provided, that a successful bidder forfeits the bidder's bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) calendar days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the Council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder within twenty-one (21) days from the date contract is executed by the next lowest bidder. 
F.  Bid Opening Procedure. Bidders shall submit sealed bids to the Purchasing Officer and shall specifically identify them as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening. 
G.  Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the City Council may reject any and all bids presented, and may re-advertise for bids. 
H.  Nonresponsive Bids. If no bid, or no responsive bid, is received after inviting bids under this section, the Purchasing Officer may proceed to hire or have general services performed or purchase the supplies or equipment on the open market. 
I.  Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
J.  Tie Bids. If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the City Council may select any one of the tie bidders in its sole and absolute discretion. 
K.  Performance Bonds. Except as otherwise required under the Purchasing Procedures Manual, the Purchasing Officer has the authority to require a performance bond as a condition to the city's solicitation of any bids, in such amount as the Purchasing Officer shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the Purchasing Officer requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
L.  Unlawful Evasion of Bidding Requirements. Consistent with the second paragraph of Section 3.24.040(C), above, it is unlawful to split into smaller orders the purchase of supplies, equipment, materials or general services for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.060 - Procurements exempted from competitive bidding requirements. 
A.  The following varieties of procurements are exempt from the formal competitive bidding requirements of Section 3.24.050, above: 
1.  Single-Source or Sole-Source Procurements. An item or service shall be considered single-source or sole-source if such item or service is essentially unique and can only be met solely by a single patented, copyrighted or proprietary article or process available from a single or sole source. Examples of acceptable sole source purchases are equipment for which there is no comparable competitive product, a component or replacement part for which there is no commercially available substitute and which can be obtained only from the manufacturer, or an item where compatibility with supplies, equipment, materials, general services or processes already in use by the city is the overriding consideration. 
2.  Cooperative purchases (or piggyback purchases) where such purchases (a) have already been made using the competitive bidding procedures of another public agency; or (b) are conducted in accordance with the procedures of the California Multiple Award Schedules Program (the "CMAS Program"), the U.S. General Services Administration, the United States Communities Government Purchasing Alliance or any similar cooperative purchasing program. The foregoing notwithstanding, in order to qualify as a cooperative purchase exempt from the formal competitive bidding requirements of this chapter, the cost or unit price of the supplies, materials, equipment or general services procured must be equal to or less than the price paid by the public agency, organization or association with whom the cooperative purchase is made. 
3.  The purchase of items for which there is no competitive market such as memberships in professional organizations or industry organizations; registration fees for conferences, meetings or other like business-related events; or subscriptions to professional or trade journals and/or periodicals. 
4.  Emergency Procurements or Supplies, Materials, Equipment or General Services. To qualify as an emergency procurement exempt from the formal competitive bidding requirements of this chapter, the procurement must be made for the purpose of responding to an "emergency" within the meaning of Section 1102 of the California Public Contract Code. All emergency procurements shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth under Section 22050 of the California Public Contract Code. 
5.  Professional consulting services. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.070 - Professional consulting services. 
A.  Deputy City Manager Approval. With respect to each city department, the Deputy City Manager for that department has the authority to approve the procurement professional consulting services costing up to fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) per any twelve (12) month period. All such procurements shall be made in compliance with the purchasing procedures set forth in the Purchasing Procedures Manual. 
B.  City Manager Approval. The City Manager has the authority to approve the procurement of professional consulting services costing in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) per any twelve (12) month period but below thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) per any twelve (12) month period. All such procurements must be made in compliance with the informal purchasing procedures set forth in the Purchasing Procedures Manual. 
C.  City Council Approval. The City Council must approve the procurement of professional consulting services costing in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) per any twelve (12) month period. The procurement of professional consulting services costing in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) per any twelve (12) month period must also be preceded by the issuance of a request for qualifications as provided under the Purchasing Procedures Manual. 
D.  All professional consulting agreements must be accomplished by written agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney. Such agreements must be submitted to, and approved by the appropriate authorizing officer or body and to the City Attorney before being presented to service provider as the city's proposed agreement. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.080 - Public projects—UPCCAA procedures. 
A.  Work or services which fall with the definition of the term "public project" as defined under Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code shall be let in accordance with the procedures set forth under Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act codified under the California Public Contract Code, Section 22000 et seq. (hereinafter, the "Act"). The city of El Monte initially adopted the Act as its procedures for the procurement of work or services which fall within the definition of the term "public project" in 2004 by way of El Monte City Council Ordinance No. 2614. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 22032(a) of the California Public Contract Code, work or services which qualify as a "public project" within the meaning of the Act may be performed by negotiated contract, purchase order or such other method authorized under Section 22032(a) of the California Public Contract Code if the cost of such work or services is equal or less than the not-to-exceed sum set forth under Section 22032(a) of the California Public Contract Code. 
C.  Pursuant to Section 22032(b) of the California Public Contract Code, work or services which qualify as a "public project" within the meaning of the Act may be let to contract by the informal procedures set forth under Section 22034 of the California Public Contract Code if the cost of the works or services is equal to or less than the not-to-exceed sum set forth under Section 22032(b) of the California Public Contract Code. 
D.  Pursuant to Section 22032(c) of the California Public Contract Code, work or services which qualify as a "public project" within the meaning of the Act shall be let to contract by formal bidding procedures if the cost of the work or services is in excess of the sum set forth under Section 22032(c) of the California Public Contract Code. The applicable formal bidding procedures shall be those set forth under Section 3.24.050 of this chapter and under the Purchasing Procedures Manual. 
E.  Approval of Public Project Awards. With respect to each city department, the Deputy City Manager for that department shall have the authority to approve the award a public project costing fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less, subject to all applicable requirements of the Act and this section. The City Manager shall have the authority to approve the award of a public project costing in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) but below thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), subject to all applicable requirements of the Act and this section. The City Council must approve the award of any public project costing thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) or more, subject to all applicable requirements of the Act and this section. 
F.  With respect to informal bidding procedures, the city shall comply with all requirements of the Act, including those specifically set forth under Section 22034 of the California Public Contract. In compliance with the Act, the city shall do the following: 
1.  A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provision of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission; and 
2.  A notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work or services to be bid no less than ten (10) days prior to the bid due date. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the Purchasing Officer; provided however: (a) if there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission; and (b) if the work, product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.090 - Surplus and/or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment. 
A.  Each city department or division shall submit to the Purchasing Officer, at such times and in such form as the Purchasing Officer shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The Purchasing Officer, upon approval of the City Manager, shall have authority to sell or otherwise dispose of all supplies, materials and equipment which cannot be used by any department or division, or which have become unsuitable for city use. Upon City Manager approval, the Purchasing Officer may also exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies, materials and/or equipment. 
B.  Disposition of surplus and/or obsolete items may include some form or recycling or reuse such as donation to public bodies, charitable, civic or nonprofit organizations and may include city property which has no commercial value or for which the estimated cost of continued care, handling, maintenance or storage would exceed the estimated proceeds of sale. Sales procedures may include negotiated sales, acceptance of sealed bids or public auction. Services of a paid auctioneer may be used, as appropriate. City Council approval is needed for the disposition of supplies, materials or equipment when the total estimated value exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.100 - Availability of funds. 
The Purchasing Officer in consultation with the Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services shall not issue any purchase orders for supplies, materials, equipment or services in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) unless there exists an unencumbered amount in the current fiscal budget against which said purchase is to be, or may be, charged. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.110 - Purchase awards to city businesses. 
Local preference is desirable because of its ability to stimulate the local economy, generate jobs and spur further investment into the community. As set forth in this section, the city shall strive to give preference to businesses located within the city of El Monte. All other procurement factors being equal, if the cost differential or unit price difference between an item or service provided by a business located in the city of El Monte is no greater than one percent of the cost or unit price quoted by a non-city business, the procurement may be awarded to the El Monte business under the rational that the city will recoup at least one percent of the cost of the transaction in the form of sales taxes. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.120 - Unauthorized procurements. 
A.  Any procurement of supplies, materials, equipment or services made in violation of the procedures set forth under this chapter or under the Purchasing Procedures Manual shall be void and not considered an obligation of the city. Furthermore, invoices issued without an authorized purchase order may be returned to the vendor or service provider unpaid. The person making the unauthorized purchase may also be held personally liable for the costs of the purchase or contract. 
B.  With respect to procurements authorized via purchase order, such purchase orders shall be issued prior to ordering supplies, equipment, materials or general services and not "after the fact" for work already performed or materials already supplied. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.130 - Ethics in purchasing. 
A.  City officials, officers and employees shall discharge their duties impartially so as to assure fair competitive access to the city procurement opportunities by responsible and responsive contractors, sellers and vendors. Moreover, they shall conduct themselves in such a manner as to foster public confidence in the integrity of city procurement activities. 
B.  No city official, officer or employee shall participate directly or indirectly in a city procurement when the employee knows that: (1) the official, officer or employee or any member of the official's, officer's or employee's immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement; or (2) the official, officer or employee or any member of the official's officer's or employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an employment arrangement which is contingent upon or will be affected by the procurement. 
C.  Upon discovery of an actual or potential conflict of interest, an employee shall promptly withdraw from further participation in the procurement. 
D.  No city official, officer or employee shall maintain a financial interest or stake in any contract where the approval of the contract in light of such interest would cause a violation of Section 1090 of the California Government Code. 
E.  No person shall offer, give or agree to give any city official, officer or employee any gratuity or offer of employment in connection with a procurement by the city. 
F.  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
1.  "Financial interest" means any (a) ownership of any interest or involvement in any relationship from which, or as a result of which, a person has received compensation within the past year, or is entitled to, or is currently receiving compensation; or (b) ownership, whether wholly or in part, of any property or business; or (c) status as an officer, director, trustee, partner, employee, agent or manager of a business. 
2.  "Immediate family" means any spouse, child or stepchild of a city officer, official or employee. The relationship of parent to child includes both natural and adoptive relationships. 
3.  "Gratuity" means a gift, payment, loan, advance, deposit of money, or service, presented or promised in return for or in anticipation of favorable consideration in the contracting process. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
3.24.140 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth under this section: 
1.  The term "the Act" means and refers to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act codified under the California Public Contract Code, Section 22000 et seq. 
2.  The terms "contract" or "agreement" mean any legally binding instrument to do or not do a certain thing. "Contract" and "agreement" are synonymous. The term "contract" includes but is not limited to, a purchase order, a contract for services, an addendum or change order, a letter agreement or a memorandum of understanding. 
3.  The term "equipment" means items that are durable, have a fixed life expectancy. 
4.  The term "general services" means and includes any work performed or services rendered by an independent contractor, with or without the furnishing of materials, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Maintenance or nonstructural repair to city buildings, structures or improvements which do not require engineering plans, specifications or design, including but not limited to, unscheduled replacement of broken window panes, fire extinguisher maintenance, minor roof repairs, plumbing, elevator maintenance, custodial services and pest control; 
b.  Repair, modification and maintenance of city equipment and software; 
c.  Cleaning, testing, moving, removal or disposal (other than by sale) of city supplies, materials or equipment; 
d.  Repainting, care or maintenance of public grounds, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, flowers, lawns; 
e.  Providing temporary clerical/administrative support services; 
f.  Providing other miscellaneous services to facilitate city operations; 
g.  Performing repair, demolition or other work required to abate nuisances under the El Monte Municipal Code; 
h.  Licensing software; 
i.  Leasing or rental of equipment (personal property) for use by the city; 
j.  A maintenance agreement for equipment owned or leased by the city. 
The term "general services" does not include "professional consulting services." The definition of the term "general services" may in certain instances overlap with the definition of the term "public project" and where such is the case the work or services in question shall be awarded and contracted in accordance with those provisions of this chapter governing "public projects." 
5.  The term "person" means any natural person, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, association, trust, family trust, corporation, limited liability corporation, labor union, committee, sole proprietorship, club, governmental entity, public entity or quasi-public entity. 
6.  The term "professional consulting services" as used in this chapter means services rendered persons or entities on an independent contractor basis where the service or function rendered is of an analytical nature; or where such services or functions essentially consist of the rendering of advice and opinion; and/or the exercise of judgment all based on the educational training, experience or specialized expertise of the person(s) rendering the advice and opinion or exercising judgment. The term "professional consulting services" does not include services rendered by a natural person pursuant to a direct employment arrangement, employment contract, collective bargaining agreement or collective bargaining memorandum of understanding. 
7.  The term "public project" shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(c) of the California Public Contract Code as that section may be amended from time to time. As set forth under Section 22002(c) of the California Public Contract Code, the term "public project" does not include "maintenance work" as the term "maintenance work" is defined therein. The Purchasing Procedures Manual shall set forth concrete examples distinguishing "public projects" from "maintenance work." 
8.  The terms "purchase," "procure" or "procurement" mean the buying, renting, leasing, acquisition, licensing or trade of supplies, equipment, materials or services. 
9.  The terms "supplies" and "materials" mean and include office supplies, janitorial supplies, materials used for the maintenance of public works (e.g., cement, concrete, asphalt, gravel), goods, tools or other commodities used in the general conduct of the city's business that do not constitute equipment. 
(Ord. 2727 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 3.26 - UNIFORM PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION COST ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES* 
* Editor's Note: The provisions of Chapter 3.26 originally adopted in 2004 pursuant to El Monte City Council Ordinance No. 2614 has been amended in part and re-codified under Section 3.24.080 (Public projects—UPCCAA procedures) of Chapter 3.24 (Purchasing System) of the El Monte Municipal Code. The City Council maintains its intent to preserve its original 2004 adoption of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act procedures set forth under the California Public Contract Code, Section 22000 et seq., notwithstanding the re-codification under Chapter 3.24.  
Chapter 3.28 - FUND ACCOUNTS 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Fund accounts. 
The City Administrator is empowered, subject to the approval of the City Council, to establish fund accounts for all departmental funds of the city. 
(Added during 1999 recodification)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Advertising vehicle" means the business of operating, using or parking upon the street any wheeled vehicle equipped with music or a musical device, loud speaker, bells, chimes, sound amplifier of any kind, flood lights, kleig lights, search lights, or other device for attracting attention, regardless of whose goods, business or profession is thus advertised, or who operates or parks upon the street any wheeled vehicles solely for advertising purposes, and to which wheeled vehicles there are attached signs, placards, billboards, or other advertising matter. 
"Builder" means any person constructing, reconstructing, erecting or repairing a building, dwelling or structure not intended for his or her own occupancy. 
"Bulk vending machine" means a nonelectrically operated vending machine, containing unsorted confections, nuts or merchandise which upon insertion of a coin, dispenses the same in equal portions, at random and without selection by the customer. 
"Business" means all professions, trades, occupations, and callings carried on for profit or livelihood, including every kind of commercial enterprise. 
"Business by vehicle" means the business of running, driving or operating any automobile, automobile truck, automobile tank wagon, or any vehicle used for transportation, selling, collection or delivery of goods or other personal property of any kind from a vehicle, either as his, her or its principal business, or in connection with any other business, or of soliciting for work, labor, or services to be performed upon the public street, in or from a vehicle, or to be performed on goods or other personal property to be taken for such purpose to a plant or establishment inside or outside the city limits of the city. 
The term shall be deemed to apply to the delivery of goods purchased by retail merchants in the city at wholesale prices and delivered to said merchants in said city for resale by them for use or consumption by the public, but shall not apply to persons operating such vehicles together with and in conjunction with a fixed place of business within the city, for which such business a license fee is paid under other provisions of this chapter, nor shall the term apply to the pick-up from or delivery to assembly or manufacturing plants located within the City and licensed to do business under the provisions of this chapter, of goods, wares or material used in the assembly or manufacture of articles for sale to or consumption by the public or public agencies. 
The provisions of this chapter are not to be construed as imposing a tax upon vehicles, but as a method of classification of businesses and distinguishing between those maintaining a fixed place of business in the conduct of which vehicles are used, and those maintaining a business in the conduct of which vehicles are used but who do not have a fixed place of business in the city. 
"Conduct," "manage," and "carry on" means the conducting, managing, and carrying on of a business either as owner, officer, agent, manager, employee, servant or lessee. 
"Contractor" means any person, except an owner who contracts for a project with a licensed contractor or contractors or a licensed architect or a registered civil engineer acting solely in his or her professional capacity, who in any capacity other than as the employee of another with wages as the sole compensation, undertakes to or offers to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does him or herself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereon, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith. A contractor in the meaning of this chapter includes subcontractors or specialty contractors, and builders as hereinabove defined, but does not include any one who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating work of the contractor. 
"Cost of operation" means an amount which is equivalent to the volume of business performed in the city during the licensing period, where the business of any local office, facility, agent, broker, or employee situated within the city, is that of performing administrative or management-related services, or manufacturing services in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere. The cost of operation of a particular business shall be computed by determining the total cost of maintaining and operating said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee. The total cost of maintaining its local office, facility, agent, broker or employee shall include, but is not limited to the wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, rent, and/or depreciation, telephone, postage, utilities, janitorial and other expenses allocated for the maintenance of said office, facility, agent, broker or employee. 
"Curing" means any process whereby a skin, hide, or any decaying substance is processed for the preservation thereof. 
"Day" means any period of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours commencing at midnight, or any part of such a period. 
"Devices and contraptions" means the business of exhibiting, showing or letting the use of any microscope, phonograph or any kinetoseope, giograph, projectoscope or other instrument or machine of like character, lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic battery, weighing machine, ball, knife or ring throwing, and all devices or contraptions of a similar nature. Each such device or contraption shall be considered and licensed as a separate business. 
"Embalming" means any method of treating a skin, hide or other substance with special preparation in order to prevent decay. 
"Fire, wreck, bankrupt, or damaged goods sale" means the sale of goods salvaged from a fire, wreck, or other calamity, or a sale of goods of a bankrupt or purchased from a receiver in bankruptcy, or a sale of goods advertised as either a fire, wreck, bankrupt, or damaged goods sale, but shall not include the sale of goods salvaged from any fire, wreck, or other calamity occurring in the city, nor for the sale of goods by any person, sold or advertised as bankrupt stock, where such goods were, immediately prior to the insolvency of such person, offered for sale from a regularly established place of business in the city. 
"Fortunetelling" means and includes the business, practice or avocation of palmistry, phrenology, line-reading, fortunetelling, card reading, psychology, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clair audiences, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy, when a fee, collection, gratuity, or remuneration is charged, solicited or received. 
"Gross receipts" means the gross receipts for the calendar year, or portion thereof, and is defined as follows: 
The total amount of the sale prices of all sales; the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods or not, for which charge is made or credit allowed, including all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind and nature, any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the material used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever; provided that cash discounts allowed or taken on sales shall not be included, and in this chapter shall not be construed to impose a tax upon any business or transaction which the city is not authorized to license or tax under any law of the state or of the United States. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, and such part of the sales price of any property previously sold returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so accepted for resale, shall be deducted for the purpose of determining gross receipts herein. 
"Incidental advertising by vehicle" means the advertising by means of signs, banners or posters painted on or affixed to a vehicle which is used principally for some purpose other than advertising, and which signs, banners or posters advertise the goods, business or profession of any person other than the owner or lessee of such vehicle. 
"Itinerant vendor" means any person who engages in a temporary or transient business in the city, selling goods or any other thing of value with the intention of conducting such business in the city for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies any room, doorway, vacant lot, building or other place for the exhibiting or sale of goods, or other thing of value. If the place in which a business is conducted is rented or leased for a period of ninety (90) days or less, such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the business carried on therein is a transient business. 
"License collector" means the Finance Director who is made ex-officio the License Collector. 
"License tax" is synonymous with license fee and business tax. Any reference to a business license in this code shall mean a city business tax receipt and any reference to a license tax or license fee shall mean a business tax. Use of the word "license" shall not mean nor give any right to any person to occupy a premises for the purpose of conducting business therein. 
"Medicine show" means the business of dealing in medicines other than as conducted by a regularly established drug store, or peddling the same, or treating diseases of the human body, or calling attention to wares or method of treatment or advertising the same by use of music, entertainment, speech or other device. 
"Motor bus" means any motor-propelled vehicle operated over any of the streets of the city for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire and which within the city regularly receives and discharges passengers along the route traversed by any such vehicle and which is operated or run over a particular route or to a particular point or between particular points, whether one or both points be within the city or whether the streets of the city are used en route from one point to another, both of which points are within the city, other than a motor bus used for the transportation of teachers or children to or from the public schools and where other passengers are nor carried for hire. 
"Noncommercial car wash" means and includes any car wash or automobile laundry conducted by any person, group of persons, or organization where such car wash activity is not a regular part or function of an established business licensed as a commercial car wash whereat a fee is charged for such car wash service regardless of whether such car wash is for charitable, promotional or fund-raising purposes. 
"Peddling" means the act of going from house to house, place to place, or in or along the street, within the city, selling and making immediate delivery or offering for sale and immediate delivery, any goods or anything of value in possession of the peddler, or services of the peddler, to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or retailers in such commodities. Peddling shall not include business by vehicle as herein described. 
"Preserving" means any art or process whereby any skin, hide or any substance is treated for the purpose of keeping the same from injury by decay. 
"Private dance" means any dance which is not advertised publicly, and to which the general public is not invited, and to which no admission is charged, and at which no offering is accepted or any collection taken, and where nothing of value is requested or required for admission other than membership so the group for and by whom the dance is given, and admission to which is limited to members and guests of members of the group for and by whom the dance is given. 
"Proprietary advertising by vehicle" means the advertising by means of signs, banners or posters painted on or affixed to any vehicle and advertising the goods, business, or profession of the owner or lessee of such vehicle. 
"Public dance" means any dance other than a private dance. 
"Soliciting" means the act of going from house to house, place to place, or in or along the streets within the city, selling or taking orders for goods or other things of value for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, but "soliciting" shall not include the soliciting by bona fide representatives of manufacturers, jobbers, brokers or wholesale establishments wherever located, of orders from established places of business located in the city and licensed under any of the provisions of this chapter. 
"Spiritual specialty shop" means any establishment whose primary business is the sale of, or providing instruction on the use of natural herbs, dry goods, health products, charms, non-pharmaceutical medicinal type products, and religious or spiritual items. Spiritual specialty shop includes, but is not limited to, botanicas, herbal medicine stores with sales of spiritual items, and similar uses. 
"Tanning" means any art or process by which a skin or hide is tanned. 
"Taxicab" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the city, for compensation and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, at rates for distance traveled or for waiting time or for both. 
(Ord. 2671 § 1, 2006; prior code §§ 6100—6100.30)  
5.04.020 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of raising and providing revenue for the city for municipal purposes and for the purpose of regulating the businesses, callings, professions, exhibitions and occupations specified herein, except such of them as are exclusively regulated by the state or other governmental agency, and all license fees fixed by this chapter shall be deemed to have been fixed for each of such purposes. 
(Prior code § 6101)  
5.04.030 - Not substitute for other charges. 
Any person required to pay a license for transacting and carrying on any business under Chapter 5.08 of this title shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other chapters of this code which are not in direct conflict with this chapter. No license imposed by Chapter 5.08 of this title shall be in lieu of inspection, application or investigation fees required by any other chapter. 
(Prior code § 6102)  
5.04.040 - License required. 
There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter, license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. No person shall engage in business or transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city, without first having procured a license from the city and fully complying with any and all other provisions of the code relating to such business. 
A.  Employees Excluded. No person who is an employee or who is the direct representative of a licensee shall be required to pay a license for doing of any part of the work of such licensee. 
B.  Each Business. Every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental or commission basis or as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed under any provision of this chapter, shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to the appropriate provisions hereof, and shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Branch Establishments. A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments, and provided further that any person carrying on a business at one location containing several departments, all of which are presided over and carried on exclusively by such person as proprietor or by members of his or her immediate family (parents, spouse or children), shall be required to pay only one license fee which shall be the full license fee of whichever business calls for the highest license fee, and provided further that but one license shall be required for the business of sales conducted exclusively by means of bulk vending machines, regardless of the number of locations. 
D.  Separate Violations. The conduct, management or carrying on of business in the city without first having procured a license from the city so to do, or without complying with any or all of the provisions of this chapter pertaining to such business, shall be deemed a separate violation hereof for each and every day that such business is carried on. 
(Prior code §§ 6103—6107)  
5.04.050 - Illegal business prohibited. 
The issuance of a license under this chapter shall not entitle the licensee to engage in any business which for any reason is in violation of any law or other Section of this code. 
(Prior code § 6108)  
5.04.060 - Denial of license. 
Subject to appeal pursuant to Section 5.04.210, the License Officer may refuse to issue a license under this chapter if he or she has evidence that applicant has in the conduct of the same or any similar business been guilty of fraud, misrepresentation or conduct detrimental to the public welfare. If upon appeal the Council directs the issuance of a license, it may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public welfare. 
(Prior code § 6108.1)  
5.04.070 - License not assignable. 
No license hereunder shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall such license be construed as authorizing any person other than the licensee to engage in the licensed business. 
(Prior code § 6109)  
5.04.080 - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to municipal corporations of such taxes as are herein prescribed. 
A.  Utilities. Any public utility operating under a franchise from the city and paying a franchise tax thereunder is subject to the provisions of this chapter to the extent of any retail business in which any such utility may engage in the city, but not otherwise. 
B.  Claims Of. Every person claiming to be entitled to exemption from payment of any license fee provided for in this chapter or Chapter 5.08 of this title upon the grounds that the imposition of such fee casts an unlawful burden upon his or her right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the several states or conflicts with the regulation of interstate commerce by the United States, shall file a verified statement with the officer or employee of the city having charge of the collection of licenses, disclosing the interstate or other character of his or her business entitling him or her to such exemption. Such statement shall state the name and location of the person for which the orders are to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or state manager (if any) and his or her address, the kind of goods, wares, merchandise, or services to be delivered or performed, the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded or the services performed, the method of solicitation or taking of orders, the location of any warehouse, factory, or plant within the state, the method of delivery, the name and location of the residence of the applicant, and any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption. A copy of the order blank, contract form, or other papers used by such person in taking orders shall be attached to the affidavit. If it appears that the applicant is entitled to such exemption, such applicant shall forthwith be issued a free license. 
C.  Charity. The provisions of this chapter or Chapter 5.08 of this title shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage, or carry on any business, or require the payment of any license fee from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person. No license tax payment shall be required for the conducting of any historical, literary or religious entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific or moral subjects whenever the receipts from the same are to be appropriated for the purposes and objects for which such association or organization was formed, and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person. Nothing in this Section contained shall be deemed to exempt any such institution or organization from complying with the provision of this code requiring such institution or organization to obtain a permit from the Council or proper officer to conduct, manage or carry on any business, when a permit is otherwise required, nor to exempt such institution or organization from obtaining a free license as herein required. 
D.  Veterans. Honorably discharged, disabled war veterans of the United States shall be entitled to receive free licenses for peddling or soliciting any goods except junk, provided that said persons first exhibit to the License Collector evidence of such character as shall satisfy the License Collector that the veteran applying therefor has received an honorable discharge from the United States service and of service connected disability. Applicants for free licenses under this Section shall be required to comply with all other provisions of this chapter pertaining to peddling or soliciting. 
E.  Blind. Upon application to the City Council by or on behalf of a blind person, the City Council may, by the vote of a majority of its members entered upon the Council minutes, exempt a blind person employing not more than one person from the payment of any license fee otherwise due or payable under this chapter, and order the License Collector to issue a free license to such blind person upon such terms and conditions as the Council may in each case prescribe. Applicants for free licenses under this Section shall be required to comply with all other provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Affidavit. Any person claiming an exemption shall file a verified statement or sworn affidavit with the License Collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. 
G.  Exempt License. The License Collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement or sworn affidavit, issue a license to such person claiming exemption without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter. In all cases of doubt as to any applicant being entitled to an exemption from any license tax, or from the application of any of the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 5.08 of this title, the License Collector shall disallow the claim to exemption, and the burden of establishing the right of such exemption shall be upon the applicant. 
H.  Appeal. In the event the License Collector disallows a claim to an exemption, the applicant therefore shall be entitled to a hearing before the Council upon written request therefore filed with the City Clerk, and the Council shall consider the request for exemption as the first regular meeting or adjourned regular meeting of the Council following the filing of such written request for hearing. The Council may consider such request as any special meeting. At such hearing the Council shall hear all available relevant testimony concerning the claim to exemption, and may continue such hearing from time to time for the purpose of obtaining new or additional testimony. Upon the conclusion of such hearing the Council shall allow or disallow the claim to exemptions, and the decision of the Council shall be final. If the Council allows the claim to exemption, the License Collector shall forthwith issue to applicant the license applied for upon compliance by applicant with all other provisions of this Code, relating to the business for which a license was applied for. If the Council disallows the claim to exemption, the License Collector shall issue no business license to such applicant until such applicant shall have paid the required license fees and complied with all other provisions of this Code relating to the business for which application was made. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 6110—6114.1, 6117—6119)  
5.04.090 - Application—Issuance of license and administrative processing charge. 
Every person required to have or obtain a license hereunder shall, not more than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such license, apply to the License Collector for such license and pay or tender to the License Collector the amount of the tax therefore. Upon receipt of such application together with the amount of the tax and the administrative processing charge, the License Collector shall prepare and issue to every such person a license, except in those cases where other provision is made, in such form as the License Collector shall provide, which license shall state the amount of the license tax and charges paid therefore, the duration of the license, the name of the person to whom issued, the nature of the business licensed and the location or place where such business is to be conducted. In addition to the amount of the tax as payable to the city, each person required to obtain a license hereunder, except such persons or organizations engaged in a charitable or nonprofit activity, shall also pay to the License Collector as a separate administrative processing charge the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) upon the submission of an application for the issuance of a license. 
(Prior code § 6120)  
5.04.100 - New business. 
A.  Upon a person making application for a newly established business and in all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, such person shall furnish to the License Collector, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the License Collector and executed by the applicant under penalty of perjury setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. 
B.  Gross Receipts Basis. If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant for a newly established business is based upon the gross receipts of such business, he or she shall estimate the gross receipts for the initial period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if acceptable to the License Collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, provided, however, the amount of the license tax to determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the License Collector with a statement, upon a form furnished by the License Collector, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses. 
C.  Renewal Application. The applicant for the renewal of a license based upon gross receipts shall, within thirty (30) days after the close of the preceding license period, submit to the License Collector a written statement upon a form to be provided by the License Collector and executed by applicant under penalty of perjury, setting forth such information concerning applicant's business during the preceding year as may be required by said License Collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Renewal License Fee. The renewal license fee based upon gross receipts shall be the amount due calculated upon the gross receipts of such business during the preceding year. 
E.  Licensee in Default. The License Collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished to him or her the written statement and paid the license tax as required by the preceding Section. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 6121—6122)  
5.04.110 - Effect of mistake. 
In no event shall any mistake made by the License Collector in stating the amount of the license fee or in receiving the license fee prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of the amount actually due, together with all costs of collection, from any person for carrying on any business without a license or for refusing to pay the license fees specified in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6123)  
5.04.120 - Vehicle plates. 
The License Collector shall issue numbered plates to each licensee who is issued a license for engaging in business by vehicle as defined in this chapter. One plate shall be issued for each vehicle so used, which plate shall be placed conspicuously on the rear of each such vehicle. No person shall place any such plate on a vehicle not used by the licensee in such business, or drive or operate a vehicle upon which a plate is placed in violation of these provisions or drive or operate a vehicle engaged in any such business upon which no plate is placed. 
(Prior code § 6124)  
5.04.130 - Duration. 
Annual licenses shall date from the first day of January of each year or from the effective date thereof if issuance occurs subsequent to the first day of January. Annual licenses shall expire on the last day of December of the year for which they were issued except as otherwise provided herein. The City Council may for good cause issue a license for a business, enterprise, occupation or event regulated by this chapter setting forth the commencement and termination dates thereof; provided, however, that any such license shall expire and be of no further force and effect upon the expiration of the time specified in such license. No person shall acquire any rights whatsoever in law, equity or otherwise by the issuance of any such license other than to engage in or conduct the business, enterprise, occupation or event specified in such license and only in strict accordance with all terms and conditions therein specified including all applicable provisions of law. All license fees shall be due and payable upon issuance of the license. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6125)  
5.04.140 - Cessation report. 
In the event any licensee whose license fee was determined on a gross receipts basis hereunder shall cease to do business during the period for which a license was issued hereunder, he or she shall within thirty (30) days after cessation of business file with the License Collector a closing report stating the amount of gross receipts of the business during the period of operation under the outstanding license. Such closing report shall be accompanied by payment of the difference between the amount of the license tax theretofore paid and the amount of the license tax shown to be due by such closing report. In determining the additional tax due, the tax shall be computed upon the business conducted for the period of time it was so conducted, upon the same basis as if initial application were being made for such business for such period of time. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6128)  
5.04.150 - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the License Collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit paying the License Collector a duplicate license administrative processing charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Prior code § 6130)  
5.04.160 - Change of address. 
Upon application of any licensee under this chapter and the surrender of the license thus issued, and upon securing a new permit when a permit is required by any Section of this code, a new license for a new location of a previously licensed business or change of address, shall be issued by the License Collector upon the same terms and conditions and for the unexpired term of the license thus surrendered upon payment of an administrative processing charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Prior code § 6130.1)  
5.04.170 - False statements prohibited. 
No person shall wilfully make any false representation or statements to the License Collector or his or her authorized Deputy with reference to any of the amounts or numbers required to be stated or furnished under this chapter. The number, or amount, or designation of the classification of business as set forth in any license issued hereunder and accepted by the licensee, shall be prima facie evidence of the statements and representations made to such License Collector, or his authorized Deputy, with reference to the above matters, or any of them, by the applicant, at the time of the issuance of any such license. 
(Prior code § 6131)  
5.04.180 - Statements not conclusive on city. 
No such statement shall be conclusive upon the city, or upon any officer thereof, as to the matters therein stated, set forth, or otherwise, and the same shall not prejudice the right of the said city to recover any amount that may be ascertained to be due from such person in addition to the amount as stated or shown by such written statement to be due in case such statement be found to be incorrect. 
(Prior code § 6132)  
5.04.190 - Audit. 
The correctness of all such statements shall be subject to audit and verification by the License Collector, or his or her properly authorized Deputy, who are authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons licensed or applying for a license to commence or conduct or conducting any business in this chapter specified or referred to, or required to be licensed hereunder. 
(Prior code § 6133)  
5.04.200 - Statements confidential. 
All statements made pursuant to the provisions of this Section shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection, or to disclosure except in a proper proceeding before the Council or a competent court or tribunal. 
(Prior code § 6134)  
5.04.210 - Appeals to Council. 
In the event any applicant for a license under this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title, or any licensee hereunder, and the License Collector, or his or her authorized Deputy charged with the issuance of the license herein provided for, are unable to agree with reference to the classification of any business hereunder or the amount of the license fee to be paid therefor, then and in that event any such applicant or licensee or said License Collector may appeal to the Council to hear and determine said matter or matters, by addressing a written communication to the Council briefly stating the question or questions involved. Said communication shall be presented to the Council at the next regular or adjourned regular meeting of the Council after the filing of the same with the City Clerk, at which said meeting the Council shall hear such evidence with reference to the subject or subjects thereof as may be offered and may continue said hearing from time to time. The Council may hear and determine such an appeal at any special meeting. The findings and decisions of the Council after hearing and considering such evidence and referring to this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title shall be binding, final and conclusive as to the classification of the business and the amount of license fee involved hereunder. Pending the hearing on any such appeal filed by an applicant for a license hereunder, no license shall be issued for the business involved in such controversy unless the classification assigned thereto by the License Collector is accepted in the meantime and the license fee therefor paid as herein provided. Such acceptance and payment shall be deemed made under protest and subject to decision of the Council, and such adjustment, if any, as the Council may order. Appeals by a licensee hereunder must be filed with the Clerk in writing as herein contemplated within ten (10) days after the issuance of the license constituting the basis of appeal, and if not so filed within said period of ten (10) days, the same shall be deemed waived, and thereafter shall not be considered by the Council. 
(Prior code § 6135)  
5.04.220 - Delinquencies—Determination. 
For the purposes of determining penalties accruing hereunder the various licenses provided for herein shall be delinquent as follows: 
A.  Any daily license fee shall be delinquent unless the amount thereof, as prescribed herein, is paid on or before the day upon which such fee becomes payable. 
B.  All license fees except daily and annual license fees shall be delinquent unless the amount thereof, as prescribed herein, is paid within five days after the same become due and payable. 
C.  Any annual license fee shall be delinquent unless the amount thereof, as prescribed herein, is paid at or before four-thirty p.m. on the thirtieth day after the same becomes due and payable. 
(Prior code § 6137)  
5.04.230 - Computing time. 
In computing the time within which licenses, other than daily licenses, become delinquent hereunder, the first day upon which any such license becomes payable hereunder shall be included. 
(Prior code § 6138)  
5.04.240 - Penalty not exemption. 
Nothing contained in the preceding Sections of this chapter shall be construed as relieving or exempting any person from arrest or punishment for failure to procure for any business the license required hereunder, at or before the time of commencing to conduct the same. 
(Prior code § 6139)  
5.04.250 - Penalty amount. 
A.  For failure to pay a license tax when due, the license collector shall add as a penalty a percentage of the original license tax on the first day of each month after the due date; the penalty schedule to be as follows: 
1.  A minimum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten (10) percent of the amount of the license tax for the first month (or portion thereof) of such delinquency, whichever amount is greater; 
2.  A minimum of twenty dollars ($20.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the license tax for the second month (or portion thereof) of such delinquency, whichever amount is greater; 
3.  A minimum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifty (50) percent of the amount of the license tax for the third month (or portion thereof) of such delinquency, whichever amount is greater; 
4.  A minimum of thirty dollars ($30.00) or seventy-five (75) percent of the amount of the license tax for the fourth month (or portion thereof) of such delinquency, whichever amount is greater; 
5.  A minimum of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) or one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the license tax for the fifth month (or portion thereof) of such delinquency, whichever amount is greater; 
6.  A charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be payable in a case where no license tax is payable pursuant to an exemption as authorized in this chapter but where a license application and declaration of exemption nonetheless must be filed with the License Collector. 
B.  In the event that a delinquent penalty may be payable, the License Collector shall not issue a license until such time as the applicable tax, together with the amount of the delinquent penalty are paid. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6140)  
5.04.253 - Amnesty. 
In order to promote the licensing of all businesses within the city, the City Council may, by resolution, establish amnesty periods during which persons or entities conducting business within the city may apply for a current business license, and be absolved from the obligation of paying any penalties which have been assessed as a result of unpaid business license taxes. 
(Ord. 2505 § 1, 1999: prior code § 6140.1)  
5.04.257 - Appeal. 
In the event that any person or entity doing business in the city disagrees with a determination of any employee of the city regarding the application of any provision of this chapter, that person or entity may, within ten (10) days of that determination file a written appeal to the City Manager which must state the grounds upon which the appeal is made. The City Manager may grant the appeal if he or she makes a finding based upon one or more of the following grounds: 
A.  The tax has been computed incorrectly; 
B.  The business against which the tax is being imposed is not the business responsible for the payment of the tax; 
C.  The tax is being imposed for the wrong period; or 
D.  The tax has not been paid due to excusable neglect resulting from circumstances beyond the control of the business against which collection of the tax is being imposed. 
The City Manager shall notify the person filing the appeal of his or her decision within twenty (20) days of receipt of the appeal. At his or her sole discretion, the City Manager may take testimony from the appellant. The decision of the City Manager shall be final on the date that it is signed and mailed. 
(Ord. 2505 § 2, 1999: prior code § 6140.2)  
5.04.260 - Extensions. 
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the License Collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period nor exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case so waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, and shall have the further power, with the consent of the Council, to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due. 
(Prior code § 6141)  
5.04.270 - Cancellation. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy or power in this chapter as declared or reserved by the City Council it is further provided that any business license issued under this chapter may be cancelled by the Permit Committee after fifteen (15) days written notice to the holder of said license transmitted by U.S. first-class mail to the most current business address of such business in the possession of the License Department that such business license is proposed to be cancelled and revoked. Any business license may be cancelled by the Permit Committee for good cause including without limitation failure on the part of the licensee to pay the business license tax without substantial justification and despite diligent efforts to collect such amounts. 
B.  A hearing shall be held by the Permit Committee pursuant to said notice at which hearing the holder of the business license shall have a right so offer evidence. The decision of the Permit Committee shall be in writing and contain a statement of facts and findings and shall be final within fifteen (15) days unless within such time period appealed in writing to the City Council. An appeal from the decision of the Permit Committee shall be submitted on a form as approved by the Permit Committee and such appeal shall be accompanied by a charge or fee in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the preparation of a transcript of the proceedings by the Permit Committee but in no case shall such fee exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Upon submission of an appeal to the City Clerk the business license shall be stayed until twenty (20) days following the data on which City Council concludes a hearing on the appeal. 
C.  Any said license may be canceled when it satisfactorily appears to the Council that disorderly or immoral conduct is or has been permitted on said premises, or whenever the preservation of public morality, health, peace, or good order shall, in its judgment, render such cancellation necessary. 
(Prior code §§ 6142, 6143)  
5.04.280 - Special permits after cancellation. 
The person whose license has been cancelled shall not thereafter be entitled to receive any business license of any character from the city except upon a special permit from the Council. 
(Prior code § 6144)  
5.04.290 - Notice of cancellation. 
The notice provided for cancellation shall contain in substance the nature of the charge against the holder of the license, and a statement of the place and date of the hearing, and may be served personally or left at or mailed to the place of business of the said holder as shown on the last application filed with the License Collector by such licensee. 
(Prior code § 6145)  
5.04.300 - Forfeiture upon cancellation. 
In the event of the cancellation for cause of any business license issued by the city, any licensee fee or permit fee theretofore paid by the licensee for such license or permit shall be forfeited to the city and said licensee shall be entitled to no refund for any unexpired term of said license. 
(Prior code § 6146)  
5.04.310 - License fees to be as designated. 
The respective amounts or rates of license fees to be paid to said city by persons commencing or conducting any business subject to a license under this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title shall be as in this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title designated, and such respective amounts or rates of license fees are respectively designated, fixed and established for the respective businesses to which the same respectively relate. Such respective amounts or rates of license fees for such respective businesses are hereinafter set forth, designated, fixed and established in Chapter 5.08 of this title. 
(Prior code § 6147)  
5.04.320 - Appointment of fees. 
Except as hereinafter provided, all moneys collected by the License Collector under this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title shall be promptly deposited to the general fund. 
(Prior code § 6148)  
5.04.330 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the License Collector, and he or she is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title and the Chief of Police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the License Collector or the Council. The License Collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her hereunder, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title have been complied with. 
B.  Authority. The License Collector and/or any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein, and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person having such license certificate theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title. It shall be the duty of the License Collector and each of his or her assistants to cause a complaint so be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of said provisions. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 6149, 6150)  
5.04.340 - Posting and keeping licenses. 
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(Prior code § 6151)  
5.04.350 - License a debt. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of this title shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from said city so to do shall be liable to an action in the name of said City in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of license tax and penalties imposed on such business. 
(Prior code § 6152)  
5.04.360 - Criminal and civil action for failure to pay tax. 
The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution from the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6153)  
5.04.370 - Nuisances and unlawful businesses not authorized. 
The granting of a license hereunder shall not be deemed in any sense whatsoever a permit or license to conduct the business referred to herein, in an unlawful manner, or in any manner so as to constitute the same a nuisance. 
(Prior code § 6154)  
Chapter 5.08 - BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
5.08.010 - License taxes. 
The rates of license taxes payable to the city and certain terms and conditions of licenses as issued pursuant to this chapter are fixed in accordance with the schedules which appear in this chapter as may be adjusted from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council adopted in accordance with Section 5.08.020. The terms "fee" or "fees" which may appear in various Sections of this chapter refer to license taxes, unless the context or the use of the term "fee" may indicate otherwise. 
(Prior code § 6200)  
5.08.020 - CPI adjustment. 
The tax(es) imposed by this chapter may be increased or decreased annually as of July 1st of each calendar year, commencing on July 1, 1993, upon adoption of a resolution of the City Council which specifies such increase or decrease in an amount which shall not exceed the increase or decrease of change in the Consumer Price Index from the base index as determined by reference to the most current edition of the Consumer Price Index, as prepared and released by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics, for the Los Angeles-Long Beach area. The Consumer Price Index published for the month of April, 1992, shall be deemed to be the base index for the purpose of this Section. A resolution of the City Council which makes such an adjustment shall be adopted not less than sixty (60) days prior so the date on which the increase or decrease in the taxes shall be effective. 
(Prior code § 6200.1)  
5.08.030 - Gross receipts. 
Every person, whether or not having an established place of business within the city, operating or conducting any business within the city and not otherwise specifically licensed by this chapter, and specifically including the business of astrology and the business of operating or supplying any coin-operated device, contraption or vending machine of any kind, shall pay an annual license tax, based upon the gross receipts of such business according to the following schedules: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $100,000 	$50.00 plus $0.50 per $1,000 
$100,000 to $1,000,000 	$100.00 plus $0.55 per $1,000 over $100,000 
$1,000,000 and above 	$595.00 plus $0.15 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
;adv=6;(Prior code § 6201)  
5.08.040 - City business. 
A.  The license tax specified in Section 5.08.030 shall be based only on business conducted within the city or resulting from business activities conducted within the city. 
B.  All gross receipts of a business conducted in whole or in part within the city shall be presumed to have resulted from business activities conducted within the city, unless the licensee submits appropriate written information in sufficient detail to establish the basis for exclusion of any receipts from the city license tax. The written information thus submitted by the licensee shall not be conclusive upon the city. The License Collector shall, from information submitted by the licensee and from other information in his/her possession, determine the portion of cost of operation of a business, if any, which may not be subject to the license taxes specified by Section 5.08.030 in accordance with formulae and criteria adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  For businesses which do not generate gross receipts from activity within the city, the license tax as specified in Section 5.08.030 shall be payable to the city based upon the cost of operation of such business as conducted in the city. All costs of operation of a business which do not generate gross receipts in the city shall be presumed to have resulted from business activities conducted within the city, unless the licensee submits appropriate written information in sufficient detail to establish the basis for exclusion of any cost of operation from the city license tax. The written information thus submitted by the licensee shall not be conclusive upon the city. The License Collector shall, from information submitted by the licensee and from other information in his/her possession, determine the portion of cost of operation of a business, if any, which may not be subject to the license taxes specified by Section 5.08.030 in accordance with formulae and criteria adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 6201.2)  
5.08.050 - Excluded businesses. 
No license shall be required and no license tax required of farmers, poultrymen or horticulturists for the privilege of selling exclusively their own produce grown or raised by themselves and sold only upon the premises where such products were grown or raised; but if such person sell goods purchased for resale in addition to selling products grown or raised by them, then such persons shall be required to obtain a license as herein provided, and all sales including sales of home grown or home raised products shall be included in the gross receipts upon which such license tax is computed. 
(Prior code § 6202)  
Article II. - Fees and Taxes Payable 
 
5.08.060 - Amusement machines, game machines and music boxes. 
A.  Tax Assessed. Every person engaged in the business of operating an amusement machine, game machine or music machine, shall pay an annual license tax of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per machine. This amount shall be in addition to any other applicable tax as otherwise provided for under this chapter. 
B.  Amusement Machine Inspection. Every coin-operated device or contraption of any kind, including amusement machines, music boxes, vending machines and newsracks, shall have securely affixed thereto in a conspicuous location a statement of the name, address and telephone number of the person maintaining, operating or supplying same. 
C.  Owner—Operator Credit. The gross receipts emanating from the use of any coin-operated device or contraption of any kind including amusement machines, music boxes or vending machines, which is owned or maintained by a person conducting a business licensed under Section 5.08.030 and which is used in conjunction with such business thus licensed, shall be included within the gross receipts of such business thus licensed under Section 5.08.030. 
D.  Sealing of Coin Slots. The License Collector is authorized to place a seal across the coin slot or opening of any amusement machine, music box or other device for which the license fee required by this chapter has not been paid, or which does not have affixed thereto the name, address and telephone number of the person owning, operating, maintaining or supplying the same. No person other than the License Collector shall remove any such seal. No person shall use or play or permit the use or playing of any amusement machine, music box or other device that has been thus sealed by the License Collector prior to the time that the applicable fee has been paid in full and the seal removed therefrom by the License Collector. 
(Prior code §§ 6226—6227.2)  
5.08.070 - Auctioneers. 
Every person engaged in the business of an auctioneer for the sale of a public auction of any real or personal property shall pay a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day payable daily in advance. 
(Prior code § 6237)  
5.08.080 - Automobile wrecking and junk dealers. 
Every person engaged in the business of dealing in automobile junk, operating an automobile junk yard or automobile wrecking establishment, as any of the terms are defined in Chapters 5.20 and 5.52 of this title shall pay an annual license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus an amount based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $100,000 	$0.50 per $1,000 
$100,000 to $1,000,000 	$0.55 per $1,000 over $100,000 
$1,000,000 and above 	$0.15 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
(Prior code § 6236)  
5.08.090 - Billboards. 
Every person operating or maintaining any billboards in the city, shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot per year for all such billboards in use during the license period or any part thereof. 
(Ord. 2522 § 2, 2000: prior code § 6208)  
5.08.100 - Cabaret dance with live entertainment. 
Every person conducting a cabaret dance with live entertainment shall pay an annual license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior code § 6230.1)  
5.08.110 - Cabaret dance without live entertainment. 
Every person conducting a cabaret dance without live entertainment shall pay an annual license tax of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Prior code § 6230.2)  
5.08.120 - Christmas tree lots. 
Every person operating a Christmas tree lot in the city, shall pay a license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per location, this amount shall be in addition to any license tax paid pursuant to Section 5.08.210. 
(Prior code § 6214.8)  
5.08.130 - Circuses, carnivals and sideshows. 
Every person operating a circus, a carnival or a sideshow, shall pay a license tax based on the number of attractions offered at a particular site as identified in the business license application as set forth below: 
Number of Attractions 	License Tax Per Day 
1—9 	$350.00 
10—16 	500.00 
17—plus 	750.00 
 
For the purpose of this Section, an attraction is defined as an exhibit, event or attraction for which anything of value is paid in exchange for the privilege of viewing, attending or participating therein. 
(Prior code § 6231)  
5.08.140 - Closing out sales. 
Every person who conducts a closing out sale as defined by Section 5.28.010, shall pay a license tax for such closing out sale as follows: 
30-day sale 	$150.00 
60-day sale 	300.00 
90-day sale 	450.00 
 
Every person conducting such a sale shall upon application make a final determination as to the number of days such sale shall be conducted. No extension shall be granted. No license shall be issued under this Section and no closing out sale shall be conducted for a period in excess of ninety (90) days. 
(Prior code § 6233.1)  
5.08.150 - Contractors. 
A.  Every person, owner-builder, contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor, special subcontractor or supplier rendering services or supplying materials or labor in connection with the construction, alteration, moving, relocation or demolition of a building or structure or other work on private property or within dedicated street areas for which a permit is required by Chapters 12.04 through 12.20, 13.04, 13.08, 18.04, 18.08 or Title 15, a sum equal to one-half of the permit fee or fees (exclusive of plan check fees) required thereby; provided, however, that where a permit is obtained pursuant to Title 15 of this code and the fee prescribed therefor is paid, the payment of a like amount as a business license fee shall constitute payment of the business license fee as to all work and materials upon which the permit fee is calculated pursuant to Title 15 of this code, and the payment of any additional business license fee shall be required only with respect to the work or materials the cost of which is not included in the calculation of the building permit fee. The sums required by this Section shall be due and payable and shall be paid at the same time that the applicable permit fees specified in Chapters 12.04 through 12.20, 13.04, 13.08, 18.04, 18.08 or Title 15 are due and payable, and shall forthwith become delinquent if not paid when due and shall be subject to the same penalties specified in the respective Sections of Chapters 12.04 through 12.20, 13.04, 13.08, 18.04, 18.08 or Title 15. The gross receipts of any person for services rendered or labor or materials furnished for or in connection with any such construction, alteration, moving, relocation or demolition of a building or structure, or other work on private property or within dedicated street areas for which a permit is required by Chapters 12.04 through 12.20, 13.04, 13.08, 18.04, 18.08 or Title 15 and for which the fee prescribed by this Section has been paid, shall be excluded from the gross receipts of such person for the purpose of computing gross receipts under Section 5.08.030. Section 5.08.030 shall not apply to any person whose total gross receipts are subject to the license fee imposed by this Section. 
B.  Exemption. No license shall be required and no license fee shall be required to be paid by individuals who qualify as owner-builders under Title 15 of this code. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 6211, 6211.1)  
5.08.160 - Dealers of new and used automobiles. 
Dealers of new and used automobile shall pay the annual license tax based upon the gross receipts of such automobile dealership business according to the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $1,000,000.00 	$50.00 plus $0.75 per $1,000.00 of gross receipts 
$1,000,000.00 to $6,000,000.00 	$800.00 plus $0.15 per $1,000.00 of gross receipts 
$6,000,000.00 to $10,000,000.00 	$2,500.00 
Over $10,000,000.00 to $100m 	$5,000.00 
Over $100m 	$20,000.00 
 
(Prior code § 6201.1)  
5.08.170 - Exhibitions and entertainment. 
For each person engaged in business in the conduct of exhibitions or entertainment, such as boxing, wrestling, roller skating, games or contest, and the like: ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(Prior code § 6214.5)  
5.08.180 - Fortunetelling. 
Every person engaged in the business of fortunetelling, as defined by Section 5.04.010 of this title, shall pay a license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(Prior code § 6204)  
5.08.185 - Spiritual specialty shops. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating a spiritual specialty shop as defined by Chapter 17.04 of this code shall pay a license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(Ord. 2671 § 2, 2006)  
5.08.190 - Garage sales. 
Neither a business license fee nor a permit fee shall be required for any garage sale lawfully conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.44 of this title. 
(Prior code § 6203.1)  
5.08.200 - Handbills. 
Every person operating the business of distributing advertising handbills, samples, dodgers or printed advertising of any kind shall pay a license tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per person per calendar quarter or portion thereof; provided however, that where such business is conducted in connection with a bona fide newspaper, printed, published and circulated within the city, for which license fee is paid under the provisions of this chapter, no additional fee shall be required to be paid under this Section. 
(Prior code § 6205)  
5.08.210 - Incidental advertising. 
For every person operating any incidental advertising by vehicle shall pay a license tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year or portion thereof, per vehicle. This Section shall not apply to the mere use of a vehicle for proprietary advertising, nor shall it apply to any vehicle licensed under any other Section of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6207)  
5.08.220 - Itinerant vendors. 
Each person engaged in business in the city as an itinerant vendor shall pay a license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day per location, or an aggregate amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per person per location per year, provided such tax is paid in full upon original application. 
(Prior code § 6214.6)  
5.08.230 - Junk dealers. 
Every junk dealer or person engaged in the business of collecting, storing, selling or exchanging junk, other than person licensed under Section 5.08.080, shall pay an annual license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus an amount based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts PerAnnum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $100,000 	$0.50 per $1,000 
$100,000 to $1,000,000 	$0.55 per $1,000 over $100,000 
$1,000,000 and above 	$0.15 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
(Prior code § 6236.1)  
5.08.240 - Kleig lights. 
For every person operating, using or placing upon any property any kleig light, floodlight or search light, whether mounted upon or being a part of a wheeled vehicle or otherwise, the sum of five dollars ($5.00) per year for each such floodlight, kleig light or search light; provided, however, that the parking, placing or keeping of any such floodlight, kleig light or search light upon any street is hereby prohibited between the hours of twelve midnight and five-thirty p.m. next succeeding; and provided further that no such floodlight, kleig light or search light shall be used at any angle exceeding thirty (30) degrees off of perpendicular. 
(Prior code § 6206)  
5.08.250 - Medicine shows. 
Every person operating a medicine show shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 
(Prior code § 6232)  
5.08.260 - Motor buses. 
A.  Any person engaged in the business of operating in the city motor buses shall be required to pay a license fee based upon the gross receipts of such business as provided in Section 5.08.030. 
B.  Determination of Gross Receipts. In determining the gross receipts of such business, however, only that percentage of the gross receipts of such business shall be used as the ration which the miles traveled within the city by such licensee's buses bears to the total number of miles traveled by such licensee's buses on any route lying in whole or in part in the city. 
(Prior code §§ 6234, 6234.1)  
5.08.270 - Noncommercial car wash. 
No business license fee shall be required for any noncommercial car wash lawfully conducted in accordance with the provision of Section 5.96.050 of this title. 
(Prior code § 6203.2)  
5.08.271 - Multiple residential service bond. 
Every person, owner-builder or contractor shall deposit with the city a cash bond or certificate of deposit payable to the city on demand in an amount equal to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per unit for every multiple residential apartment house as defined in this code and every condominium development, planned development, community apartment project or stock cooperative to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of said apartment house, condominium development, planned development, community apartment project or stock cooperative. Every person, owner-builder or contractor shall similarly post a bond of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per unit for every conversion of existing residential units to condominiums, planned developments, community apartments or stock cooperatives. The multiple residential service bond shall be refunded for condominium developments, planned developments, community apartments or stock cooperatives if none of the units in the development are rented or leased by the developer or its successor in interest either through purchase, assignment, or operation of law for a period of eighteen (18) months after the certificate of occupancy is issued by the City Building Department. The multiple residential service bond shall also be refunded if fifty-one (51) percent of the units are conveyed to individual owner-occupants and management of the homeowners association is transferred to those owner-occupants. Notwithstanding the above, no refund of the multiple residential service bond shall be made after eighteen (18) months from issuance by the City Building Department of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 2583 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.08.272 - Bond service fee. 
Any bond or certificate of deposit submitted to the city either pursuant to Section 5.08.271 of this chapter, pursuant to any provision of the El Monte Municipal Code, or in conjunction with the issuance of any permit issued by the Building Department shall be accompanied by a payment to the city of a non-refundable bond service fee in an amount equal to five (5) percent of the face value of the bond or certificate of deposit. 
(Ord. 2583 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.08.280 - On-sale liquor establishments. 
For each person engaged in business in the conduct of an on-sale liquor establishment as defined in Chapter 17.04 of this code shall pay a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per annum in addition to the annual gross receipt tax provided for in Section 5.08.030. 
(Prior code § 6213)  
5.08.290 - Pawnshops. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating a pawnshop in the city shall pay an annual base license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year plus an amount based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $100,000 	$0.50 per $1,000 
$100,000 to $1,000,000 	$0.55 per $1,000 over $100,000 
$1,000,000 and above 	$0.15 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
(Prior code § 6219.1)  
5.08.300 - Peddling. 
A.  Every person engaged in the business of peddling any goods, property or service not otherwise specifically provided for herein, shall pay a license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per calendar quarter per person, or an aggregate amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per person per year, provided such tax is paid in full upon original application. 
1.  Solicitor Exception. Nothing contained in subsection A of this Section shall apply to a regular employed agent or salesman of a merchant or manufacturer whose place of business is located wholly within the city and which merchant or manufacturer is specifically licensed under this chapter to conduct the business with reference to which such agent or salesperson acts. 
B.  Vehicle at Retail. From a wagon or vehicle at retail: one hundred dollars ($100.00) tax per year for each wagon or vehicle so used. 
1.  Exception. SubSection B of this Section shall not apply to any vehicle licensed under Section 5.08.030, nor to any vehicle regularly used by a merchant or manufacturer whose place of business is located wholly within the city and which merchant or manufacturer is specifically licensed under this chapter so conduct the business with reference to which such vehicle is employed or used. 
C.  Vehicle at Wholesale. From a wagon or vehicle as wholesale only, operating within the city and duly licensed under the provisions of this chapter, the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) tax per vehicle per year or portion thereof for each vehicle used; provided however, that no license tax shall be required when the sole business conducted with the city is the pick up from or delivering to assembly or manufacturing plants located within the city and licensed to do business under the provisions of this chapter of goods, wares or material used in the assembly or manufacture of articles for sale to or consumption by the public or public agencies. 
D.  Other Business by Vehicle. All other business by vehicle, not otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter shall pay a license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year or portion thereof per vehicle. 
(Prior code §§ 6215—6215.9)  
5.08.310 - Pool tables. 
Every person owning or maintaining a pool table of any size for use by patrons or members of the public, other than a coin-operated pool table, shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year or portion thereof per table. This amount shall be in addition to any other applicable tax as otherwise provided for under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6228)  
5.08.320 - Professions. 
Any person engaged in a profession who is not specifically exempted from the payment of a local license tax by the Constitution of laws of this state, or otherwise covered by another Section of this chapter shall be deemed to be engaged in the business of a "profession" within the meaning of this Section. The professions include, but are not limited to, physicians, surgeons, attorneys, veterinarians, dentists, chiropractors, chiropodists, osteopaths, auditors, income tax agents, engineers, architects, surveyors, optometrists, oculists, property management companies, and insurance agents. Each such business shall pay an annual license tax which is based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Less than $150,000 	$50.00 plus $2.50 per $1,000 
Over $150,000 to $1,000,000 	$425.00 plus $2.00 per $1,000 over $150,000 
Over $1,000,000 	$2,125.00 plus $1.25 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6238)  
5.08.330 - Public dances. 
Every person conducting a public dance or engaged in the business of conducting public dances, shall pay a license tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per calendar quarter or fraction thereof, for each location where the dance is held, or shall pay an annual license tax of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each location where such dances are conducted. No portion of any such license tax shall be refundable for any reason other than a duplication of payment, upon presentation of proof of payment, nor shall any dance license be transferable. 
(Prior code § 6230)  
5.08.340 - Pumpkin patches. 
Every person operating a pumpkin patch in the city shall pay an annual license tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per location. This amount shall be in addition to any license tax paid pursuant to Section 5.08.120 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6214.7)  
5.08.350 - Real estate and business opportunities brokers. 
Every real estate broker and sales agent and every business opportunities broker and sales agent shall pay an annual license tax based on the gross receipts resulting from fees or commissions earned or accrued in the conduct of such business, based on the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $150,000 	$50.00 plus $2.50 per $1,000 
$150,000 to $1,000,000 	$425.00 plus $200 per $1,000 over $150,000 
$1,000,000 and above 	$2,125.00 plus $1.25 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6238.1)  
5.08.360 - Secondhand business. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating a secondhand business in the city shall pay a base license tax of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year plus an amount based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $100,000 	$0.50 per $1,000 
$100,000 to $1,000,000 	$0.55 per $1,000 over $100,000 
$1,000,000 and above 	$0.15 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
(Prior code § 6220)  
5.08.370 - Solicitors or canvassers. 
A.  Every person engaged in the business of soliciting or canvassing within the city shall pay a license tax in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per person per calendar quarter, or an aggregate amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per person per year, provided such tax is paid in full upon original application. 
B.  Licensed Business. No license fee shall be required of any bona fide employee of any business licensed under any provision of this chapter for soliciting orders for his or her regular employer. 
(Prior code §§ 6216, 6218)  
5.08.380 - Sound truck and other advertising vehicles. 
Every person operating a sound truck or other advertising vehicle in the city, shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day per vehicle. 
(Prior code § 6206.1)  
5.08.390 - Street benches. 
For every person erecting, placing, installing or maintaining any bench, as defined by either definition in Section 12.28.010 of this code upon any public property as defined by Section 12.28.010 of this code, the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) per annum for the first ten (10) benches or less and the further sum of six dollars ($6.00) per annum for each bench in excess of ten (10). 
(Prior code § 6208.1)  
5.08.400 - Tanning, curing and embalming. 
Every person engaged in the business of tanning, curing or embalming shall pay a license tax of sixty dollars ($60.00) per year. 
(Prior code § 6235)  
5.08.410 - Taxicabs. 
A.  Every person engaged in the business of operating taxicabs in the city, as defined in Section 5.04.010 of this title, whether or nor such person has established a place of business in the city, shall pay an annual license tax of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per vehicle per year. 
B.  Exemption. No license shall be required and no license fee shall be required to be paid for the privilege of merely discharging passengers from a taxicab within the city, provided that no passenger be permitted to board such taxi within the city. 
(Prior code §§ 6209, 6210)  
Chapter 5.12 - BUSINESS PERMITS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Permit committee. 
There is established a Permit Committee, the members of which shall consist of the following: 
A.  The City Manager or a representative designated by him or her, who shall ex officio be Chairperson of the Committee; 
B.  The Chief Building Official or a representative designated by him or her; 
C.  The Chief of Police or a representative designated by him or her; 
D.  The Fire Chief of Los Angeles or a representative designated by him or her; 
E.  The Revenue Supervisor or a representative designated by him or her; 
F.  The Services Manager or a representative designated by him or her; 
G.  The Code Enforcement Supervisor or a representative designated by him or her. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2582 § 1, 2003: amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6300)  
5.12.020 - Quorum. 
Any four (4) members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for purposes of acting upon a permit application; provided, however, that each member of the Committee shall, with respect to each application, to be acted upon by the Committee, submit a written report or recommendation concerning the same. 
(Prior code § 6300.1)  
5.12.030 - Meetings. 
The Permit Committee shall meet regularly at the time and place designated by the Committee. The Committee shall likewise meet, at the call of the Chairperson or at the request of any three (3) members of the Committee, at a time and place specified in such call or request. Unless notice is in writing waived by the applicant, the Chairperson shall, at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to a meeting of the Committee at which a permit application is to be considered or acted upon, place in the United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to such applicant at the address shown in the application, notice of the time and place of the meeting of the Permit Committee and of the fact that such applicant's application will then and there be considered or acted upon. An applicant shall be entitled to be present, in person or by counsel, at each meeting of the Committee at which his or her application is considered or acted upon, and to present pertinent testimony or evidence in support of his or her application. Unless a different time be fixed by the Chairperson of the Committee, the Permit Committee shall consider each application the first regularly scheduled meeting held not less than ten (10) days after the filing of an application, and in such case notice shall be deemed to have been waived by applicant and need not be given as hereinbefore required. 
(Prior code § 6300.2)  
5.12.040 - Action. 
A.  If any three (3) or more members of the Permit Committee in writing recommend against or disapprove the granting of a permit, such permit shall be deemed denied. If one or two (2) but less than three (3) members of the Committee in writing recommend against or disapprove the granting of a permit, the Committee shall not have the power to and shall not grant such application, but shall forthwith file the same, together with all reports and recommendations of the Committee members and all other data presented to or accumulated by the Committee, with the City Clerk for decision thereon by the City Council. The City Clerk shall place each application thus filed with the City Clerk for action thereon by the City Council on the Council agenda of the first regularly scheduled evening Council meeting following at least seven (7) days the filing of such application and related material with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall, at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to such meeting of the City Council, place in the United States mail, addressed to the applicant at the address shown in his or her application, notice of the time and place of such City Council meeting and of the fact that such application will then and there be considered by the City Council. Such notice shall be accompanied by a copy of all reports and recommendations of the Permit Committee members, unless the same have already been furnished to the applicant. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this Section, a simple majority of the quorum of the Committee shall be sufficient to take action to either approve or deny a parade or block party permit application submitted pursuant to Chapter 12.07 of this code. Furthermore, noticing requirements and appeals of any Committee action on a parade or block party permit shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 12.07 of this code. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004; prior code § 6300.3)  
5.12.050 - Records. 
The Permit Committee shall keep permanent records of its meetings and its decisions, as well as an accurate summary of all pertinent oral testimony presented thereat and a copy of all written evidence, reports, recommendations and other material accumulated by it. 
(Prior code § 6300.4)  
5.12.060 - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, no person shall engage in the practice of astrology or fortunetelling, or engage in or conduct any circus, carnival, sideshow, boxing or wrestling contest or exhibition, race or contest of endurance or speed between horses or beasts or mechanical devices, skating rink, bowling alley, pool or billiard hall, live entertainment, moving pictures or picture slides where alcoholic beverages are sold, served or permitted to be consumed, amusement or recreation center, or in any similar business, enterprise, occupation or event, or as an itinerant vendor, or the playing, maintaining or operating of any bingo game, or any other business, enterprise, occupation or event regulated by any Section of this chapter, nor shall any license be issued for any of the same, unless a permit therefor shall first have been issued, as provided in this Section; provided, however, that no additional permit shall be required solely for musicians, vocalists and announcers used solely in connection with a dance regulated by Chapter 5.32 of this title and for which a permit required by this chapter has been issued and is in effect. The application for the issuance of a permit authorizing any of the activities, as described in Section 5.12.070 of this chapter, including an adult-oriented business, as described in Section 5.16.020 of this title, shall be submitted to the Permit Committee for its approval or denial within thirty (30) days following the date of receipt of such a completed application on a form as may be prepared by the Chairperson of the Permit Committee. The Permit Committee may continue its consideration regarding the issuance or denial of a permit authorizing any of the activities, as described in Sections 5.12.070 and/or 5.16.020 of this title, to a date which is later than thirty (30) days following the receipt of the application by the License Department subject to the approval of the applicant. A permit for an adult-oriented business establishment shall be subject to the application procedures and shall be issued or renewed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.16 of this title. 
(Prior code § 6300.5)  
5.12.070 - Live entertainment defined. 
The term "live entertainment," as used in Section 5.12.060 of this chapter, means and includes any activity planned, engaged in or permitted to occur for the purpose of or resulting pleasing, entertainment, attracting or retaining patrons or customers, and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, any act, play, burlesque show, revue, pantomime, fashion show, the playing of any musical instrument by any person, and the employment, use or display of nude or seminude persons, whether such person engaging in any such activity be owner, proprietor, employee, receptionist, food or bar service worker, dancer model, customer, patron, amateur or professional performer, and whether hired, retained, displayed, used, permitted to be present, or permitted to participate or engage in any of the activities described in this Section by the owner, permittee, manager or employee of the premises. In a case where the live entertainment shall be provided in an adult-oriented business establishment, as described in Section 5.16.020 of this title, the provisions of Chapter 5.16 of this title shall be applicable to the submission of an application and the issuance and renewal of the permit, as required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6300.5.1)  
5.12.080 - Nudity defined. 
The term "nude person," as used in Section 5.12.070 of this chapter, means a person completely without clothing. The term "seminude person," as used in Section 5.12.070 of this chapter, means a person wearing such attire, costume, or clothing which exposed to public view any portion of the human anatomy which is not covered by an opaque covering: the genitals, pubic hair, anus, anal regions, natal cleft, perineum, or the crease of the buttocks of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person. However, the term "nude person" shall not refer to isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this Section, except where taken together, such an instance of nudity constitutes a regular and substantial course of conduct within a business premises where any of the activities described in Section 5.12.070 of this chapter may occur. 
(Prior code § 6300.5.2)  
5.12.090 - Application. 
Whenever a permit is required by any provision of this chapter, an application therefor shall be made in writing and filed with the Chairperson of the Permit Committee. Such application shall be on forms prescribed by the Committee, and shall contain all information required by any Section of this chapter, in addition to the information specified in the application form. 
(Prior code § 6300.6)  
5.12.100 - Application—Secondhand dealer. 
The License Department and the Permit Committee shall accept an application for and grant a business license and permit permitting the applicant to engage in the business of secondhand dealer, as defined in Section 5.68.010 of this title, to an applicant who has not been convicted of an attempt to receive stolen property or any other offense involving stolen property. Prior to the granting of a license or permit, the License Department shall submit the application to the Department of Justice. If the Department of Justice does not comment on the applicant within a reasonable time thereafter, the License Department and Permit Committee may grant the applicant a business license and permit. All applications for licensure and permit, and license or permit renewal, shall be on forms prescribed and provided by the Department of Justice. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6300.6.1)  
5.12.110 - Application—Permit previously denied or revoked. 
The License Department shall not accept application for permission to operate any business, enterprise, occupation or even regulated by any Section of this chapter if a permit for such business, enterprise, occupation or event has previously been denied or revoked with respect to the applicant or a successor or assignor to the applicant pursuant to Section 5.12.120 of this chapter, within a twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the tender of the application; except as authorized by this Section. An applicant who is subject to the provisions of this Section may submit to the Secretary of the Permit Committee a written request for authorization to file an application for permission to operate any such business, enterprise, occupation or event. Upon receipt of such written request, the Secretary of the Permit Committee shall schedule the matter for consideration by the Permit Committee at the next regular meeting of the Permit Committee for which such matter may be properly posted on the agenda. The Permit Committee shall either grant or deny the request to file an application within thirty (30) days following the date on which the matter is submitted to it by the Secretary of the Permit Committee and shall make a finding that either the conditions which caused the denial or revocation have been corrected or make a finding that such conditions have not been corrected. 
(Prior code § 6300.6.2)  
5.12.120 - Approval or denial of permit. 
A.  The Permit Committee shall grant a permit based upon a completed permit application unless three (3) or more of its members find and determine, upon evidence presented to it, that the granting of the permit as applied for, or the conduct of the business, enterprise, occupation or event for which permit application was filed, will be contrary to, inimical to or will jeopardize the preservation of the public peace, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or will be detrimental to other properties or businesses in the vicinity or in the event that a material falsehood may appear in the application. The decision of the Permit Committee to deny a permit application shall be in writing and shall contain written findings of fact upon which the decision is based. A copy of such decision and findings shall be transmitted to the applicant by personal service or by first class United States mail by a date which is not later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Permit Committee following the date of the meeting during which the application for the issuance of the permit was denied. Refer to Section 12.28.280(C) of this code for additional standards of review for news rack applications. 
B.  The Permit Committee, upon a showing of good cause, may direct an application for a business permit to a Hearing Officer to conduct a hearing, receive relevant evidence and to return to the Permit Committee findings of facts and recommendations to be acted upon by the Permit Committee. The Permit Committee may approve, modify or reject the findings and recommendations of the Hearing Officer or take such other action as deemed necessary by the Permit Committee. 
(Ord. 2615 § 1, 2004: Ord. 2538 § 1, 2001: prior code § 6300.7)  
5.12.130 - Permit approval. 
In granting any permit under this chapter, the Permit Committee may impose such terms, conditions and restrictions upon the operation, management and conduct of any business, enterprise, occupation or event that it finds necessary or expedient to protect the public health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or to protect other properties or businesses from detriment which would be otherwise caused or liable to be caused by the conduct of the business, enterprise, occupation or event for which the permit is granted. 
(Prior code § 6300.8)  
5.12.140 - Permit approval—Fortunetellers. 
Prior to issuing a permit to any person for engaging in the business of fortunetelling as defined in Section 5.04.010 of this title, the applicant shall be finger-printed and photographed by the El Monte Police Department in addition to any other terms, conditions and restrictions as may be imposed pursuant to Section 5.12.130 of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6300.8.1)  
5.12.150 - Finality of decision. 
Except as otherwise provided under Chapter 12.07 of this code, the decision of the Permit Committee shall be final unless an appeal therefrom be filed as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 2656 § 3, 2005: Ord. 2632 § 3, 2004; prior code § 6300.9)  
5.12.160 - Appeal. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any portion of a decision of the Permit Committee may appeal all or any portion of such decision to the City Council. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the final decision in writing by such Committee, shall be accompanied by an appeal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall specify with particularity the ground or grounds upon which such appeal is based. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this Section or any other provision of this chapter, appeals from any Committee action taken on a parade or block party permit application applied for pursuant to Chapter 12.07 of this code shall be governed in accordance with the appeal provisions of Chapter 12.07 of this code. 
(Ord. 2656 § 4, 2005; Ord. 2632 § 4, 2004; prior code § 6300.10)  
5.12.170 - Appeal—Hearing by City Council. 
A.  Each appeal filed pursuant to Section 5.12.160 of this chapter or any matter as may be referred to the City Council in accordance with Section 5.12.040 of this chapter shall be heard by the City Council at its first regularly scheduled meeting held not less than five (5) days after the filing of such appeal with the City Clerk at which time the decision of the Permit Committee either shall be rejected and the permit shall be issued by the City Council with such conditions, as authorized by Section 5.12.180 of this chapter, or the decision of the Permit Committee shall be affirmed by the City Council. The City Council may continue the hearing on any such appeal from time-to-time at its discretion; provided, however, that in the case of an appeal from a decision of the Permit Committee involving any activity described in Section 5.12.070 of this chapter, the City Council either shall issue, issue subject to conditions, or deny the permit within thirty (30) days following the date of the filing of such appeal, unless a continuance of the decision on the matter is approved by the appellant. Promptly after the filing of any such appeal, the City Clerk shall be given written notice of the time and place of the City Council hearing on such appeal to the applicant, to the appellant if the appellant be other than the applicant, and to any other person who has in writing filed with the City Clerk a request for notice. 
B.  At the time for which the hearing of any such appeal has thus been noticed, the City Council shall consider and review the decision of the Permit Committee, and all reports, recommendations, findings, summary of evidence and other material presented to, acquired by or made by the Permit Committee or the members thereof. The City Council may, by the affirmative vote of three (3) of its members, hear the application anew and receive additional testimony or evidence. 
(Prior code §§ 6300.11, 6300.12)  
5.12.180 - Council decision. 
The decision of the City Council on any such appeal shall be made by the affirmative votes of at least three (3) of its members entered upon the Council minutes. The Council may adopt all or any portion of the Permit Committee's decision or findings or any of the reports or recommendations of the Committee members, by reference without setting forth the same in full in the minutes. In its decision on any such appeal, the City Council may approve or disapprove in whole or in part the decision of the Permit Committee and may grant or deny the permit applied for. The Council, in granting a permit, may amend, add to or delete any or all of the conditions or restrictions imposed by the Permit Committee. The City Clerk shall mail to the applicant and appellant a copy of the minutes of the City Council with reference to any such appeal within forty-eight (48) hours after the approval of such Council minutes by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 6300.13)  
5.12.190 - Council action on referred applications. 
The Council hearing on any application referred to the Council for decision pursuant to Section 5.12.040 of this chapter shall be limited to a consideration and review of all reports and recommendations of the members of the Permit Committee, the application, the summary of evidence presented with respect thereto and all material compiled by the Permit Committee; provided, however, that the City Council may, by the affirmative vote of three (3) of its members entered upon the Council minutes, hear any such application anew and receive additional evidence or testimony; and provided still further that the City Council may, by a vote of a majority of its members entered upon its minutes, refer the application to a Hearing Officer for the conduct of a hearing thereon pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act. 
(Prior code § 6300.14)  
5.12.200 - Decision. 
The decision of the City Council denying any permit under an application referred to it pursuant to Section 5.12.040 shall be in substantially the same form as specified in Section 5.12.180 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6300.15)  
5.12.210 - Finality of decision. 
A decision of the City Council on any permit application or on any appeal from the decision of the Permit Committee shall be final and shall not be subject to reconsideration. 
(Prior code § 6300.16)  
5.12.220 - Permits nonassignable. 
Every permit issued under any Section of this chapter shall apply only to the person or persons in whose name or names it is issued, only to the premises or location therein specified, and only for the business, enterprise, occupation or event therein set forth. No permit issued under any Section of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable in any manner by sale, conveyance, encumbrance, security, court order, or in any other manner. 
(Prior code § 6300.17)  
5.12.230 - Duration. 
Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter, with the exception of hotel/motel permits, shall expire at the same time as the business license. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6300.18)  
5.12.240 - Revocation by Council. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy or right specified or reserved to the Council by any provision of this chapter or code or any law of the state, any permit issued under or pursuant to this chapter may be revoked and canceled by the Council after a hearing duly noticed as hereinafter provided. Upon report or recommendation of any city official that any such permit be revoked or canceled, the Permit Committee may fix a date, time and place for a public hearing on the matter of such permit revocation. At least ten (10) days prior to the date thus fixed by the Permit Committee, the Secretary of the Committee shall deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee as shown in the permit application on file with the city, notice of the time and place of such meeting before the Permit Committee, of the fact that the Permit Committee will consider the matter of the revocation of such person's permit, a specification of the grounds upon which the revocation may be made, a statement that the permittee may appear at such time and place, in person or by counsel, and present testimony or documentary evidence in his or her favor and in opposition to the proposed revocation, together with a copy of all reports or other documentary evidence theretofore presented to the Permit Committee in support of the proposed revocation. At the conclusion, but no later than ten (10) days thereafter, of any such hearing, the Permit Committee shall make findings and recommendations and direct the Secretary of the Permit Committee to place such findings and recommendations on the next regular Council agenda for the Council's consideration and adoption. The Council shall consider the findings and recommendations and may adopt them in total or in lieu thereof may amend, modify or reject them in total. In addition, the Council may send the findings and recommendations back to the Permit Committee with instructions to rehear any relevant matter not previously heard and then resubmit additional amended or modified findings to the Council. The Council may revoke, amend, modify, or impose such other or further terms, conditions or restrictions on the terms, conditions or restrictions theretofore placed in the permit as the Council finds reasonable or necessary to insure that the business enterprise, occupation or event will not be contrary to or inimical to or jeopardize the preservation of the public peace, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants or be detrimental to other properties or businesses in the vicinity. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this Section or any other provision of this chapter, appeals from any revocation of a parade or block party permit issued pursuant to Chapter 12.07 of this code shall be governed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12.07 of this code. 
(Ord. 2656 § 5, 2005; Ord. 2632 § 5, 2004; prior code § 6300.20)  
5.12.250 - Compliance with permit conditions. 
No person shall violate or fail to comply with each and every term, conditions and regulation specified in any permit issued pursuant to this Section for any business, enterprise, occupation or event regulated by any Section of this chapter. A violation of any term, condition or regulation specified in such a permit is a misdemeanor. In addition to such administrative action as may be initiated under Section 5.12.240 of this chapter, failure to comply with any condition of a permit or violation of any permit condition shall be subject to prosecution, as provided under Section 1.24.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6300.21)  
5.12.260 - Prerequisite fee payment. 
No permit required or issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be valid or effective unless and until all license fees, if any, due by the terms of Chapter 5.08 of this title and any other fees or charges due or payable by the applicant by reason of any provision of law or of this code, shall have first been paid to the city. 
(Prior code § 6300.22)  
5.12.270 - Application fees. 
A.  Establishment of Fees. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person required to procure and maintain a valid business permit for the conduct of any type of business, business activity, event or occupation subject to the permit requirements of this chapter shall be required to pay an application processing fee for the renewal or initial issuance of any such permit. The purpose of the fee shall be to recover the reasonable estimated cost and expense to the city associated with the processing, review, investigation, consideration and final disposition of a business permit application. The amount of such fee shall be established and may, from time to time, be adjusted by City Council resolution. 
B.  Types of Applications. Business permit applications shall fall into two categories: new applications and renewal applications. Each variety of application shall be subject to the fee requirements of this chapter as set forth by City Council resolution. 
C.  Distinguishing the Types of Applications. The application of a business permit applicant shall be considered a renewal application if during any portion of the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year in which the application is submitted, the applicant was the holder of an identical business permit for the same type of business, business activity, enterprise, event or occupation and if all of the following additional conditions apply: 
1.  The nature of the business, business activity, enterprise, event or occupation for which the permit is required remains the same as under the permit issued the previous calendar year; 
2.  The name of the applicant remains the same as under the permit issued the previous calendar year; 
3.  The location of the applicant's business, business activity, enterprise, event or occupation remains the same as under the permit issued the previous calendar year. 
Any other application which does not satisfy the foregoing conditions shall be considered a new application. 
D.  Exemptions. No application fee corresponding to a new application or renewal application shall be required of any business, institution, organization or person exempt from the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.04 pursuant to Section 5.04.080(C) of this title. The foregoing exemption shall not apply fees associated with the issuance of fireworks permits as set forth under Chapter 8.16 (Fireworks) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2721 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2717 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2684 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2671 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2476 § 1, 1998; prior code §§ 6300.23—6300.23.15)  
5.12.280 - Application for change of location. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided under Chapter 12.28 (Encroachments) of the El Monte Municipal Code, the holder of a business permit issued under this chapter (whether pursuant to a new application or a renewal application) may, prior to its expiration, request that the Permit Committee amend the permit to correspond with a changed business address within the city of El Monte. Such an amendment shall be conditioned upon the permit holder's submission of a change of address application form, the payment of a corresponding change of address application fee and a finding by the Permit Committee that all of the following conditions apply: 
1.  The nature of the business, business activity, enterprise, event or occupation for which the permit was issued will remain the same at the new location; 
2.  The name of the person in whose name the permit was issued will remain the same at the new location; 
3.  The new location is one which is properly zoned for the business, business activity, enterprise, event or occupation which corresponds to the permit. 
Any other request to amend an existing permit shall require the submission of a new application for a business permit or a renewal application for a business permit, whichever is appropriate, and any subsequent approval of a new business permit shall terminate, replace and supersede the existing permit. 
B.  The change of address application fee is intended to recover the reasonable estimated cost and expense to the city associated with the processing, review, investigation, consideration and final disposition of a change of address application. 
The El Monte Licensing and Treasury Division, on behalf of the Permit Committee, shall maintain copies of the most up-to-date schedule of business permit fees approved by City Council resolution for public inspection and copying. 
(Ord. 2721 § 2, 2008: Ord. 2717 § 2, 2008: prior code § 6300.24)  
5.12.290 - Duplicate permits. 
Whenever a permit holder requests or requires a duplicate of a valid business permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the issuance of such a duplicate business permit shall be conditioned upon the permit holder's payment of a duplication fee. The purpose of the duplication fee is to recover the cost and expense to the city associated with the preparation of a duplicate business license. The amount of the duplication fee shall be established and may, from time to time, adjusted by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 2721 § 3, 2008: Ord. 2717 § 3, 2008: prior code § 6300.25)  
5.12.300 - Maintenance of fee schedule. 
The El Monte License and Treasury Division, on behalf of the Permit Committee, shall maintain a copy of the most recently adopted schedule of fees implemented under this chapter and shall make such schedule available for public inspection and copying. 
(Ord. 2721 § 4, 2008: Ord. 2717 § 4, 2008)  
5.12.310 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrase, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning set forth below: 
"Applicant" means any person who applies for a business permit (whether pursuant to a new application or renewal application) and in whose name the business permit is to be issued. 
"City" means the city of El Monte. 
"Person" means any natural person, individual, firm, association, organization, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, business trust, joint venture or sole proprietorship. 
(Ord. 2717 § 5, 2008)  
Chapter 5.16 - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexual oriented materials. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.1)  
5.16.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Adult-oriented business" means any business as defined in Section Chapter 17.76 of this code and/or any other business where employees or patrons expose "specified anatomical areas" or engaged in "specified sexual activities," or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." Adult-oriented businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments operated by state licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients. In determining whether a use is an adult-oriented business, only conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct shall be considered. Isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this Section as characterizing an adult-oriented business shall not be considered except where such activities, taken together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
An adult-oriented business shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Adult Bookstore. "Adult bookstore" means an establishment as described in Chapter 17.76 of this code. 
2.  "Adult cabaret" means an establishment as described in Chapter 17.76 of this code. 
3.  Adult Model Studio. "Adult model studio" means an establishment open to the public where, for any fee or consideration of gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, so similarly depicted by persons, other than the proprietor, paying such consideration of gratuity. This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets the requirements established in the Education Code of the state for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer a diploma. 
4.  Adult Motel. "Adult motel" means a motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
5.  Adult Motion Picture Arcade. "Adult motion picture arcade" (otherwise sometimes called peep shows) means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to one person per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
6.  Adult Theater. "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
7.  Body Painting Studio. "Body painting studio" means an establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas. 
8.  Sexual Novelty Store. "Sexual novelty store" means an establishment having, as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, goods which are replicas of or which stimulate, "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities," or goods which are designed to be placed on or in "specified anatomical areas," or to be used in conjunction with "specified anatomical areas" and to evoke sexual interest, or to be used in conjunction with "specified sexual activities," and to evoke sexual interest. 
"Establishing an adult-oriented business establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any business defined as an adult-oriented business establishment herein; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business establishment, to any of the adult-oriented business establishments as defined in this chapter; 
3.  The addition of any of the other adult-oriented business establishment uses defined herein to an existing adult-oriented business establishment; or 
4.  The relocation of any such business/use. 
"Legitimate or live theater" means a theater, concert hail, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any fee or consideration, regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in that any such depiction or description is only incidental to the primary purposes of the performance. 
"Massage establishment" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Chapter 5.56 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Person" means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or any other forms of business organization or group. 
"Private viewing room" means an area separated from the sales or display area of the establishment by a curtain, wall, door, shade or similar obstruction thus allowing the private viewing of video tapes, movies, transparencies, films or projectable motion picture, containing specified sexual activities or depicting specified anatomical areas, by customers at the establishments. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified sexual activities" means and includes any or all the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
3.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 1 through 3 of this definition. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.2) 
(Ord. No. 2779, § 6, 10-18-2011)  
5.16.030 - Permit required. 
A.  A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates an adult-oriented business within the city without a valid permit issued by the city for the adult-oriented business unless the adult-oriented business had been lawfully established and continually open for business at least one hundred eighty (180) days preceding the date on which the ordinance codified in this Section becomes effective. 
B.  An application for a permit must be submitted to the city on a form provided by the Secretary of the Permit Committee. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. 
C.  A conditional use permit, if required, must be obtained before a permit application may be accepted by the Secretary of the Permit Committee. The conditional use permit application shall be processed in accordance with the time limits of Section 17.76.060. 
D.  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the applicable law and regulation by the Planning Department, Department of Community Development, Fire Department and the Police Department. 
E.  Any person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business must sign the application for the license as the applicant. 
F.  The fact that a person possesses any other valid license or permit issued by the city does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business permit. A person who operates an adult-oriented business and possesses any other city license or permit shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter and all City Codes as well as the requirements and provisions of such other permit. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.3)  
5.16.040 - Issuance of permit. 
A.  The Permit Committee shall issue or deny the issuance of a permit to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed application. The Permit Committee shall issue the permit unless the Permit Committee finds one or more of the following to be true: 
1.  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
2.  An applicant is over due in payment to the city of fees owed by the applicant in relation to the adult-oriented business which is the subject of the application; 
3.  An applicant has failed to completely fill out the application for a permit or has provided materially false information on the application; 
4.  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; 
5.  The premises to be used for the adult-oriented business or any structural or operational element thereof has not been approved by the Planning Department, Community Development Department, Fire Department or the Police Department in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, including the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 17.76.030; 
6.  The applicant is operating the adult-oriented business without a permit in violation of Section 5.16.030 or Section 17.76.030; 
7.  The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude at any time within a ten (10) year period preceding the date of the filing of the application. 
B.  The permit shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, and the address of the adult-oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the adult-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
C.  The Clerk of the Permit Committee shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action to issue or deny the permit. The decision of the Permit Committee to deny issuance of the permit may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council as provided in Section 5.16.100. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.4)  
5.16.050 - Fees. 
The initial application fee, the initial permit fee, and the annual renewal fee for an adult-oriented business permit shall be as established by the City Council by resolution adopted from time-to-time in accordance with Government Code Section 66016. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.5)  
5.16.060 - Inspection. 
An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Planning Department, Community Development Department, Fire Department and Police Department to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter at any time the premises is open for business, provided reasonable and normal business operations shall not be interfered with and the inspection is conducted in the same manner as an inspection for other businesses. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.6)  
5.16.070 - Expiration of permit. 
A.  Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application upon penalty of perjury that there has been no material change in the business or its operation. Applications for renewal should be filed at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date; the application for renewal shall not extend the permit beyond the expiration date. The Clerk of the Permit Committee shall issue the permit or deny the application for renewal within thirty (30) days. 
B.  An adult-oriented business which was lawfully established and continuously open for business at least one hundred and eighty (180) days preceding the date on which the ordinance codified in this Section becomes effective shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter insofar as the issuance or renewal of a permit issued under this chapter may be concerned. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.7)  
5.16.080 - Suspension. 
The Permit Committee shall suspend a permit if it determines that a permittee has failed to comply with any of the provisions of Sections 5.16.030, 5.16.040 and 5.16.050 of this chapter. The suspension shall be for thirty (30) days or until the violation is corrected, whichever time period is longer. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.8)  
5.16.090 - Revocation. 
A.  The Permit Committee shall revoke a permit if a cause for suspension in Section 5.16.080 occurs and the permit has previously been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; or, 
B.  The Permit Committee shall revoke a permit if it determines that: 
1.  A permittee submitted materially false or misleading information to the Permit Committee during the application process; or 
2.  A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the adult-oriented business when the permittee's permit was suspended; 
C.  When the Permit Committee revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall nor be issued and adult-oriented business permit for that business for one year from the date the revocation became effective. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.9)  
5.16.100 - Appeal. 
A.  If the Permit Committee suspends or revokes a permit, the Secretary of the Permit Committee shall send to the applicant or permittee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action. The decision to suspend or revoke the permit shall be effective ten (10) days after the notice of the decision has been deposited in the United States Mail. 
B.  An appeal of the decision to suspend or revoke the permit may be submitted in writing to the City Clerk prior to the date on which the decision becomes effective. An application as submitted to the City Clerk of an appeal stays the decision to suspend or revoke the permit until a decision is rendered on the appeal by the City Council. 
C.  The appeal proceedings shall be conducted before the City Council within thirty (30) days following the date of receipt of the written application of the appeal by the City Clerk. The City Council may, in its sole discretion, appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing on the appeal provided however, that such an appointment of a hearing officer shall be made by the City Council within twenty (20) days following the date of receipt of the written application of the City Clerk. In either case, the hearing on the appeal shall be commenced within said thirty (30) day period and shall thereafter be concluded as promptly as prudent and feasible. The decision of the City Council (or its appointed hearing officer) regarding the action of the Permit Committee to suspend or revoke the permit shall be final and shall be subject to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.10)  
5.16.110 - Transfer of permit. 
Any permit shall be immediately void if the applicant attempts to transfer the permit to another person or location. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.11)  
5.16.120 - Location of adult-oriented businesses. 
The location of an adult-oriented business shall be as specified in the zoning regulations of this code. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.12)  
5.16.130 - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business without a valid permit or in violation of Section 5.16.120, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Prior code § 6300.50.13)  
Chapter 5.18 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES 
 
5.18.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter 5.18 to accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons in need of cannabis for medicinal purposes, as advised and recommended by their health care provider(s), and to implement state law, which includes, but is not limited to the provisions of the Medicinal Adult-Use Cannabis Recreation and Safety Act (hereinafter, "MAUCRSA"), as may be amended and augmented under state law, while imposing regulations on the use of land to protect the city's neighborhoods, residents, and businesses from negative impacts. It is a further purpose and intent of this Chapter 5.18 to regulate the cultivation, manufacturing, processing, testing, and distribution of medicinal cannabis and medicinal cannabis-related products in a manner which is responsible, which protects the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of El Monte, and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with state law. In part to meet these objectives, an annual permit shall be required to own and/or to operate a commercial medicinal cannabis business within El Monte. Nothing in this Chapter 5.18 is intended to authorize the possession, use, or provision of cannabis for purposes which violate state or federal law. The provisions of this Chapter 5.18 are in addition to any other permits, licenses and approvals which may be required to conduct business in the city, and are in addition to any permits, licenses and approval required under state, county, or other law. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.020 - Legal authority. 
Pursuant to Sections 5 and 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution, and the provisions of the MAUCRSA, as may be amended and augmented under state law and any subsequent state legislation regarding the same, the city is authorized to adopt ordinances that establish standards, requirements, and regulations for local licenses and permits for medicinal cannabis and medicinal cannabis-related activity. Any standards, requirements, and regulations regarding health and safety, security, and worker protections established by the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, shall be the minimum standards applicable in the city to medicinal cannabis, and/or medicinal cannabis-related activity. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.030 - Cannabis cultivation and commercial medicinal cannabis business activities prohibited unless specifically authorized by this chapter. 
A.  Except as specifically authorized in this Chapter 5.18 and Section 17.24.040 of this Code, the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, dispensing, distribution, delivery, and/or sale of cannabis or cannabis product is expressly prohibited in the city. 
B.  The following are expressly prohibited: 
1.  Adult-use commercial cannabis activities; and 
2.  Medicinal commercial cannabis delivery and/or sale, including dispensaries, and microbusinesses. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.040 - Compliance with laws. 
It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial medicinal cannabis business to ensure that it is, always, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this Chapter 5.18 shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate federal, state, or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial medicinal cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and the operators of the commercial medicinal cannabis business to ensure that the commercial medicinal cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state and local laws, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines, any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. Nothing in this Chapter 5.18 shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate federal or state law regarding the operation of a commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.050 - Definitions. 
When used in this Chapter 5.18, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth herein. Any reference to California statutes includes any regulations promulgated thereunder and is deemed to include any successor or amended version of the referenced statute or regulatory provision. Definitions herein, which coincide with those set forth in MAUCRSA or other applicable state law, shall be deemed to include any successor or amended versions of such definitions. 
A.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 14017 of the Statutes of 1972. Cannabis does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this Chapter 5.18, cannabis does not mean industrial hemp as that term is defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  "Cannabis business park" a park or campus is one contiguous commercial area of land which has many cannabis related businesses grouped together. Each individual business would be clearly defined, which has a unique entrance and immovable physical barriers between uniquely licensed premises. 
C.  "Cannabis concentrate" means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this Chapter 5.18. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
D.  "Cannabis product" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
E.  "Canopy" means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, inclusive of all vertical planes, whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. 
F.  "Caregiver" or "primary caregiver" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
G.  "City" or "City of El Monte" means the City of El Monte, a California General Law City. 
H.  "Commercial cannabis activity" includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as provided for in this Chapter 5.18. 
I.  "Commercial medicinal cannabis business" means any business or operation which engages in medicinal commercial cannabis activity. 
J.  "Commercial medicinal cannabis business permit" means a regulatory permit issued by the city pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 to a commercial medicinal cannabis business and is required before any commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the city. The initial permit and annual renewal of a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit is made expressly contingent upon the business's ongoing compliance with all of the requirements of this Chapter 5.18 and any regulations adopted by the City governing the commercial cannabis activity at issue. 
K.  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
L.  "Cultivation site" means a location where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or a location where any combination of those activities may occur. Cultivation sites must be licensed by the city and state pursuant to this Chapter 5.18. 
M.  "Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a family day care home, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers. 
N.  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer. 
O.  "Dispensary" means a commercial medicinal cannabis business facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment (whether fixed or mobile) that delivers, pursuant to express authorization, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale. 
P.  "Dispensing" means any activity involving the retail sale of medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products from a dispensary. 
Q.  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between persons authorized to engage in permitted commercial cannabis activities pursuant to this Chapter 5.18. 
R.  "Distributor" means a person engaged in the business of purchasing medicinal cannabis from a licensed cultivator or medicinal cannabis products from a license manufacturer for sale to a licensed medicinal cannabis dispensary. Distributors must be licensed by the city and state pursuant to this Chapter 5.18. 
S.  "Dried flower" means all dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried, cured, or otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems. 
T.  "Edible cannabis product" means cannabis product that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501) of the California Food and Agriculture Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. An edible cannabis product shall not be deemed to be adulterated pursuant to Section 19347.6 of the Business and Professions Code solely because it contains cannabis. 
U.  "Greenhouse" means a fully enclosed permanent structure that is clad in transparent material with climate control, such as heating and ventilation capabilities and supplemental artificial lighting, and that uses a combination of natural and supplemental lighting for cultivation. 
V.  "Live plants" means living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, immature plants (including unrooted clones), and vegetative stage plants. 
W.  "Manufacture" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. 
X.  "Manufacturer" means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. A manufacturer may also be a person that infuses cannabis in its products but does not perform its own extraction. 
Y.  "Manufactured cannabis" means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, extraction, or other manufactured product intended for internal consumption through inhalation or oral ingestion or for topical application. 
Z.  "Manufacturing site" means a location that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis. Manufacturing sites must be licensed by the city and state pursuant to this Chapter 5.18. 
AA.  "Marijuana" means "cannabis," as that term is defined in this Chapter 5.18. 
BB.  "Microbusiness" means a commercial medicinal cannabis business facility of cultivation of medicinal cannabis on areas less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and also acts as a licensed distributor, manufacturer, and retailer. 
CC.  "Nursery" means a person that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. 
DD.  "Owner" means any of the following: 
1.  A person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty (20) percent or more in the person applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance; 
2.  The chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity; 
3.  A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit; 
4.  An individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the person applying for the license. 
EE.  "Patient" or "qualified patient" shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., as it may be amended, and which means a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
FF.  "Permittee" means the holder of a valid, city-issued commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. 
GG.  "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
HH.  "Person with an identification card" shall have the meaning given that term by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. 
II.  "Premises" means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be occupied by one licensee. 
JJ.  "State license" means a permit or license issued by the State of California, or one of its departments or divisions, under MAUCRSA and any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same to engage in commercial cannabis activity. 
KK.  "Testing laboratory" means a laboratory, facility, or entity in the city that offers or performs tests of medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products and that is both of the following: 
1.  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the medicinal cannabis industry in the state. 
2.  Licensed by the Bureau of Cannabis Control and is owned and operated by a person issued a valid commercial medicinal cannabis business permit for laboratory testing from the city. 
LL.  "Topical cannabis" means a product intended for external application and/or absorption through the skin. A topical cannabis product is not considered a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
MM.  "Volatile solvent" means a solvent that is or produces a flammable gas vapor that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures. 
NN.  "Youth center" means any public or private facility that is primarily used to host recreational or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club facilities, video arcades, or similar amusement park facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.060 - Cannabis employee permit required. 
A.  Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works or volunteers within a commercial medicinal cannabis business must be legally authorized to do so under applicable state law. Employees, workers, or volunteers at businesses that are permitted by the city that are operating pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775(a) as collectives or cooperatives until that subsection is repealed must be qualified patients or primary caregivers as required by state law. 
B.  Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works or volunteers within a commercial medicinal cannabis business must obtain a commercial medicinal employee work permit from the city prior to performing any work at any commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
C.  Applications for a commercial medicinal cannabis employee work permit shall be developed and made available by the City Manager or his/her designee(s), and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and phone number of the applicant; 
2.  Age and verification of applicant. A copy of a birth certificate, driver's license, government issued identification card, passport or other proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age must be submitted with the application; 
3.  Name, address of the commercial medicinal cannabis businesses where the person will be employed, and the name of the primary manager of that business; 
4.  A list of any crimes enumerated in California Business and Professions Code Section 26507(b)(4) for which the applicant has been convicted; 
5.  Name, address, and contact person for any previous employers from which the applicant was fired, resigned, or asked to leave and the reasons for such dismissal or firing; 
6.  The application shall be accompanied by fingerprints and a recent photograph of the applicant in a form and manner as required by the City Manager or designee(s); 
7.  A signed statement under penalty of perjury that the information provided is true and correct; 
8.  If applicable, verification that the applicant is a qualified patient or primary caregiver; and 
9.  A fee paid in an amount set by resolution of the City Council in an amount necessary to cover the costs of administering the employee work permit programs. The fee is non-refundable and shall not be returned in the event the work permit is denied or revoked. 
D.  The City Manager or designee(s) shall review the application for completeness and shall direct the Chief of Police to conduct a background check in accordance with Section 5.18.230.L. to determine whether the applicant was convicted of a crime or left a previous employer for reasons that show the applicant: 
1.  Is dishonest; or 
2.  Has committed a felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, embezzlement; or 
3.  Was convicted of a violent felony, a crime of moral turpitude; or 
4.  The illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, except for medicinal cannabis related offenses for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996. 
Discovery of these facts showing that the applicant is dishonest or has been convicted of those types of crimes are grounds for denial of the permit. Where the applicant's sentence (including any term of probation, incarceration, or supervised release) for possession of, possession for sale, sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance is completed, such underlying conviction shall not be the sole ground for denial of a commercial medicinal cannabis work permit. Furthermore, an applicant shall not be denied a permit if the denial is based solely on any of the following (i) a conviction for any crime listed in subsection D.4. above for which the applicant has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation pursuant to Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 4852.01) of Title 6 of Part 3 of the California Penal Code or (ii) a conviction that was subsequently dismissed pursuant to Sections 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.41 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of state law allowing for dismissal of a conviction. 
E.  The City Manager or designee(s) shall issue the commercial medicinal cannabis work permit or a written denial to the applicant within ninety (90) days of the date the application was deemed complete by the city, unless the applicant stipulates to an extension of the City Manager's response time. Upon the request of a commercial medicinal cannabis business and while processing the application for a work permit, the City Manager or his/her designee(s) may issue a temporary work permit for an employee if the business demonstrates to the City Manager or his/her designee(s) that the employee is necessary for the operation of the business. The temporary permit may be immediately revoked by the City Manager or his/her designee(s) upon determination that the applicant has failed the background check. 
F.  A work permit shall be valid for a twelve (12) month period from issuance and must be renewed on an annual basis. Renewal applications shall contain all the information required in subsection B above including the payment of a renewal application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Council. 
G.  In the event a person changes employment from one commercial medicinal cannabis business in the city to another, the work permit holder shall notify the City Manager or his/her designee(s) in writing of the change within ten (10) days, or the work permit shall be suspended or revoked and such person shall not be permitted to work at any commercial medicinal cannabis business in the city. 
H.  The city may immediately revoke the commercial medicinal cannabis work permit should the permit holder be convicted of a crime listed in subsection C and D above or if facts become known to the City Manager or his/her designee(s) that the permit holder has engaged in activities showing that he or she is dishonest. 
I.  The City Manager or designee(s) is hereby authorized to promulgate all regulations necessary to implement the work permit process and requirements. 
J.  The applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a commercial medicinal cannabis work permit by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date the applicant received the notice of denial, which appeal shall be conducted as set forth in this Chapter 5.18. 
K.  The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall issue a permit in the form of a personal identification card that can be worn by the employee, which shall include a photograph of such employee. The personal identification card shall be worn approximately chest-high on their outermost garment, in a prominent and visible location. The identification card shall be maintained in good and readable condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.070 - Commercial medicinal cannabis business permit required to engage in commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
A.  No person may engage in any commercial medicinal cannabis business or in any medicinal commercial cannabis activity within the city including cultivation, nursery, manufacture, processing, laboratory testing, transporting, or distribution, of cannabis or cannabis product unless the person (1) has a valid commercial medicinal cannabis business permit issued by the City Manager upon City Council approval of a conditional use permit, development agreement, and any other applicable approvals, including, but not limited to, a building permit and business licenses; and (2) is currently in compliance with all applicable state and local laws and regulations pertaining to the commercial medicinal cannabis business and the commercial cannabis activities, including the duty to obtain any required state licenses. 
B.  Until Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), is repealed, the city intends that person's eligible to operate collectives or cooperatives under that subdivision shall be eligible to apply for a City permit to conduct commercial cannabis activities but only to the degree those activities are authorized under state law for collectives and cooperatives. When the Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), is repealed, or as soon as collectives and cooperatives are no longer permitted to engage in commercial cannabis activity under state law, any city permit holder operating a commercial medicinal cannabis business under a collective or cooperative who has not already obtained a state license for the commercial cannabis activities they are engaged in shall automatically forfeit his or her city commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. At that point, such former permit holder shall no longer be authorized to engage in any commercial cannabis activities in the city until they obtain both a city issued commercial medicinal cannabis business permit and a state license for that commercial cannabis activity. 
C.  The maximum number of each type of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits that shall be permitted to operate in the city, if any such maximum is desired by the City Council, shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Nothing in this subsection creates a mandate that the City Council must issue any or all of the commercial medicinal cannabis business permits if it is determined that the applicants do not meet the standards which are established in the application requirements or further amendments to the application process. 
D.  Each year following the City Council's initial award of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits, if any, or at any time in the City Council's discretion, the City Council may reassess the number of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits which are authorized for issuance. The City Council, in its discretion, may determine by resolution that the number of commercial medicinal cannabis permits should stay the same or be expanded. 
E.  The City Council shall adopt, by resolution, an application process, and related forms, which shall provide for a point system based evaluation of applications by an independent third-party, who shall score applicants and recommend the best applicants to city staff for additional review by staff, which shall identify applicants who may apply for a conditional use permit and development agreement, in accordance with Section 17.24.040(34) of this Code. Additional points shall be awarded to applicants with ten (10) or more employees who commit to enter into, or demonstrate that it has already entered into, and abide by the terms of a labor peace agreement, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(x). 
F.  Any person intending to open and to operate a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall provide sufficient evidence of the legal right to occupy and to use the proposed location of such business. In the event the proposed location will be leased from another person, the applicant shall be required to provide a signed and notarized statement from the owner of such property, acknowledging that the property owner has read this Chapter 5.18 and consents to the operation of the commercial medicinal cannabis business on the owner's property. 
G.  At the time of filing, each applicant shall pay an application fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover all costs incurred by the city in the application process. 
H.  THE CITY'S RESERVATION OF RIGHTS: 
The city reserves the right to reject any or all applications received by the city for of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits. The city may also modify, postpone, or cancel any request for applications, or the entire program under this Chapter 5.18, at any time without liability, obligation, or commitment to any party, firm, or organization. Persons submitting applications assume the risk that all or any part of the program, or any particular category of permit potentially authorized under this Chapter 5.18, may be cancelled at any time prior to permit issuance. The city further reserves the right to request and obtain additional information from any candidate submitting an application for a of commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. In addition to any other justification provided a failure to comply with other requirements in this Chapter 5.18, an application RISKS BEING REJECTED for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Proposal received after designated time and date. 
2.  Proposal not containing the required elements, exhibits, nor organized in the required format. 
3.  Proposal considered not fully responsive to this request for permit application. 
4.  Proposal contains excess or extraneous material not called for in the request for permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.080 - Limitations on city's liability. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 or otherwise approving the operation of any commercial medicinal cannabis business. As a condition to the approval of any commercial medicinal cannabis business permit, the applicant shall be required to meet all of the following conditions before they can receive the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit: 
A.  They must execute an agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend (at applicant's sole cost and expense), and hold the city, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, and agents, harmless, from any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to, the city's issuance of the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit, the city's decision to approve the operation of the commercial medicinal cannabis business or activity, to process used by the city in making its decision, or the alleged violation of any federal, state, or local laws by the commercial medicinal cannabis business or any of its officers, employees, or agents. 
B.  Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon determined necessary and appropriate from time to time by the City Attorney. 
C.  Reimburse the city for all costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees and costs and court costs, which the city may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city's approval of the applicant's commercial medicinal cannabis business permit or related to the city's approval of a medicinal commercial cannabis activity. The city, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve any of the obligations imposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.090 - Expiration of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits. 
Each commercial medicinal cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of its issuance. Commercial medicinal cannabis permits may be renewed as provided in Section 5.18.110. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.100 - Revocation of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits. 
Commercial medicinal cannabis business permits may be revoked for any violation of any law and/or any rule, regulation, and/or standard adopted pursuant to this Chapter 5.18. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.110 - Renewal applications for commercial medicinal cannabis business permits. 
A.  An application for renewal of a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit shall be filed at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to the expiration date of a valid, current commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. 
B.  The renewal application shall contain all the information required for new applications. 
C.  The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by the City Council to cover the costs of processing the renewal permit application, together with any costs incurred by the city to administer the program created under this Chapter 5.18. 
D.  An application for renewal of a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit shall be rejected if any of the following exists: 
1.  The application is filed less than sixty (60) days before its expiration. 
2.  The commercial medicinal cannabis business permit is suspended or revoked at the time of the application. 
3.  The commercial medicinal cannabis business has not been in regular and continuous operation in the four (4) months prior to the renewal application. 
4.  The commercial medicinal cannabis business has failed to conform to the requirements of this title, or of any regulations adopted pursuant to this title. 
5.  The permittee fails or is unable to renew its State of California license. 
6.  If the city or state has determined, based on substantial evidence, that the permittee or applicant is in violation of the requirements of this Chapter 5.18, of the city's Municipal Code, or of the state rules and regulations, and the city or state has determined that the violation is grounds for termination or revocation of the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. 
E.  The City Manager or designee(s) is authorized to make all decisions concerning the issuance of a renewal permit. In making the decision, the City Manager or his/her designee(s) is authorized to impose additional conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to be necessary to ensure compliance with state or local laws and regulations or to preserve the public health, safety or welfare. Appeals from the decision of the City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall be handled pursuant to Chapter 5.18.130. 
F.  If a renewal application is rejected, a person may file a new application pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 no sooner than one year from the date of the rejection. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.120 - Effect of state license suspension, revocation, or termination. 
Suspension of a license issued by the State of California, or by any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial medicinal cannabis business to operate within the city, until the State of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or reissues the state license. Should the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the license of a commercial medicinal cannabis business, such revocation or termination shall also revoke or terminate the ability of a commercial medicinal cannabis business to operate within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.130 - Appeals regarding commercial medicinal business license permits. 
A.  Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of a decision of the City Manager or his/her designee(s) to revoke, suspend or deny a permit, or to add conditions to a permit, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk setting forth the reasons why the decision was not proper. 
B.  At the time of filing the appellant shall pay the designated appeal fee, established by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
C.  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the matter de novo, and shall conduct the hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth by the city. 
D.  The appeal shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing the appeal, but in no event later than ninety (90) days from the date of such filing. The city shall notify the appellant of the time and location at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
E.  At the hearing, the appellant may present any information they deem relevant to the decision appealed. The formal rules of evidence and procedure applicable in a court of law shall not apply to the hearing. 
F.  At the conclusion of the hearing the City Council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.140 - Change in location; updated registration form. 
A.  Any time the business location specified in the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit is changed, the applicant shall require a new commercial medicinal cannabis business permit in accordance with Section 5.18.070.A. 
B.  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of any other change in the information provided in the registration form or any change in status of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including any change in the commercial medicinal cannabis business ownership or management members, the applicant shall file an updated registration form with the City Manager or designee(s) for review along with a registration amendment fee. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.150 - Transfer of commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. 
A.  The owner of a commercial medicinal cannabis business license permit shall not transfer ownership or control of such permit to another person or entity unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the City Manager or designee(s) stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the City Manager accompanied by a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council (or if not set, shall be the same amount as the commercial medicinal cannabis business license permit application fee), and the City Manager or designee(s) determines that the transferee passed the background check required for permittees and meets all other requirements of this Chapter 5.18. 
B.  Commercial medicinal cannabis business permits issued through the grant of a transfer by the City Manager or designee(s) shall be valid for a period of one year beginning on the day the City Manager or designee(s) approves the transfer of the permit. Before the transferee's permit expires, the transferee shall apply for a renewal permit in the manner required by this Chapter 5.18. 
C.  Changes in ownership of a permittee's business structure or a substantial change in the ownership of a permittee business entity (changes that result in a change of more than fifty one (51) percent of the original ownership), must be approved by the City Council through the transfer process contained in this subsection A, above. Failure to comply with this provision is grounds for commercial medicinal cannabis business license permit. 
D.  A permittee may change the form of business entity without applying to the City Manager or designee(s) for a transfer of permit, provided that either: 
1.  The membership of the new business entity is substantially similar to original permit holder business entity (at least fifty one (51) percent of the membership is identical); or 
2.  If the original permittee is a cooperative or collective and then transitions to a new business entity to comply with Section 5.18.070.B., provided that the original operator(s) of the original permittee business are the same, and the only change is removing collective/cooperative members from the ownership of the new business entity. 
Although a transfer is not required in these two (2) circumstances, the permittee is required to notify the City Manager in writing of the change within ten (10) days of the change. Failure to comply with this provision is grounds for permit revocation. 
E.  No commercial medicinal cannabis business permit may be transferred when the City Manager or Police Chief has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
F.  Any attempt to transfer a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this Section 5.18.150 is hereby declared void, and such a purported transfer shall be deemed a ground for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.160 - City business license. 
Prior to commencing operations, a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall obtain a city business license, pursuant to Chapter 5.04. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.170 - Building permits and inspection. 
Prior to commencing operations, a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall be subject to a mandatory building inspection and must obtain all required permits and approvals which would otherwise be required for any business of the same size and intensity operating in the zone in which the business proposes to be located. These includes but are not limited to building permits, fire department approvals, health and safety approvals, zoning approvals, including those set forth in Section 17.24.040(34). 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.180 - Records and recordkeeping. 
A.  Each owner and operator of a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall maintain accurate books and records in an electronic format, which detail all revenues and expenses of the business, including, but not limited to, all of its assets and liabilities. On no less than an annual basis (at or before the time of the renewal of a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.18), or at any time upon reasonable request of the city, each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall file a sworn statement detailing the number of sales by the commercial medicinal cannabis business during the previous 12-month period (or shorter period based upon the timing of the request) detailing sales for each month within such period in question. The statement shall also include gross sales for each month and all applicable taxes paid or due to be paid. On an annual basis, each owner and operator shall submit to the city a financial audit of the business's operations conducted by an independent certified public accountant. Each permittee shall be subject to a regulatory compliance review and financial audit as determined by the City Manager or designee(s). 
B.  Each owner and operator of a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall maintain a current register of the names and the contact information (including the name, address, and telephone number) of anyone owning or holding an interest in the commercial medicinal cannabis business and, separately, the same contact information of all officers, managers, employees, agents, and volunteers currently employed or otherwise engaged by the commercial medicinal cannabis business. The register required by this paragraph shall be provided to the City Manager or designee(s) upon a reasonable request. 
C.  Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall maintain a record of all distributions of cannabis and cannabis products to other commercial medicinal cannabis businesses authorized by state law for a period of no less than four (4) years. 
D.  All commercial medicinal cannabis businesses shall maintain an inventory control and reporting system that accurately documents the present location, amounts, and descriptions of all cannabis and cannabis products for all stages of the growing, production, manufacturing, laboratory testing, and/or distribution, or other commercial cannabis activity processes until purchase or distribution for medicinal purpose as set forth under state law, as may subsequently be amended. 
E.  Subject to any restrictions under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) regulations, each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall grant city officials access to the business's books, records, accounts, together with any other data or documents relevant to its permitted commercial medicinal cannabis activities, for the purpose of conducting an audit or examination. Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data or documents shall be produced no later than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the city's request for such data, unless otherwise stipulated by the city. The city may require the materials to be submitted in an electronic format that is compatible with the city's software and hardware. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.190 - Security measures. 
A.  A permitted commercial medicinal cannabis business shall implement sufficient security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis products and to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis or cannabis products at the commercial medicinal cannabis business. Except as may otherwise be determined by the Chief of Police or designee(s), these security measures shall include, but are not limited to, all of the following: 
1.  Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the commercial medicinal cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly related to the permitted operations of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
2.  Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized commercial medicinal cannabis business personnel. 
3.  Except for live growing plants, which are being cultivated at a cultivation facility, all cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a secured and locked room, safe, or vault. All cannabis and cannabis products, including live plants which are being cultivated, shall be kept in a manner designed to prevent diversion, theft, and loss. 
4.  Installing twenty-four-hour security surveillance cameras of at least HD-quality to monitor all entrances and exits to and from the premises, all interior spaces within the commercial medicinal cannabis business, which are open and accessible to the public, all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency, is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis, and all interior spaces where diversion of cannabis could reasonably occur. The commercial medicinal cannabis business shall be responsible for ensuring that the security surveillance camera's footage is remotely accessible by the Chief of Police or designee(s), and that it is compatible with the city's software and hardware. In addition, remote and real-time, live access to the video footage from the cameras shall be provided to the Chief of Police or designee(s). Video recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of forty-five (45) days and shall be made available to the Chief of Police or designee(s) upon request. Video shall be of sufficient quality for effective prosecution of any crime found to have occurred on the site of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
5.  Sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure areas. 
6.  Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial medicinal cannabis businesses. 
7.  Having a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm system. 
8.  Any bars installed on the windows or the doors of the commercial medicinal cannabis business shall be installed only on the interior of the building. 
9.  Security personnel shall be on-site twenty-four (24) hours a day or alternative security as authorized by the Police Chief or designee(s). Security personnel must be licensed by the State of California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services personnel and shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the Chief of Police or designee(s), which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
10.  Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall install standby generators and have the capability to remain secure during a power outage and shall ensure that all access doors are not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are not released during a power outage. 
11.  Additional security measures may be added through the review of the conditional use permit and development agreement process. 
B.  Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall identify a designated security representative/liaison to the city, who shall be reasonably available to meet with the Chief of Police or designee(s) regarding any security related measures or and operational issues. 
C.  As part of the application and permitting process each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall have a storage and transportation plan and currency management plan, which describes in detail the procedures for safely and securely storing, disposing and transporting all cannabis, cannabis products, and any currency. 
D.  The commercial medicinal cannabis business shall cooperate with the city whenever the Chief of Police or designee(s) makes a request, upon reasonable notice to the commercial medicinal cannabis business, to inspect or audit the effectiveness of any security plan or of any other requirement of this title. 
E.  A commercial medicinal cannabis business shall notify the Chief of Police or designee(s) within twenty-four (24) hours after discovering any of the following: 
1.  Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The level of significance shall be determined by the regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police or designee(s). 
2.  Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the commercial medicinal cannabis business or any agent or employee of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
3.  The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis, registering qualifying patients, primary caregivers, or employees and/or agents of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
4.  Any other breach of security. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.200 - Restriction on alcohol sales. 
No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on or about the premises of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.210 - Compliance with laws. 
It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial medicinal cannabis business to ensure that it is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws and any regulations promulgated and applicable thereunder. Nothing in this Chapter 5.18 shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate state law or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial medicinal cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and the operators of the commercial medicinal cannabis business to ensure that the commercial medicinal cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, the 2008 Attorney General Guidelines any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit. Nothing in this Chapter 5.18 shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate state law with regard to the operation of a commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.220 - Fees and charges. 
A.  No person may commence or continue any medicinal commercial cannabis activity in the city without timely paying in full all fees and charges required for the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. Fees and charges associated with the operation of such activity shall be established by resolution of the City Council which may be amended from time to time. 
B.  All commercial medicinal cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this title shall pay all sales, use, business and other applicable taxes, and all license, registration, and other fees required under federal, state and local law. Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall cooperate with city with respect to any reasonable request to audit the commercial medicinal cannabis business' books and records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, a verification of the amount of taxes required to be paid during any period. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.230 - Miscellaneous operating requirements. 
A.  Commercial medicinal cannabis businesses may operate only during the hours specified in the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit issued by the city and must comply with state law at all times. 
B.  Restriction on Consumption of Cannabis. Cannabis shall not be consumed on the premises of any commercial medicinal cannabis businesses or elsewhere in the city other than within private residences. 
C.  No cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products shall be visible from the exterior of any property issued a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit or on any of the vehicles owned or used as part of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. No outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is permitted at any time. 
D.  Reporting and Tracking of Product and of Gross Sales. Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall have in place a point-of-sale or management inventory tracking system to track and report on all aspects of the commercial medicinal cannabis business including, but not limited to, such matters as cannabis tracking, inventory data, gross sales (by weight and by sale) and other information which may be deemed necessary by the city. The commercial medicinal cannabis business shall ensure that such information is compatible with the city's record-keeping systems. In addition, the system must have the capability to produce historical transactional data for review. Furthermore, any system selected must be approved and authorized by the City Manager or designee(s) prior to being used by the permittee. 
E.  Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall install standby generators and have the capability to remain operational during a power outage. 
F.  All cannabis and cannabis products sold, distributed, and/or manufactured shall be cultivated, manufactured, and distributed by licensed facilities that maintain operations in full conformance with the state and local regulations. 
G.  There shall not be a physician located in or around any commercial medicinal cannabis business at any time for the purpose of evaluating patients for the issuance of a medicinal cannabis prescription or card where applicable. 
H.  Emergency Contact. Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall provide the City Manager or designee(s) with the name, telephone number (both land line and mobile, if available) of an on-site employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided at any hour of the day. 
I.  Signage and Notices. 
1.  In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth in this section, business identification signage for a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall conform to the requirements of the El Monte Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a city sign permit. 
2.  No signs placed on the premises of a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall obstruct any entrance or exit to the building or any window. 
3.  Each entrance to a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall be visibly posted with a clear and legible notice indicating that smoking, ingesting, or otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises, or in the areas adjacent to the premises, is prohibited. 
4.  The entrance to the commercial medicinal cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice that no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age is permitted to enter upon the premises of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
5.  Business identification signage shall be limited to that needed for identification only, and shall not contain any logos or information that identifies, advertises, or lists the services or the products offered. No commercial medicinal cannabis business shall advertise by having a person holding a sign and advertising the business to passersby, whether such person is on the premises of the commercial medicinal cannabis business or elsewhere including, but not limited to, the public right-of-way. 
6.  Signage shall not be directly illuminated, internally or externally. No banners, flags, billboards, or other prohibited signs may be used at any time. 
7.  Holders of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits agree that, as an express and ongoing condition of permit issuance and subsequent renewal, the holder of the permit shall be prohibited from advertising any commercial medicinal cannabis business located in the city utilizing a billboard (fixed or mobile), bus shelter, placard, aircraft, or other similar forms of advertising, anywhere in the state. This paragraph is not intended to place limitations on the ability of a commercial medicinal cannabis business to advertise in other legally authorized forms, including on the internet, in magazines, or in other similar ways. 
J.  Minors. Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall not be allowed on the premises of a commercial medicinal cannabis business and shall not be allowed to serve as a driver for a transport service. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter 5.18 for any person to employ any person at a commercial medicinal cannabis business who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
K.  Odor Control. Odor control devices and techniques shall be incorporated in all commercial medicinal cannabis businesses to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable off-site. Commercial medicinal cannabis businesses shall provide a sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the commercial medicinal cannabis business that is distinctive to its operation is not detected outside of the facility, anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, on or about the exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for use by common tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located inside the same building as the commercial medicinal cannabis business. As such, commercial medicinal cannabis businesses must install and maintain the following equipment, or any other equipment which the Economic Development Director or designee(s) determine is a more effective method or technology: 
1.  An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents internal odors from being emitted externally; 
2.  An air system that creates negative air pressure between the commercial medicinal cannabis business's interior and exterior, so that the odors generated inside the commercial medicinal cannabis business are not detectable on the outside of the commercial cannabis business. 
L.  Display of Permit and City Business License. The original copy of the commercial medicinal cannabis business permit issued by the city pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 and the city issued business license shall be posted inside the commercial medicinal cannabis business in a location readily-visible to the public. 
M.  Background Check. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which authorizes city authorities to access state and local summary criminal history information for employment, licensing, or certification purposes; and authorizes access to federal level criminal history information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the Department of Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, every person listed as an owner, manager, supervisor, employee or volunteer, of the commercial medicinal cannabis business must submit fingerprints and other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s) for a background check by the El Monte Police Department. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which requires that there be a requirement or exclusion from employment, licensing or certification based on specific criminal conduct on the part of the subject of the record. No person shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial medicinal cannabis business or a related work permit unless they have first cleared the background check, as determined by the Chief of Police or designee(s), as required by this Chapter 5.18. A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the actual cost to the city to conduct the background investigation as it deems necessary and appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application for a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit is submitted. 
N.  Loitering. The owner and/or operator of a commercial medicinal cannabis business shall prohibit loitering by persons outside the facility both on the premises and within fifty (50) feet of the premises. 
O.  Additional operating requirements may be added through the review of the conditional use permit and development agreement process. 
P.  If a commercial medicinal cannabis business permittee is operating as a collective or cooperative under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), members of the applicant authorized to possess cannabis shall sign an agreement with the commercial medicinal cannabis business which states that members shall not distribute cannabis or cannabis products to non-members or in violation of the "Memorandum for all United States Attorneys," issued by the United States Department of Justice, from James M. Cole, Deputy Attorney General and any other applicable state and federal laws, regulations, or guidelines. 
Q.  If the commercial medicinal cannabis business permittee is operating as a collective or cooperative under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, subdivision (a), the commercial medicinal cannabis business shall terminate the membership of any member violating any of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.240 - Additional operational requirements. 
The City Manager or designee may develop additional commercial medicinal cannabis business operational requirements or regulations as are determined to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.250 - Operating requirements for cultivation facilities. 
A.  Cultivation facilities must operate at all times in accordance with state law. 
B.  Cultivation facilities may locate within appropriate areas as described in Section 17.24.040(34), subject to the regulations set forth in this Chapter 5.18, and subject to whatever additional regulations may be promulgated hereunder by the City Council or designee. 
C.  Outdoor Cultivation Prohibited. The cultivation of all cannabis must occur indoors. All outdoor cultivation is prohibited. 
D.  In no case, shall cannabis plants be visible from the facility's parking lot, a public or private road, sidewalk, park, or any common public viewing area. 
E.  Commercial medicinal cannabis cultivation in this city shall only be allowed to cultivate within canopy space limitations under state law. 
F.  Cannabis cultivation shall be conducted in accordance with state and local laws related to land conversion, grading, electricity, water usage, water quality, woodland and riparian habitat protection, agricultural discharges, and similar matters. 
G.  Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to avoid contamination through erosion, leakage or inadvertent damage from pests, rodents or other wildlife. 
H.  In no case shall any hazardous, flammable, or explosive substances be used to process or manufacture cannabis products on site, unless a separate medicinal commercial cannabis permit is issued for the premises, which allows the use of such substances (e.g. manufacturing). 
I.  The cultivation of cannabis shall at all times be operated in such a way as to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the employees working at the commercial medicinal cannabis business, visitors to the area, neighboring properties, and the end users of the cannabis being cultivated, to protect the environment from harm to streams, fish, and wildlife; to ensure the security of the cannabis being cultivated; and to safeguard against the diversion of cannabis. 
J.  All applicants for a medicinal cannabis cultivation permit shall submit the following in addition to the information generally otherwise required for a commercial medicinal cannabis business: 
1.  A cultivation and operations plan that meets or exceeds minimum legal standards for water usage, conservation, and use; drainage, runoff, and erosion control; watershed and habitat protection; and proper storage of fertilizers, pesticides, and other regulated products to be used on the parcel, and a description of the cultivation activities (indoor, mixed-light) and schedule of activities during each month of growing and harvesting, or explanation of growth cycles and anticipated harvesting schedules for all-season harvesting (indoor, mixed-light). 
2.  A description of a legal water source, irrigation plan, and projected water use. 
3.  Identification of the source of electrical power and plan for compliance with applicable Building Codes and related regulations, codes, and/or rules. 
4.  Plan for addressing odor and other public nuisances which may derive from the cultivation site. 
K.  Additional operating requirements may be added through the review of the conditional use permit and development agreement process. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.260 - Cannabis manufacturing: edibles and other cannabis products; sale or distribution of edible and other cannabis products. 
The manufacturing of food or other products infused with or which otherwise contain cannabis may be manufactured within the appropriate areas as set forth in Section 17.24.040(34), subject to state law, the regulations set forth in this Chapter 5.18, and whatever additional regulations may be promulgated hereunder by an the City Council or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.270 - Packaging and labeling. 
A.  The packaging and labeling of edible cannabis or edible cannabis products shall comply at all times with state law. 
B.  Before a commercial medicinal cannabis manufacturer prepares any edible cannabis or edible cannabis product for retail sale, it shall be labeled and placed in tamper-evident packaging which at least meets the requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 19347, as the same may be amended from time-to-time or superseded or replaced by subsequent state legislation or by any department or division of the State of California. 
C.  All items to be sold or distributed shall be individually wrapped at the original point of preparation by the business permitted as a commercial cannabis manufacturer. 
D.  Labeling must include a warning if nuts or other known allergens are used, and must include the total weight (in ounces or grams) of cannabis in the package. 
E.  A warning that the item is a medication and not a food must be clearly legible on the front of the package and/or must comply with state packing requirements. 
F.  The package must have a label warning that the product is to be kept away from children. 
G.  The label must also state that the product contains cannabis and must specify the date of manufacture and the manufacturer's information, including, but not limited to, address, phone number, and commercial medicinal cannabis business permit number. 
H.  Any edible cannabis product that is made to resemble a typical food product must be in a properly labeled opaque (non-see-through) package before it leaves the commercial cannabis manufacturing business. 
I.  Distributions must be in a properly labeled opaque package when distributed. 
J.  The City Council, or designee, may impose additional packaging and labeling requirements on cannabis or cannabis products. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.280 - Operating requirements for cannabis manufacturing (levels one and two), extraction, and the like. 
A.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities shall comply with state law at all times. 
B.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities requiring a Type-6 or Type-7 state license (using non-volatile and volatile solvents) as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 19341, may be permitted to operate within those areas as set forth in Section 17.24.040(34). 
C.  Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing process shall not be stored on any property within the city in containers that exceeds the amount which is approved by the Fire Department and authorized by the regulatory permit. Each site or parcel subject to a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit shall be limited to a total number of tanks as authorized by the Fire Department on the property at any time. 
D.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use the hydrocarbons N-butane, isobutane, propane, or heptane or other solvents or gases exhibiting low to minimal potential human-related toxicity approved by the city. These solvents must be of at least ninety-nine (99) percent purity and any extraction process must use them in a professional grade closed loop extraction system designed to recover the solvents, work an environment with proper ventilation, controlling all sources of ignition where a flammable atmosphere is or may be present. 
E.  If an extraction process uses a professional grade closed loop CO 2 gas extraction system where every vessel is certified by the manufacturer for its safe use as referenced in subsection F of this section, the CO 2 must be of at least ninety-nine (99) percent purity. 
F.  Closed loop systems for compressed gas extraction systems must be commercially manufactured and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial number. 
G.  Certification from an engineer licensed by the State of California must be provided to the Economic Development Department for a professional grade closed loop system used by any commercial cannabis manufacturing manufacturer to certify that the system was commercially manufactured, is safe for its intended use, and was built to codes of recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices, including but not limited to: 
1.  The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME); 
2.  American National Standards Institute (ANSI); 
3.  Underwriters Laboratories (UL); or 
4.  The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 
5.  The certification document must contain the signature and stamp of the professional engineer and serial number of the extraction unit being certified. 
H.  Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction operation, and facilities must be approved for their use by the Fire Department and meet any required fire, safety, and building code requirements specified in the California Building Codes. 
I.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use heat, screens, presses, steam distillation, ice water, and other methods without employing solvents or gases to create keef, hashish, bubble hash, or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats derived from natural sources, and other extracts. 
J.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use food grade glycerin, ethanol, and propylene glycol solvents to create or refine extracts. All Ethanol must be removed from the extract in a manner to recapture the solvent and ensure that it is not vented into the atmosphere. 
K.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities creating cannabis extracts must develop standard operating procedures, good manufacturing practices, and a training plan prior to producing extracts for the marketplace. 
L.  Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create cannabis extracts must be fully trained on how to use the system, have direct access to applicable material safety data sheets and handle and store the solvents and gases safely. 
M.  Parts per million for one gram of finished extract cannot exceed state standards for any residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested. 
N.  Additional manufacturing requirements may be added through the review of the conditional use permit and development agreement process. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.290 - Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties. 
A.  In addition to any regulations adopted under state law or by the City Council, the City Manager or designee is authorized to establish any additional rules, regulations, and standards governing the issuance, denial or renewal of commercial medicinal cannabis business permits, the ongoing operation of commercial medicinal cannabis businesses and the city's oversight, or concerning any other subject determined to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter 5.18. 
B.  Regulations shall be published on the city's website. 
C.  Regulations promulgated by the City Manager shall become effective upon date of publication. Commercial medicinal cannabis businesses shall be required to comply with all state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to any rules, regulations or standards adopted by the City Manager or designee(s). 
D.  Testing labs and distribution facilities shall be subject to state law and shall be subject to additional regulations as determined from time to time as more regulations are developed pursuant to this Chapter 5.18. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.300 - Community relations. 
A.  Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall provide the name, telephone number, and e-mail address of a community relations contact to whom notice of problems associated with the commercial medicinal cannabis business can be provided. Each commercial medicinal cannabis business shall also provide the above information to all businesses and residences located within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of the commercial medicinal cannabis business. 
B.  During the first year of operation pursuant to this Chapter 5.18, the owner, manager, and community relations representative from each commercial medicinal cannabis business holding a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 shall attend a quarterly meeting with the City Manager or designee(s) and other interested parties as deemed appropriate by the City Manager or designee(s), to discuss costs, benefits, and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of this Chapter 5.18. After the first year of operation, the owner, manager, and community relations representative from each such commercial medicinal cannabis business shall meet with the City Manager or designee(s) when and as requested by the City Manager or designee(s). 
C.  Commercial medicinal cannabis businesses to which a permit is issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 shall develop and make available to youth organizations and educational institutions a public education plan that outlines the risks of youth addiction to cannabis, and that identifies resources available to youth related to drugs and drug addiction. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.310 - Fees deemed debt to City of El Monte. 
The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 shall be deemed a debt to the city that is recoverable via authorized processes as set forth in the El Monte Municipal Code or available through any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.320 - Permit holder responsible for violations. 
The person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 shall be responsible for all violations of the laws of the State of California or of the regulations and/or the ordinances of the city, whether committed by the permittee or any employee or agent of the permittee, which violations occur in or about the premises of the commercial medicinal cannabis business whether or not said violations occur within the permit holder's presence. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.330 - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The City Manager, Chief of Police, or designee(s) charged with enforcing the provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code, or any provision thereof, may enter the location of a commercial medicinal cannabis business at any time, without notice, and inspect the location of any commercial medicinal cannabis business as well as any recordings and records required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 or under applicable provisions of state law. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person having responsibility over the operation of a commercial medicinal cannabis business, to impede, obstruct, interfere with, or otherwise not to allow, the city to conduct an inspection, review or copy records, recordings, or other documents required to be maintained by a commercial medicinal cannabis business under this Chapter 5.18 or under state or local law. It is also unlawful for a person to conceal, destroy, deface, damage, or falsify any records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a commercial medicinal cannabis business under this Chapter 5.18 or under state or local law. 
C.  The City Manager, Chief of Police, or designee(s) charged with enforcing the provisions of this Chapter 5.18 may enter the location of a commercial medicinal cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation and without notice to obtain samples of the cannabis to test for public safety purposes. Any samples obtained by the city shall be logged, recorded, and maintained in accordance with the El Monte Police Department standards for evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.340 - Concurrent regulation with state. 
It is the stated intent of this Chapter 5.18 to regulate commercial medicinal cannabis activity in the city concurrently with the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.350 - Violations declared a public nuisance. 
Each and every violation of the provisions of this Chapter 5.18 is hereby deemed unlawful and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.360 - Each violation a separate offense. 
Each and every violation of this Chapter 5.18 shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by the El Monte Municipal Code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this Chapter 5.18 shall be subject to injunctive relief, any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.18 being deemed null and void, disgorgement and payment to the city of any monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or in equity. The city may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under state and local laws for any violations committed by the commercial medicinal cannabis business or persons related to, or associated with, the commercial medicinal cannabis activity. Additionally, when there is determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, the City Manager, Chief of Police, or designee(s), may take immediate action to temporarily suspend a commercial medicinal cannabis business permit issued by the city, pending a hearing before the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.370 - Criminal penalties. 
Each and every violation of the provisions of this Chapter 5.18 may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
5.18.380 - Remedies cumulative and not exclusive. 
The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies. The city is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2924, § 5, 11-8-2017)  
Chapter 5.20 - AUTOMOBILE JUNK DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Automobile" means and includes automobiles, motor trucks, motorcycles, and any and all other motor vehicles which are self-propelled. 
"Automobile junk dealer" means and includes any person who deals in, or who engages in the business of selling, exchanging, or otherwise disposing of, or who receives, stores, accumulates, or possesses or has in his possession, for the purpose of selling, exchanging or otherwise disposing of the same, any scrap iron or metal derived from or formerly a part of any automobile, or parts or accessories of and from old or used or junked automobiles, or old or used or worn automobile tires, tubes or casings, or other articles, parts or accessories used on, about or in connection with automobiles. 
"Automobile junk yard" means and includes any building, store, warehouse, shed, structure, yard, enclosure, lot, open area, or other premises or place, where scrap iron or metal derived from or formerly a part of any automobile, or parts or accessories of or from old, used or worn tires, tubes or casings, or other articles, parts or accessories of or from old or used or worn or junked automobiles, or old, used or worn tires tubes or casings, or other articles, parts or accessories used on or about or in connection with automobiles, are kept stored, piled or accumulated for the purpose of selling, offering for sale, exchanging or otherwise disposing thereof. 
"Automobile wrecking establishment" means and includes any building, store, warehouse, shed, structure, yard, enclosure, lot, open area, or other premises or place where there is carried on, conducted or maintained the business of dismantling or taking parts or accessories from old or used or wrecked automobiles, or of storing, keeping or accumulating, or selling, offering for sale, exchanging or otherwise disposing of, such parts or accessories. 
(Prior code §§ 6325—6325.4)  
5.20.020 - Regulations. 
No person shall commence, locate, establish, operate, engage in, or carry on, the business of an automobile junk dealer, or locate, establish, build, construct, equip, keep, operate, or carry on, any automobile junk yard, or automobile wrecking establishment, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6326)  
5.20.030 - Permit required. 
No person shall conduct or engage in any business or occupation described in this chapter without having first obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title. 
(Prior code § 6327)  
5.20.040 - Permit application. 
In addition to all requirements specified in or imposed under Chapter 5.12 of this title, each application for a permit for any business described in this chapter shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by at least three (3) reputable residents of the city, certifying to the good moral character and reputation of the persons or person making such application. No permit shall be granted to any person who does not bear a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity in the neighborhood in which he or she resides. 
(Prior code § 6327.1)  
5.20.050 - Additional grounds for revocation. 
In addition to any other grounds specified in this chapter, the violation of any of the laws of the United States or of the state of California, or of any of the provisions of this code, or the unlawful possession by a permittee of any stolen automobile or of stolen parts or accessories of any automobile, shall constitute good cause for revocation and termination of any license or permit issued under this title. 
(Prior code § 6328)  
5.20.060 - Minors. 
No person holding a permit under this chapter shall buy or receive any article or thing referred to in the definitions of "Automobile" or "Automobile junk dealer" in Section 5.20.010 from any motor under the age of eighteen (18) years; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply where the minor dealing with such person presents the written consent of his parent or guardian, duly signed, authorizing the particular transaction had with such person; and provided, further, that such written consent shall be retained by said person as long as the property procured through said transaction remain in the possession of such person, and provided that said written consent shall be exhibited upon demand to any peace officer requiring the same. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6329)  
5.20.070 - Business records. 
Every person operating any business or establishment under this chapter shall keep at such place of business a substantial, well bound book in which there shall be entered at the time of purchase or receipt thereof an exact description of every article or thing referred to in the definitions of "Automobile" or "Automobile junk dealer" in Section 5.20.010 purchased or received by such person, together with the date of purchase, the name and residence or place of business of the person from whom purchased or received, the signature of the person from whom purchased or received, and all particular or prominent marks of identification that may be found on such property; said book shall be kept neat and clean and all entries therein made shall be neatly and legibly written in ink. Said book shall be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police, or any police officer of the City, at all times during ordinary hours of business. 
(Prior code § 6330)  
5.20.080 - Automobile records. 
A.  Every person operating any business referred to in this chapter shall keep a record of each and every automobile wrecked by such person in said business or establishment, which record shall be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police, or any police officer of the city, at all times during ordinary hours of business and shall within twenty-four (24) hours after the purchase or receipt of such automobile, make out and deliver to the Chief of Police of the city, on blanks furnished by the Chief of Police for that purpose, a full, true and complete report, written in the English language in a clear and legible manner, stating the make, state license number, motor number, style and seating capacity of such automobile; the true name as nearly as known, the age, sex, height, weight, and the residence or place of business of the person from whom purchased or received. 
B.  Every automobile purchased or received by any person operating any business referred to in this chapter shall be held in its original condition as purchased or received and shall not be wrecked or dismantled for a period of five (5) days next succeeding the date of so notifying the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code § 6331)  
5.20.090 - Report forms. 
The Chief of Police shall cause such number of blanks to be printed as may be necessary for that purpose, and shall thereafter, from time to time, cause such additional blanks to be printed as may be required, which said blanks shall be so printed and subdivided that they shall have space for writing in the matters specified in Section 5.20.080, together with a caption providing blank spaces in which to fill in the date of said report and the name and residence or place of business of the person making the report. 
(Prior code § 6332)  
5.20.100 - Files. 
The Chief of Police shall deliver said blanks to the persons from whom said reports are required, from time to time, free of charge, upon application therefor, and shall upon receipt of said report file the same in some secure place in his office, and the same shall be open to inspection only to the Police Department of the city, or upon the order of some court, duly made for that purpose. 
(Prior code § 6333)  
5.20.110 - Enclosure. 
If any business referred to in this chapter shall be located in whole or in part in any yard, enclosure, lot, or open area, such premises shall be completely surrounded and enclosed by a wall, fence, or barrier, constructed of wood or other solid, impervious material, or of galvanized steel wire, extending above the ground for at least six (6) feet. Any and all necessary openings in said fence, wall or barrier, shall be provided with suitable gates or doors constructed of the same material and in the same manner of construction as is authorized by this Section as suitable and sufficient for a fence, wall or barrier under this Section. 
(Prior code § 6334)  
5.20.120 - Rubbish. 
If any business referred to in this chapter shall be located in whole or in part in a yard, enclosure, lot or open area, such premises and area shall be kept clean and free from rubbish at all times and all loose metal, or parts or accessories of automobiles, and all other material kept, stored or accumulated in said place shall be neatly and carefully piled; all oils and grease from said automobiles shall be collected and deposited in containers and shall not be allowed to run on the premises, or on the public highway or on adjoining property. 
(Prior code § 6335)  
5.20.130 - Fire extinguishers. 
No person shall permit any such business referred to in this chapter to be carried on unless there shall be kept on said premises, in good working order, at all times, fire extinguishers in the number and of the style designated by the Fire Chief, as reasonably necessary to minimize and eliminate fire hazard on said premises. 
(Prior code § 6336)  
Chapter 5.24 - BINGO GAMES 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - Bingo defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random. The game of bingo shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.801)  
5.24.020 - Permit—Eligible organizations. 
Organizations which are exempt from the payment of the Bank and Corporation tax pursuant to 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) or 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile home park associations, and senior citizen organizations, and who meet the other qualifications set forth in this chapter are eligible to apply to the city for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city pursuant to the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter. No organization, other than a mobile home association and a senior citizen organization shall be deemed to be eligible to apply for a bingo game permit unless it has been in existence at a location or locations in the city for a period of five (5) years preceding the filing of an application. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 2462 § 1, 1997; prior code § 6399.802)  
5.24.030 - Permit—Application. 
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain a permit to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application therefor, on a form prescribed by the city, in writing with the Business License Division together with a filing fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.803)  
5.24.040 - Qualification. 
No permit shall be issued unless the applicant is an eligible organization pursuant to Section 5.24.020 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.804)  
5.24.050 - Application—Contents. 
The application for a permit shall contain the following: 
A.  The name of the applicant and material demonstrating the applicant's eligibility pursuant to Section 5.24.020; and 
B.  Whether the applicant organization has been operating in the city for at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application; and 
C.  The names of at least two (2) officers of the applicant organization; and 
D.  A description of the particular property within the city including the street address, owned or leased by or donated to, the applicant, and used by such applicant for an office and/or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, and on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such location; and 
E.  Proposed day of the week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games; 
F.  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as the same may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the permit to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the City Administrator upon violation of any of such provisions. 
G.  The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury; 
H.  Such other information as deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.805)  
5.24.060 - Permit—Contents. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is qualified to hold a bingo permit and that it appears that the operation of bingo games will be conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, including this code, the city shall issue a permit to the applicant. Any such permit may be conditioned so as to insure compliance with applicable laws, including without limitation, this chapter. Each permit shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and legal status of the organization to whom the permit is issued; 
B.  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
C.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted; 
D.  The date of the expiration of such permit; 
E.  Any conditions imposed on the permit; 
F.  Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.806)  
5.24.070 - Permit—Duration—Renewal. 
An annual permit issued shall be valid through and including December 31st of the calendar year in which the permit is issued. Qualified applicants may apply for renewal of permits. Renewal applications shall be filed and processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If an application for a permit is denied, one-half of any permit fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.807)  
5.24.080 - Permit—Designation of officers and managing employees. 
Each permittee shall maintain on file with the Business License Division, a current list of the names, addresses and phone numbers of all officers of the permittee organization and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of those responsible persons who are conducting games pursuant to the permit for the permittee. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.808)  
5.24.090 - Permit—Suspension or revocation. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the City Administrator that a permittee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any applicable law, including without limitation, the provisions of this chapter, the City Administrator shall have the authority to summarily suspend the permit and order the permittee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. 
B.  The City Administrator shall give notice to the permittee of the violation and issue an order of suspension ("order"). The order shall advise the permittee that the permit has been suspended and shall state the effective date of such suspension together with a statement of reasons for the suspension. The permittee shall have ten (10) days from and after the date of service of the order within which to file an appeal appealing the decision of the City Administrator to suspend the permit. If for any reason the permittee fails to file a timely appeal, the order shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be an order of revocation and shall be final and conclusive subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.809)  
5.24.100 - Hearing procedure—Appeal. 
A.  Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Administrator shall designate a qualified person to act as the hearing officer with respect to said appeal. The hearing officer shall give the permittee, and any other person requesting the same, at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place of the conduct of the appeal hearing. At the time of the appeal hearing, the permittee and other interested persons shall be permitted to present such evidence as may be relevant to the issue of suspension and/or revocation of the permit involved. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applied to the proceeding by the hearing officer but the hearing officer shall take such steps as may be necessary to permit the presentation of evidentiary material which is relevant and reliable. The hearing officer shall, upon conclusion of the hearing, determine whether the permit should be revoked; and shall issue an order of revocation in the event the determination is to revoke the same. 
B.  A permittee or other interested person may file a written appeal appealing the decision of the hearing officer in the event of the issuance of an order of revocation, to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days following the giving of notice of the issuance of the order of revocation by the hearing officer. Failure to timely file such an appeal for any reason shall result in the revocation order being final and conclusive for all purposes. 
C.  Where an appeal from a decision of the hearing officer has been timely made, the City Council shall set the matter for consideration at its next most convenient meeting. The hearing officer shall prepare a transcript of proceedings and shall transmit the same to the City Council and to the appellant. The City Council shall determine the appeal from the decision of the hearing officer solely based upon the transcript of proceedings presented by the hearing officer. The permittee and any other interested person may submit to the City Council written arguments in support of the position of such person. No additional evidence will be accepted relating to the matter. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive, subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.810)  
5.24.110 - Effect of revoked permit. 
Any organization whose permit is finally revoked may not again apply for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from and after the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under the appropriate Revenue and Taxation Code Section set forth in Section 5.24.020, such organization may again apply for a permit upon submitting proof of reinstatement of the exemption. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.811)  
5.24.120 - Maximum amount of prize. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.812)  
5.24.130 - Profits to be kept in separate fund or account. 
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept and used in the manner prescribed by Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and shall principally be expanded for charitable purposes in the city. The permittee shall keep full and accurate records of the income received and expenses disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and all other phases of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. Before renewal of the permit, the permittee must provide a copy of the previous year's income/expense statement to the city. In addition the city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time and permittee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records available. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.813)  
5.24.140 - Financial interest in permittee. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the permittee shall hold any financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.814)  
5.24.150 - Exclusive operation by permittee. 
A bingo game shall be operated, conducted and staffed only by members of the permittee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, salary or income of any kind from any bingo game. The permittee organization may, however, employ security personnel to provide security services at bingo games and pay for such personnel from game proceeds. Only the permittee shall operate such game and participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.815)  
5.24.160 - Open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the permittee organization. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.816)  
5.24.170 - Attendance limited to occupancy capacity. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building department of the city. A permittee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.817)  
5.24.180 - Game only on permittee's property. 
A permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or on property whose use is donated to the organization and which property used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The permit shall be prominently displayed on the property where the bingo games are conducted and shall be presented immediately upon demand by a peace officer or an authorized agent of the city. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by or donated to the permittee be used or leased exclusively by such permittee. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.818)  
5.24.190 - Minors not to participate. 
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.819)  
5.24.200 - Intoxicated persons not to participate. 
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.820)  
5.24.210 - Days and hours of operation. 
A.  Each permittee may conduct bingo games (1) one per calendar week; and (2) for one annual event conducted for not more than a three (3) consecutive day period. 
B.  No bingo game shall be conducted before nine a.m. of any day or after eleven p.m., of any day nor longer than a four (4) consecutive hour period. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.821)  
5.24.220 - Participant must be present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.822)  
5.24.230 - Public nuisance—Abatement. 
Any person who conducts a bingo game in the city for which a permit has not been issued or, if issued, has either been suspended or revoked, shall, in addition to any other penalty for such conduct, be deemed to be conducting a public nuisance on the property where the same is located. The conduct of such a game shall be deemed for all purposes to be a continuing public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement. City may elect to file a civil action to abate such a public nuisance and if the court determines that a public nuisance exists, the city shall be awarded its attorneys' fees and other costs incurred with reference to such civil action. Contemporaneously with such a civil action, criminal proceedings may also be filed against the person or persons conducting bingo games without there being a valid permit in effect. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.823)  
5.24.240 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person operating or conducting a bingo game without a valid subsisting permit which is and in full force and effect pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2488 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 6399.824)  
Chapter 5.25 - USE OF SHOPPING AND LAUNDRY CARTS 
Sections: 
 
5.25.010 - Business permit required. 
A.  Business Permit Required. No business establishment which uses carts in its operations or which provides, or otherwise makes available, carts to its customers, may do so without a valid business permit issued by the Permit Committee in accordance with this chapter. Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, any such business permit shall remain valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of its issuance. 
B.  Submission of Application; Other Communications. Business permit applications and other material required under this chapter shall be submitted to the Permit Committee care of the El Monte License and Treasury Division. All other reports or communications which must be provided to the Director and/or the Permit Committee pursuant to this chapter shall be sent to both the Director and the Permit Committee care of the El Monte License and Treasury Division. 
C.  Any application for a business permit issued under this chapter shall be accompanied by the payment of administrative fees to recover the cost to the City of processing, reviewing and approving business permit applications issued under this chapter; as well as the cost of reviewing, approving, administering and enforcing cart containment plans required under this chapter. Such fees may be established and from time to time amended by City Council resolution, provided the amount of such fees reasonably approximates the cost of the service, function or task performed by the City. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 1, 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.25.020 - Submission of proposed cart containment plan. 
A.  Plan Required. Any business establishment that applies for a business permit under this chapter shall be required to submit a proposed cart containment plan along with its application. No business permit may be issued unless and until the Permit Committee approves a finalized cart containment plan for the business establishment. No business establishment may begin to use carts in its operations or otherwise provide, or make available, carts to its customers sooner than any time frame set forth in the approved cart containment plan. Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, any cart containment plan approved by the Permit Committee shall remain valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance of the business permit to which it corresponds. 
B.  Renewals. An application to renew a business permit and a corresponding cart containment plan shall be filed and processed in the same manner as an application for a new business permit and the submission of an initial proposed cart containment plan. 
C.  Commencement of Application Process. The Permit Committee shall commence with the acceptance of business permit applications and proposed cart containment plans no sooner than ninety (90) days from the effective date of the ordinance which initially codifies this chapter. Within six (6) months from the effective date of this chapter, all business establishments using carts in their operations or which otherwise provide or make available carts to their customers shall be required to possess a valid business permit issued pursuant to this chapter and shall also be required to comply with the terms of a corresponding and duly approved cart containment plan. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 2, 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.25.030 - Cart containment plan. 
A.  Basic Elements of Plan. At a minimum, all cart containment plans (whether proposed or approved) shall include the following basic elements which shall mandate the implementation of specific measures and practices that address the issue of cart containment as follows: 
1.  Up-to-Date Contact Information. The cart containment plan shall (i) state the name, physical address and on-site telephone number (and fax number, if available) of the business establishment; (ii) the name of the person(s) having a controlling ownership interest in the business establishment as well as the business address, telephone number (and fax number, if available) of the same; and (iii) if applicable, the name, business address, telephone number and fax number of any cart retrieval service contracted to retrieve carts for the business establishment. The business establishment shall be required to notify the Director and the Permit Committee in writing within seven (7) calendar days of the date any of the information required under this subsection (A)(l) of this Section changes. 
2.  Cart Inventory; Compliance with Mandatory Cart Signage Requirements. The cart containment plan shall include a complete inventory of all carts located on the premises whether owned by, furnished to, or otherwise used by the business establishment in its operations. Each such cart shall be identified by serial number of such other numbering system as may be employed by the business establishment. The cart containment plan shall identify those measures that must be, or have been, undertaken by the business establishment to comply with the mandatory cart signage requirements set forth under Section 8.54.040 (Mandatory Cart Signage) of Chapter 8.54 of this code and shall require that any cart owned by, furnished to, or otherwise used by the business establishment comply with these requirements. If full compliance with the signage requirements is not complete as of the date the containment plan is approved, the plan shall set forth a time frame for full compliance not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days from the date of approval. No later than the tenth (10th) day of each calendar month following the approval of a cart containment plan, the business establishment shall be required to provide the Director and the Permit Committee with an updated inventory list identifying all carts which are no longer in its inventory, all new carts added to its inventory and all carts which remain in its inventory since the last reporting. 
3.  Notice to Customers. The cart containment plan shall require that written notice be provided to customers in English, Spanish and Mandarin Chinese stating that the unauthorized removal of carts from the premises is prohibited under the laws of the state of California and a violation of this code. Such notice may be provided in the form of flyers distributed on the premises, warnings printed on shopping bags or direct mail. In addition, the business establishment shall be required to place and maintain cart removal warning signs which meet all of the following minimum specifications: (i) meet or exceed eighteen (18) inches in width and twenty-four (24) inches in height; (ii) using block lettering not less than one-half inch in width and two (2) inches in height, contain a statement in English, Spanish and Mandarin Chinese, warning that the unauthorized removal of carts from the premises, or possession of a cart in a location other than the premises, is a violation of the laws of the state of California and this code; and (iv) be conspicuously affixed to an interior wall of the building in which the business establishment is located or permanently and prominently displayed within two (2) feet of all building entrances and exits. The cart containment plan shall detail the specific means by which the business establishment shall comply with this element. 
4.  Daily Cart Confinement. All carts located on the premises of the business establishment (other than an establishment open for business twenty-four (24) hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the business establishment and shall be collectively confined in a secure manner at the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the cart containment plan until the commencement of the next business day. All carts located on the premises of any business establishment open for business twenty-four (24) hours per day, other than carts then currently in use by a customer, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to the designated cart confinement area on the premises at least twice per calendar day between the hours of one p.m. and five p.m. and the hours of eight p.m. and one a.m. for each day the business establishment is open for business. The provisions of this element shall not apply to carts which are physically confined within an enclosed building. The cart containment plan shall set forth the means by which the business establishment shall comply with the provisions of this element. 
5.  Retrieval from Immediate Vicinity of Premises. The business establishment shall designate employees in sufficient number to assure that all public streets and sidewalks immediately abutting the outer perimeter of the premises are patrolled no less often than once every six (6) hours. Each cart found as a result of such patrols shall be immediately retrieved by the business establishment so as to prevent it from blocking sidewalks or rolling onto streets. The cart containment plan shall identify the areas to be patrolled as required by this element; the number of personnel designated to undertake such patrols; the manner, frequency and times of such patrols; and the procedures to be employed by the business establishment to identify and retrieve any lost, stolen or abandoned carts. The cart containment plan shall require that the business establishment maintain a daily log indicating the time and frequency of such patrols and the names of the person undertaking such patrols on behalf of the business establishment. Each daily log shall be maintained by the business establishment for a minimum of three (3) years and shall be made available for inspection and copying within forty-eight (48) hours following any oral or written request for inspection and copying by the Director or the Permit Committee. 
6.  Employee Training. The business establishment shall implement and maintain a periodic training program for its new and existing employees designed to educate such employees concerning the requirements of the cart containment plan and the provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of carts from the premises of a business establishment. The cart containment plan shall describe the elements of the employee training program. 
7.  Retrieval Personnel. Each business establishment shall provide personnel for purposes of the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the business establishment or one or more independent contractors hired by the business establishment to provide cart retrieval services, or a combination of both. The cart containment plan shall either (i) identify the number of employees assigned to cart retrieval duties, the number of total hours per week that each assigned employee will perform such services (in addition to any on-premises retrieval duties to which such employee may be assigned), and the training each such personnel has received or will receive concerning the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned carts; or (ii) include a copy of each contract with a cart retrieval service. For purposes of this Section, those identified in the cart containment plan as providing cart retrieval services, shall be referred to in this Section as "retrieval personnel." The business establishment shall provide written authorization to all retrieval personnel which authorization shall be carried by each such person while performing cart retrieval services on behalf of the business establishment and shall be provided to any enforcement personnel upon request. Each vehicle used by retrieval personnel shall bear conspicuous signs on the vehicle identifying either the name of the business establishment for which such retrieval service is being performed or, if applicable, the name of the cart retrieval service with which the retail establishment has contracted for such service. The cart containment plan shall set forth the means by which the business establishment shall comply with this element. 
8.  Physical Containment Measures. The cart containment plan shall identify all such physical containment measures installed or otherwise employed by the business establishment in compliance with Chapter 17.06 (General Regulations) of Title 17 (Zoning) of this code. Each business establishment shall maintain all such physical containment systems, devices and/or equipment in good working order. All such physical containment measures must remain in operation at all times. With respect to containment systems involving wheel locking or stopping mechanisms used in conjunction with an electronic or magnetic barrier, such systems may be rendered temporarily inoperable by the business establishment for the limited purpose of undertaking scheduled repairs and/or maintenance, provided that the City is given at least three (3) business days prior written notice of such work and provided such notice also includes the approximate times at which the system shall be rendered inoperable and the estimated time in which all such work shall be completed. All such repairs and maintenance shall be completed within seven (7) calendar days from the estimated date of completion. During any period in which the system is inoperable regardless of the cause, the business establishment shall dispatch employees or security guards to deter or stop customers from removing carts from the premises. 
B.  Compliance Required. Each business establishment subject to this Section shall comply with the terms, conditions and requirements of this Section, its approved cart containment plan and the underlying business permit to which the cart containment plan corresponds. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 3, 14 (part), 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.25.040 - Plan submission and disposition. 
A.  Submission of Plan. Upon the filing of a complete and accurate application for a business permit along with the submission of a complete proposed cart containment plan and upon the receipt of any required processing fee, the Permit Committee shall have sixty (60) calendar days to review and analyze the application and the proposed cart containment plan; and schedule a public hearing on the matter. 
B.  Committee Options. The applicant-business establishment shall bear the burden of providing sufficient documentation and exhibits to allow the Permit Committee to render a decision upon the application and the proposed cart containment plan. In rendering a decision the Permit Committee may: 
1.  Approve the cart containment plan as proposed by the business establishment and approve the underlying business permit; 
2.  Deny the cart containment plan as proposed by the business establishment and deny the underlying business permit; 
3.  Approve a cart containment plan that modifies or amends the conditions, requirements, performance deadlines and/or measures contained in the proposed plan and approve the underlying business permit subject to such modifications and/or amendments; or 
4.  Continue the approval proceedings in its own discretion for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days so that the Permit Committee may obtain or receive additional information relevant to its final disposition on the matter or so that the applicant may modify or amend its proposed cart containment plan in an attempt to address issues and concerns raised by the Permit Committee. Such proceedings may be continued for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days with the consent of the applicant which consent must be stated verbally by the applicant or its representative at the hearing prior to the making of a motion for a continuance. 
The decision of the Permit Committee shall be made in writing and notice thereof shall be transmitted to the business establishment by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery or fax transmission. If the application and/or the proposed cart containment plan is denied, the notice of decision given to the business establishment shall state the grounds upon which the proposed cart containment plan was denied. A decision of the Permit Committee may be appealed by the business establishment in the time and manner provided in Section 5.25.060 (Appeals) of this chapter. 
C.  Substantial Evidence. The decision of the Permit Committee shall be supported by substantial evidence and shall be based on (i) the information contained in, or submitted with, the application and the proposed cart containment plan; (ii) the written reports or other communications of City staff presented to the Permit Committee at or before the hearing; (iii) such other written documentation as may be presented by the applicant, City staff, the Los Angeles County Fire Department or members of the general public at or before the hearing; (iv) the personal observations of the Permit Committee members, provided the applicant, at a minimum, is given an opportunity to verbally rebut or otherwise challenge such observations; and (v) the oral testimony, statements and/or reports of the applicant, the applicant's representative(s), City staff, members of the Permit Committee, and/or members of the general public. 
D.  Relevant Factors. In rendering any decision on an application, a cart containment plan or a renewal of either, the Permit Committee may consider the: (i) the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of a previously approved cart containment plan in reducing the number of carts removed from a premises; (ii) the proximity of the business establishment to schools, parks or other locations in the City where children regularly congregate; (iii) the proximity of the business establishment to major roadways or pedestrian rights-of-way where stray or abandoned carts are likely to cause injury or impediment; (iv) the business establishment's history of compliance under previously approved business permits and/or cart containment plans; (v) the physical and/or aesthetic compatibility of a proposed cart containment plan and measures employed thereunder with the size, shape or approved design and/or approved use of a premises; and/or (vi) whether the use of carts at the premises or the use of carts in the manner contemplated under a proposed cart containment plan will be inimical to, or will jeopardize the preservation of the public peace, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 14 (part), 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.25.050 - Revocation of business permit. 
A.  An approved business permit may be revoked by the Permit Committee upon any of the following grounds: 
1.  The owner of the business establishment is operating, or is permitting the operation of, the business establishment in violation of one or more of the provisions of the approved cart containment plan and has failed to correct said violation(s) within a period of fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the City; or 
2.  The owner of any business establishment with an approved cart containment plan is operating, or is permitting the operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the requirements of this chapter, Chapter 8.54 or Chapter 17.06 of this code and has failed to correct said violation(s) within a period of fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the City. 
B.  Order to Show Cause. If at any time following the issuance of a business permit and the approval of a cart containment plan, the Permit Committee obtains information or evidence that any of the grounds set forth in subsection A of this Section, above, may exist, the Permit Committee shall issue a written order to show cause as to why the business permit should not be revoked and schedule a hearing thereon which hearing shall not be less than fifteen (15) calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days following the date such order to show cause is received by the business establishment. The order to show cause shall state the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke the approved business permit and shall include the information and evidence, or a summary thereof, upon which such order to show cause was issued. 
C.  Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing on any order to show cause issued pursuant to this Section. 
D.  Conduct of Hearing. The hearing to consider revocation of a business permit shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence shall not be applicable. The owner or designated representative of the business establishment and the City shall each have the opportunity to present evidence and witnesses in support of or in opposition to the contemplated revocation. The parties may each be represented by legal counsel or other representatives of their choice. The City shall bear the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that grounds exist to revoke the business permit. The Permit Committee, in its discretion, and as an alternative to revocation, may consider amendment of the cart containment plan if the grounds for the order to show cause are due solely to the inadequacy of the approved cart containment plan. 
E.  Decision of the Permit Committee. Within thirty (30) calendar days following the conclusion of the hearing, the Permit Committee shall render its decision in writing either dismissing the proceedings or revoking the business permit or dismissing the proceedings subject to amendment of the cart containment plan. If the business permit is revoked or the cart containment plan amended, the decision shall specify the findings of fact and the reasons for such action. If the cart containment plan is amended, the decision of the Permit Committee shall also specify the amendments to the cart containment plan. 
F.  Appeal of Decision. Any decision of the Permit Committee to revoke a business permit or amend a cart containment plan shall be subject to appeal by the business establishment within the time and in the manner specified in Section 5.25.060 of this chapter. In the absence of a timely appeal, the decision of the Permit Committee shall be final and conclusive. 
G.  Use of Shopping Carts Following Revocation Prohibited. No business establishment subject to the requirements of this chapter shall provide or make available carts for use by its customers or otherwise use carts in its operations following the date of any decision revoking a business permit unless and until a new business permit and cart containment plan is approved by the Permit Committee for such business establishment. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a business establishment shall not be eligible to submit a new application for a business permit and new proposed cart containment plan for processing for a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days following the date any decision revoking the prior business permit for such business establishment becomes final. Any new application for a business permit submitted to the City for such a business establishment during said one hundred eighty (180) day period shall be returned to the business establishment as untimely. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 4—7, 14 (part), 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.25.060 - Appeals. 
A.  Filing of Appeal. Any business establishment aggrieved by any adverse decision of the Permit Committee pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days following the date of giving of notice of such decision by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal specifically stating and enumerating the issues appealed. Such appeal shall be deemed filed on the date the appeal is actually received in the office of the City Clerk accompanied by an appeal processing fee in such an amount as may be established and from time to time amended by City Council resolution. No appeal shall be accepted for filing and processing by the City Council unless accompanied by any applicable appeal processing fee. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. If the appeal is timely filed, the City Clerk shall notify the City Council and the Permit Committee of such timely filing. The City Council shall then have fifteen (15) days to designate a Hearing Officer by resolution. The designated Hearing Officer shall thereafter cause the matter to be set for hearing which hearing date shall be held within sixty (60) calendar days following the date of receipt of such notice of appeal. The appellant shall be provided not less than ten (10) calendar days' written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
C.  Conduct of Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence shall not be applicable. The parties may each be represented by legal counsel or other representatives of their choosing. No additional evidence or argument shall be received or considered following the conclusion of the hearing except as may be agreed to by stipulation of the parties. 
D.  Decision by Hearing Officer. 
1.  Time Period for Decision. The Hearing Officer shall render a decision on the appeal and adopt findings of in support of such decision within thirty (30) calendar days following the conclusion of said hearing. 
2.  Application Appeal. If the business establishment appeals all or any portion of a decision rendered pursuant to Section 5.25.040 (Plan Submission and Disposition), the Hearing Officer shall determine whether or not the decision or portion thereof that is the subject of the appeal was supported by substantial evidence and/or based on factors relevant to the approval, denial or conditional approval of an initial application or renewal of a business permit and its corresponding cart containment plan. The Hearing Officer's decision shall be based upon all evidence, documentation, testimony and other information presented to the Permit Committee in accordance with Sections 5.25.040(C) and (D) of this chapter; the written appeal of the business establishment; the written argument, points and/or authorities of the parties submitted in support of or in opposition to the appeal; the oral argument of the parties at the hearing; and such additional evidence and/or testimony as may be introduced by stipulation of the parties. The Hearing Officer shall not consider or rule upon any issue not raised by the business establishment in its appeal. Any written argument, points and/or authorities in support of, or in opposition to, the appeal shall be submitted to the Hearing Officer care of the City Clerk no later than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled appeal hearing. In rendering a decision, the Hearing Officer may uphold, reverse and/or modify the decision of the Permit Committee. 
3.  Revocation Appeal. If the business establishment appeals all or any portion of a decision rendered pursuant to Section 5.25.050 (Revocation of Business Permit), the Hearing Officer shall determine whether or not the decision was supported by a preponderance of evidence presented to the Permit Committee. The Hearing Officer's decision shall be based upon all evidence, documentation, testimony and other information presented to the Permit Committee in accordance with the proceedings set forth under Section 5.25.050 of this chapter; the written appeal of the business establishment; the written argument, points and/or authorities of the parties submitted in support of or in opposition to the appeal; the oral argument of the parties at the hearing; and such additional evidence and/or testimony as may be introduced by stipulation of the parties. The Hearing Officer shall not consider or rule upon any issue not raised by the business establishment in its appeal. Any written argument, points and/or authorities in support of, or in opposition to, the appeal shall be submitted to the Hearing Officer care of the City Clerk no later than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled appeal hearing. In rendering a decision, the Hearing Officer may uphold, reverse and/or modify the decision of the Permit Committee. 
E.  Decision is Final. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final and conclusive on the date said decision is deemed given to the appellant. 
(Ord. 2704 § 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.25.070 - Notices; deadlines dates. 
A.  Notices. Any notice, decision or written communication issued by Hearing Officer, the Permit Committee or any other official, officer or employee of the City which is required under this chapter shall be conclusively deemed received by the recipient on the date of personal service or three (3) consecutive days following deposit of the same in the United States Mail, certified and properly addressed. In the event contact information for a cart owner or a business establishment changes, the cart owner or business establishment, whichever the case may be, shall provide the Permit Committee with an update within three (3) business days of said change. Such updated contact information shall be sent to the Permit Committee care of the El Monte License and Treasury Division. 
B.  Deadline Dates. If any deadline date set forth under this chapter falls on a date in which the City of El Monte is not open for business, the deadline date shall be extended to five-thirty p.m. of the next day in which the City of El Monte is open for business. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 14 (part), 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.25.080 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, the defined terms set forth under Section 8.54.100 (Definitions) of Chapter 8.54 (Abandoned Carts - Retrieval and Impoundment) shall have the same meaning when used in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2691 § 2 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5.28 - CLOSING OUT SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and terms shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows: 
"Advertise," "Advertisement," "Advertising," "Publish," "Publications," means and includes any and all means whether oral, written, lettered or printed, used for conveying to the public notice of the conduct of a sale as defined herein, or notice of intention to conduct such sale, including but not limited to oral or written announcements by proclamation or outcry, newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, written or printed display, billboard display, poster, radio and television announcement. 
"Closing out sale" means and includes each of the following: 
1.  Any sale of, or any offer to sell, to the public or any group thereof, goods, wares, or merchandise on order, in transit, or in stock, in connection with a declared purpose as set forth by advertising that such sale is anticipatory of or to avoid the termination, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, removal, dissolution or abandonment of the business or that portion of the business conducted at any location; and 
2.  All sales advertised in any manner calculated to convey to the public the belief that upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the business or that portion thereof being conducted at any location will cease, be removed, be interrupted, discontinued or changed; and 
3.  All sales advertised to be "Adjuster's Sale," "Adjustment Sale," "Assignee's Sale," "Bankrupt Sale," "Benefit of Administrator's Sale," "Benefit of Creditors' Sale," "Benefit of Trustee's Sale," "Building Coming Down Sale," "Closing Out Sale," "Creditor's Committee Sale," "Creditor's Sale," "Damaged Goods Sale," "End Sale," "Executor's Sale," "Final Days Sale," "Fire Sale," "Forced Out Sale," "Forced Out of Business Sale," "Insolvent Sale," "Insurance Salvage Sale," "Liquidation Sale," "Loss of Lease Sale," "Mortgage Sale," "Outselling Sale," "Receiver's Sale," "Reorganization Sale," "Salvage Sale," "Selling Out Sale," "Smoke Sale," "Smoke and Water Sale," "Trustee's Sale," "Quitting Business Sale," "Wholesale Closing Out Sale," "We Quit Sale," "We Give Up Sale," "Fixtures For Sale," or advertised by any other expression or characterization closely similar to any of the foregoing and calculated to convey the same meaning; and 
4.  All sales advertised in a manner calculated to indicate that the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold, or any part thereof, have been involved in any business failure or have been derived from a business which has failed, been closed, discontinued or liquidated; and 
5.  All sales accompanied by notices or advertising indicating that the premises are available for purchase or lease or otherwise to be vacated; and 
6.  All sales accompanied by advertising indicating a business emergency or failure affecting the seller or any previous holder of the goods to be disposed of. 
"Fake sale" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The sale of goods, wares or merchandise, at auction or otherwise to agents or other persons purchasing the same for or on behalf of the owner or other person interested in the selling thereof; 
2.  The offering for sale of goods, wares or merchandise of a different quality, brand or bearing a different trademark than the merchandise previously advertised for sale; 
3.  The sale of any goods, wares or merchandise misrepresented as to quantity or quality or otherwise; 
4.  The sale or offering for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise transported or brought into the city and not constituting the original legitimate stock of goods, wares and merchandise of a place of business within said city, as the original and legitimate stock of goods, wares and merchandise of such place of business, at a bankrupt, insurance, mortgage, insolvency, assignee's, receiver's, trustee's, creditor's, executor's or administrator's sale, or a forced removal sale, or closing out sale, or the sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the sale of the original stock of goods, wares and merchandise of any place of business at a bankrupt, insurance, mortgage, insolvency, assignee's, receiver's, trustee's, creditor's, or administrator's forced removal or closing out sale, but the bringing of new stock into any such place of business or the adding of new stock to such original stock of goods, wares and merchandise and selling or offering to sell such new stock or added stock of such goods, wares and merchandise at said place of business at any of the sales above described, is declared unlawful and to be a fake sale within the meaning thereof. 
"Permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
"Permitted sale" means any sale for which a permit has been issued under this chapter. 
"Permittee" means any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code §§ 6398—6398.6)  
5.28.020 - Fake sales prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, make or advertise any fake sale of goods, wares or merchandise in the city. 
(Prior code § 6399)  
5.28.030 - Permit required. 
No person shall advertise or conduct a closing out sale as herein defined without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
A.  Regulations. The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this title providing for a business license tax. Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose a greater restriction upon persons, premises, business or practices than is imposed by the general business license regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
B.  Interval Between Sales. Any person who has held a sale of the type regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the application, within one year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a permit. 
C.  Restricted Location. If a person applying for a permit hereunder operates more than one place of business, the permit issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application, and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way participating in the permitted sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the permitted sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the permitted sale. 
D.  Persons Exempted. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
1.  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
2.  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
3.  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction; 
4.  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been complied with. 
(Prior code §§ 6399.1—6399.5)  
5.28.040 - Permit application. 
In addition to the requirements specified in or imposed under Chapter 5.12 of this title each application for a permit to conduct any sale regulated by this chapter shall specify the following information: 
A.  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; 
B.  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; 
C.  The address of the place where such sale is to be held; 
D.  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; 
E.  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is conducted; 
F.  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
G.  The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement; 
H.  An itemized stock list or inventory of the goods, wares, and merchandise to be offered for sale, together with the cost at which the goods, wares and merchandise was obtained by the owner thereof, or the person conducting such sale. All goods, wares and merchandise listed upon the inventory, herein required, shall be so described in detail by manufacturer's name and lot number, the individual number of articles so numbered, colors, sizes and otherwise, that the identity of such goods with the goods listed on such inventory can be readily determined. All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase, or additions to the stock of goods of the business affected made within thirty (30) days before the filing of any application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character; 
I.  The place where such stock was purchased or acquired, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; and in the case of stock placed upon the premises within thirty (30) days prior to such sale, the time of acquisition of such stock; 
J.  The name of the owner of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale; 
K.  The name of the person conducting such sale if the sale is to be conducted by a person not the owner of the goods. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6399.6)  
5.28.050 - Surety bond. 
Each applicant for a permit to conduct any sale regulated by this chapter shall file with the city a corporate surety bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6399.8)  
5.28.060 - Terms of permit. 
A permit under this chapter shall be issued on the following terms: 
A.  Permit Period—Renewal. The permit shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than sixty (60) consecutive days; provided, however, that the Permit Committee may, upon application therefor, accompanied by such renewal fee as may be elsewhere specified, renew said permit for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days. Such application for renewal shall set forth a complete list of goods listed in the original application and remaining unsold, and shall not contain any goods, wares or merchandise not named in such original application. Upon receipt of such application for renewal the License Officer shall cause an investigation to be made at once, and if satisfied of the truth of the statement therein contained, shall grant such renewal. 
B.  Nature of Sale. The permit shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
C.  Saleable Goods. The permit shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
D.  Nontransferability. Any permit herein provided for shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Prior code § 6399.9)  
5.28.070 - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee hereunder shall: 
A.  Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the permitted sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for permit; 
B.  Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; 
C.  Conduct the permitted sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto; 
D.  Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request; 
E.  Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods; 
F.  At the close of business each day the stock inventory shall be revised and items on such list disposed of during such day shall be noted thereon. Suitable books and records as prescribed by the Permit Committee shall be kept by the permittee and shall be available at all times to the License Officer, his or her agents, or representatives, including any police officer assigned to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6399.10)  
5.28.080 - Additional goods prohibited. 
No goods, wares or merchandise shall be permitted to be offered for sale at the place of business where such sale is to be conducted other than those items listed in the inventory filed with the application for the permit. 
(Prior code § 6399.11)  
5.28.090 - Examination of records. 
The License Officer or his or her agent or representative, including any police officer assigned to assist in the enforcement of this chapter, shall at all times have the power to make an examination or investigation of the business and the books, records and accounts, and other pertinent papers of any person theretofore permitted or authorized to conduct a sale regulated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6399.12)  
5.28.100 - Permit suspension. 
A.  The License Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to suspend at any time any permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter whenever any such sale or special sale is being conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or in such manner as to deceive or defraud the public, or if: 
1.  The holder of any such permit has made any material misstatement in the application of such permit. 
2.  He or she has been guilty of any fraudulent practice in the conduct of the sale authorized by such permit. 
3.  He or she has failed to include in the inventory required by the provisions of this chapter, the goods, wares, or merchandise required to be contained in such inventory. 
4.  He or she has added, caused to be added, or permitted to be added to any goods, wares or merchandise not described in the original inventory. 
5.  He or she has violated any of the provisions of this chapter of the laws pertaining to advertising. 
B.  A copy of such order of suspension shall be presented by the officer issuing the same to the City Council at its next regular meeting after such issuance, and unless so presented it shall be of no further force and effect thereafter. Provided, however, that the Council may by order adopted at and entered in the minutes of such meeting, continue such temporary suspension in effect pending a full hearing thereon. 
(Prior code § 6399.13)  
Chapter 5.32 - DANCES AND DANCE HALLS 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Cabaret dance" means any dance or dancing held or engaged in at any place or premises licensed by the state to sell, serve or dispense intoxicating liquor for consumption in or at such place or premises. 
"Club dance" means any dance held by a dancing club. 
"Dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is participated in, either as the main purpose for such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose. 
"Dancing club" means any club or association of persons which conducts dances other than public dances for its members or bona fide guests more often than once per month, at which a fee is charged, either for admission to such dance or for dancing therein, or at which any collection or donation of money is made or received, or in which the amount of dues to be paid by each member is dependent upon attendance at such dances by such members. 
"Public dance hall" means a place where dancing is conducted whether for profit or not for profit, and to which the public is admitted, either with or without charge, or at which the public is allowed to participate in the dancing, either with or without charge. 
"Teenage dance" means a nonprofit public dance or club dance for minors between the ages of thirteen (13) and nineteen (19) years of age to which no person twenty-one (21) years of age or over, or under thirteen (13) years of age, is admitted as a participant. 
(Prior code §§ 6340—6340.6)  
5.32.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall conduct or assist in conducting any public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or any public dance in the city except under and by authority of a written permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.12 of this title; and no person shall participate in any such dance conducted without such a permit. 
(Prior code § 6341)  
5.32.030 - Private dance. 
No permit shall be required to conduct a private dance, as defined by Section 5.04.010. 
(Prior code § 6341.1)  
5.32.040 - School dancing. 
No permit shall be required for dancing at any school, elementary or high, as defined by Chapter 17.04 of this code, when such dancing is conducted as part of the curriculum of such school or is conducted at a dance officially sanctioned by such school. A permit shall be required if such dancing be conducted other than at such school. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6341.2)  
5.32.050 - Church dances. 
No permit shall be required for dancing at any church, provided that such dance is limited to the church members and their guests, that the dance is conducted entirely within a church building or on church grounds not readily accessible from public property, and that such dance is a church sanctioned or organized regular function of the church. 
(Prior code § 6341.3)  
5.32.060 - Permit application. 
In addition to all requirements specified in or imposed under Chapter 5.12 of this title, each application for any permit required by this chapter shall set forth the following: 
A.  The name and residence of the applicant or applicants; if any applicant be a firm or partnership, the names and residences of the members or partners thereof; if any applicant be an association, the names and residences of the officers thereof; if any applicant be a corporation, the names and residences of the officers and directors thereof; 
B.  The place for which the permit is desired or in or at which any dance or dances is or are to be conducted; 
C.  The number of dances for which application for a permit is made, the date of the dances to be conducted under such permit, and the hours during which a dance is to be conducted on each such date; 
D.  The maximum number of persons estimated by applicant to attend each such dance; 
E.  Whether the application is for a new permit or for the renewal of an existing permit; 
F.  An accurate description of that portion of the premises upon which dancing is to be conducted and which shall be designated as the dancing area. 
(Prior code § 6342)  
5.32.070 - Suspension of permits. 
Any permit issued under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by written order signed by the Chief of Police. A copy of such order shall be transmitted by the Chief of Police to the City Council at its next regular meeting after such issuance, and unless so presented it shall be of no further force and effect thereafter; provided, however, that the Council may, by order adopted at and entered in the minutes of such meeting, continue such temporary suspension in effect pending a full hearing thereon. 
(Prior code § 6344)  
5.32.080 - Special police officers. 
A.  Every person conducting a public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, or public dance, other than a cabaret dance, shall pay to the city, in advance, the cost of special officers to be assigned by the Chief of Police to patrol the dance, in accordance with the estimated attendance shown on the permit application, as follows: 
Up to and including 100 persons 	1 special officer 
From 101 to 300 persons 	2 special officers 
In excess of 300 persons 	2 special officer for each additional 100 persons (or fraction thereof) in excess of 300 persons. 
 
B.  No person conducting a public dance shall permit more people to attend than the number of persons shown in his or her permit application as estimated attendance. The Administrative Officer shall determine the cost of such special officers. Such cost shall comprise all cost factors such as wages, retirement, insurance and administrative overhead. 
C.  Admission by Police Officer. Any police officer of the city on duty, whether in uniform or working in civilian clothes, shall be admitted without charge to any such public dance, club dance or public dance ball at the time for the purpose of inspecting the conduct of those participating in the dancing and to see that the provisions of this chapter are being properly complied with. 
(Prior code §§ 6345, 6346)  
5.32.090 - Disorderly conduct. 
No person in charge of or assisting in the conduct of any public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance shall permit any person to enter into, to be in or to remain in any place where such public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance is conducted who is intoxicated, boisterous, or disorderly. No person in an intoxicated condition shall enter, be in or remain in any public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance, or in any automobile parking lot used in conjunction therewith. No person shall conduct himself or herself in a boisterous or disorderly manner in or at a public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance or public dance, or in or at any automobile parking lot used in conjunction therewith. 
(Prior code § 6347)  
5.32.100 - Bringing liquor to dances prohibited. 
No person shall bring to any public dance hall or to any dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or any public dance any intoxicating liquor; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, and to his or its employees acting within the scope of their employment, lawfully engaged in the sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor, from delivering intoxicating liquor to any such place, upon the request or at the direction of the owner or operator thereof. 
(Prior code § 6347.1)  
5.32.110 - Possession of liquor at dances prohibited. 
No person other than the owner or operator of a dance hall, dancing club, club dance, cabaret dance, or public dance, and his bona fide employees acting in the course of their employment, shall possess any intoxicating liquor at any public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, cabaret dance, or any public dance unless the same has been lawfully sold, served or dispensed thereat. 
(Prior code § 6347.2)  
5.32.120 - Dances—Hours. 
No cabaret dance or cabaret dancing shall be held or engaged in between the hours of one-forty-five a.m. and six a.m. of any day. No public dance shall be conducted between the hours of one a.m. and six a.m. This Section shall not apply to a teenage dance officially sponsored and conducted by any school, elementary or high, as defined by Chapter 17.04 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6347.3)  
5.32.130 - Minors prohibited. 
No person shall permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to enter, be in, or remain in any place where a public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance is conducted if intoxicating liquor is sold, served, or dispensed in such place, nor shall any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years enter any place enumerated in this Section if intoxicating liquor is sold, served, or dispensed in such place. 
(Prior code § 6347.4)  
5.32.140 - Employee dancing prohibited. 
No employee of any person conducting or in charge of any dance hall, cabaret or public dance, shall engage in dancing with any other person at his or her place of employment. This Section shall not apply to dancing clubs, club dances or teenage dances. 
(Prior code § 6347.5)  
5.32.150 - Unobstructed passageways. 
A three (3) foot unobstructed aisle or passageway to an exit from the building shall at all times be provided and maintained from every bar, booth and table intended for the use of or used by patrons of the premises. No person in charge of or assisting in the conduct of a public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance shall permit any person to stand, sit, be or remain in or otherwise obstruct any aisle, corridor or passageway leading to any exit or required to be provided or maintained by any applicable statute or regulation. After having been requested not so to do by the person in charge of the premises or by any person engaged in the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, no person shall stand, sit, be or remain in or otherwise obstruct any aisle, corridor or passageway leading to any exit or required to be provided or maintained by any applicable statute or regulation. 
(Prior code § 6347.6.1)  
5.32.160 - Cabaret dances. 
No cabaret dance or cabaret dancing shall be held or engaged in unless all of the following conditions are at all times complied with: 
A.  The dance floor shall be a minimum size of two hundred (200) square feet. 
B.  The dance floor area specified in each permit issued under this chapter shall be plainly marked and designated as a dancing area. No dancing shall be permitted in the premises except upon the dancing area thus marked and designated. 
C.  During all hours during which dancing is permitted by the permit issued hereunder for the premises, no portion of the dancing area shall be used for any purpose other than dancing and entertainment. 
D.  No portion of any dance floor shall be located within ten (10) feet of any bar or other facility for the dispensing of intoxicating beverages. 
E.  The maximum number of persons, other than employees employed to render help or service on the premises, shall not at any one time exceed the number of permanently fixed seats provided for the patrons of such establishment in addition to the number of persons equal to the quotient of the number of square feet of the remaining area of useable floor space of the premises divided by fifteen (15). In computing such useable floor area, the following portions of the premises shall be excluded: 
1.  All portions of the premises designed or intended primarily for the use of or in fact principally used by persons employed on the premises; 
2.  All corridors, passageways, exits, and aisles leading to exits; 
3.  All dance floor areas; provided, however, that floor areas may be included during such times that dance floor areas may lawfully be used for purposes other than dancing or entertainment. 
F.  The person in charge of the premises shall provide and pay for that number of special officers required by the Chief of Police and determined by the Permit Committee to be necessary, based on the past conduct of cabaret dances at the premises. 
(Prior code § 6347.7)  
5.32.170 - Cabarets—Clubs prohibited. 
No premises at which cabaret dances or cabaret dancing are conducted or is engaged in shall be used or operated as a private club between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day. 
(Prior code § 6347.8)  
5.32.180 - Posting of dance regulations. 
A copy of Sections 5.32.090 through 5.32.140, together with a copy of all additional regulations or conditions imposed by the dance permit, shall be posted at each of the following locations of the premises for which the dance permit was issued: 
A.  At the inside of and within three (3) feet of each entrance and exit of the room or hall where a public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance is operated or held; 
B.  On the outside of and within three (3) feet of each entrance and exit of the room or hall where a public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance is operated or held; 
C.  In at least two (2) conspicuous places on each public or private parking lot used in connection with such public dance hall, dancing club, club dance, teenage dance, cabaret dance, or public dance. 
(Prior code § 6349)  
Chapter 5.36 - FIREARMS SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - License for sale of firearms. 
When a business permit or license is to be issued to a business that is engaged in, or intends to engage in, the sale, resale, transfer, advertising, offering, or exposing for sale or transfer, of any pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person, said business permit or license shall be in the form prescribed by the Attorney General of the state pursuant to California Penal Code Section 12071. Said business permit or license shall be effective for not more than one year from the date of issue and be subject to the following conditions, for breach of any of which the business permit or license shall be subject to forfeiture: 
A.  The business shall be carried on only in the building designated in the business permit or license; 
B.  The business permit or license, or a copy thereof, certified by the city, shall be displayed on the premises where it can easily be seen; 
C.  No pistol or revolver shall be delivered: 
1.  Within fifteen (15) days of the application for the purchase and when delivered shall be unloaded and securely wrapped; nor 
2.  Be delivered unless the purchaser either is personally known to the seller or shall present clear evidence of his identity. 
D.  No pistol or revolver, or imitation thereof, or placard advertising the sale or other transfer thereof, shall be displayed in any part of said premises where it can be readily seen from the outside. 
The aforesaid conditions shall be printed on or securely affixed to said business permit or license in such a manner that said conditions are plainly visible when said business permit or license is displayed pursuant to subsection B of this Section. 
(Prior code § 6120.1)  
5.36.020 - Sale of firearms. 
Each business receiving a business permit or license pursuant to Section 5.36.010 of this chapter shall pay a tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year plus an amount based upon the annual gross receipts of such business according to the following schedule: 
Gross Receipts Per Annum 	Tax Rate 
Up to $100,000 	$0.50 per $1,000 
$100,000 to $1,000,000 	$0.55 per $1,000 over $100,000 
$1,000,000 and above 	$0.15 per $1,000 over $1,000,000 
 
(Prior code § 6120.2)  
Chapter 5.40 - FUNDRAISING EVENTS 
Sections: 
 
5.40.010 - Fundraising events—Exemption—Nonprofit organizations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, nonprofit organizations which conduct fundraising events for periods not in excess of four (4) consecutive calendar days, not more often than once in any twelve (12) consecutive-month period, shall not be deemed to be required to obtain a business license or pay a business license tax for any temporary activity related to such an event. For the purpose of this Section, "non-profit organization" means and includes any organization including unincorporated associations, which is located within the city or which provides a service within the city and has as its purpose a charitable, educational or religious purpose. "Event" as referred to in this Section means any fundraising activity engaged in by a nonprofit organization, the proceeds of which are devoted to the purposes of such nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. 2490 § 1, 1998: prior code § 6920)  
Chapter 5.44 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.44.010 - Definitions. 
"Garage sales" as used in this chapter means the sale of personal property in, at or upon any residentially zoned property, or upon any commercially zoned property independent of any business licensed under Chapter 5.08 of this title to conduct retail sales upon such property. Garage sales shall include but not be limited to all such sales, and shall include the advertising of the holding of any such sale, or the offering to make any such sale, whether made under any other name such as yard sale, front yard sale, back yard sale, home sale, patio sale, rummage sale or any similar designation. 
(Prior code § 6399.51)  
5.44.020 - Restriction. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall display for sale, upon any residentially zoned property or upon any commercially zoned property except in connection with a business licensed to conduct retail sales under Chapter 5.08 of this title, nor advertise the availability for purchase at any such location, nor sell or offer to sell at any such location, any personal property. 
(Prior code § 6399.51.1)  
5.44.030 - Limited. 
No person shall display, sell or offer to sell at any garage sale any personal property other than personal property owned by the occupant of the premises upon which such garage sale is conducted and which personal property was acquired for and used by such occupant or members of his or her family on or in connection with the premises upon which such garage sale is conducted by or on behalf of any person exempted from license fees by 5.04.080C of this title. 
(Prior code § 6399.51.2)  
5.44.040 - Display limited. 
No personal property sold or offered for sale at any garage sale shall be placed, kept or displayed on or in any public right-of-way. Similarly, no garage sale sign or yard sale sign, as defined under Section 17.12.030 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code may be displayed, posted or placed within the public right-of-way or encroach upon the public right-of-way or be attached or affixed to any public utilities, equipment and improvements located within the public right-of-way as the term "public utilities, equipment and improvements" is defined under Section 17.12.030 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code. For purposes of this chapter, the term "public right-of-way" shall have the same meaning as the term "public thoroughfare" as set forth under Section 17.12.030 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Prior code § 6399.51.3) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 16, 9-24-2013)  
5.44.050 - Automobiles exempted. 
Notwithstanding Section 5.44.040, not more than one motor vehicle offered for sale may be kept or displayed on any portion of a permanently constructed driveway on the property owned or occupied by the owner of such vehicle. 
(Prior code § 6399.51.3.1)  
5.44.060 - Times for sales. 
Garage sales may be conducted only on the first weekend in the months of March, June, September and December of each year commencing from and after January 1, 1998. "Weekend" as used in this chapter means Saturdays and Sundays from eight a.m. to five p.m. inclusive. The City Administrator shall have the authority to select an alternate weekend if a designated weekend is not available for garage sales due to inclement weather or an emergency. 
(Ord. 2465 § 1, 1997: prior code § 6399.51.4)  
5.44.070 - Frequency. 
No person shall conduct more than two (2) garage sales during any consecutive twelve (12) month period. 
(Ord. 2465 § 2, 1997: prior code § 6399.51.5)  
5.44.080 - Signs. 
A.  Not more than two (2) signs advertising a garage sale may be maintained anywhere upon residentially zoned property. No sign shall contain more than six (6) square feet of area on any one side. No sign shall be erected or maintained upon residentially zoned property for a period of more than one day immediately preceding the lawful commencement of such garage sale. Each sign shall be removed on or at the close of the last day on which the garage sale may lawfully be conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Any person violating subsection A of this Section shall be charged a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each such unlawful sign. No permit for a subsequent garage sale shall be issued prior to payment of all such fees due and owing. 
(Prior code § 6399.51.6)  
5.44.090 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  To the sale of personal property made pursuant to a court order or judicial process; and 
B.  To a garage sale conducted by a nonprofit organization which is exempt from the payment of business license taxes pursuant to this code. 
(Ord. 2465 § 3, 1997: prior code § 6399.51.7)  
Chapter 5.48 - HOTEL AND MOTEL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.48.010 - Public lodgings—Immoral acts. 
No person conducting any motel, as defined in Chapter 17.04 of this code, or other lodging house, trailer court or hotel in the city, and no person in actual charge, management or control of any motel, lodging house, trailer court, or hotel therein, shall suffer or permit any portion thereof to be used as a house of ill fame or place of assignation for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 4222)  
5.48.020 - Public lodgings—Registration required. 
Every operator conducting any hotel, motel, motor hotel, lodging house or trailer court in the city shall maintain daily written records reflecting the renting, letting, or other provision of any of its rooms including, but not limited to, check-in and check-out dates of each person who rents, lets, or is otherwise provided a room. The operator shall obtain the name of all adult individuals occupying such room. Unless payment for the room is made by check or credit card, such records shall also include the name and home or business address and telephone number of each such person. The required records shall be maintained for no less than three (3) years, or for such longer period as may be prescribed by law, and shall be available for review by city representatives during normal business hours. 
(Ord. 2644 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.48.030 - Alterations, inspection of register. 
Erasures or alterations on the register required by Section 5.48.020 shall not be permitted or made for any purpose, and it is unlawful to erase a name or names or address or addresses or to permit such an erasure. Such register shall be kept in a conspicuous place, and shall be at all times open to the inspection of any guest of such house or motel and of any executive or police officer of the city. 
(Prior code § 4222.2)  
5.48.040 - Registering under fictitious name prohibited. 
No person shall write or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be written in any register in any motel, lodging house, trailer court, or hotel, any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person registering therein, or the name by which such person is generally known. 
(Prior code § 4222.3)  
5.48.050 - Repeated use prohibited. 
No person shall let any room for sleeping or lodging purposes in any motel, lodging house, trailer court or hotel in the city more than once between six a.m. and five fifty-nine p.m. and no more than once between six p.m. and five fifty-nine a.m. of the following morning. 
(Prior code § 4222.4)  
5.48.060 - Hourly rates prohibited. 
No person conducting any motel or other public lodging or agent thereof shall let any room for hourly or other short-time rates or in any way advertise that any room is available at hourly or other short-time rates. 
(Prior code § 4222.5)  
5.48.070 - Grounds for modification or revocation of motel regulatory permit. 
In addition to any other remedies, actions or penalties as authorized by applicable law in connection with a violation of the provisions of Sections 5.48.010 through 5.48.060, inclusive by any person operating a motel, lodging house, trailer court, or hotel in the city, the owner/operator of such motel or other place of transient accommodations shall also be subject to proceedings for the modification or revocation of his/her motel regulatory permit as issued under Section 5.96.050. 
(Prior code § 4222.6)  
5.48.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former Section 5.48.080 (limitation on continuous and cumulative occupancy of hotels, motels, and motor hotels, or trailer court) restricting and regulating the duration of occupancy for hotels, motels, motor hotels, lodging houses and trailer courts has been repealed by City Council ordinance (Ordinance No. 2745, § 1, adopted June 2, 2009). Nothing in this repeal shall be interpreted to limit the authority of the city, including but not limited to the, El Monte Permit Committee, to impose any operating requirements, conditions or restrictions authorized under Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations) of the El Monte Municipal Code or any other applicable provision of the El Monte Municipal Code.  
5.48.090 - Posting. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, each hotel, motel, motor hotel, lodging house or trailer court shall post a legible copy of the text of Section 5.48.080 of this chapter in an open and conspicuous place within the public lobby area, and in an open and conspicuous place where other postings are required by law, in each room available for rent. 
(Ord. 2644 § 1 (part), 2005)  
5.48.100 - Personal property. 
Any property left in a room by a person or party that has checked out shall be removed by the operator of the hotel, motel, or motor hotel and shall be stored or otherwise disposed of in accordance with applicable laws. 
(Ord. 2644 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 5.52 - JUNK AND SALVAGE DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.52.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Junk and salvage dealer" means any person engaged in the business of collecting, salvaging, recycling, storing, selling or exchanging junk or scrap of any kind except that the term shall not apply to any person defined as an automobile junk dealer in Section 5.20.010 of this title. 
(Prior code §§ 6337, 6337.1)  
5.52.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall conduct or engage in any business or occupation described in this chapter without having first obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6338)  
5.52.030 - Enclosure. 
If any business referred to in this chapter shall be located in whole or in part in any yard, enclosure, lot, or open area, such premises shall be completely surrounded and enclosed by a wall, fence, or barrier, constructed of wood or other solid, impervious material, or of galvanized steel wire, extending above the ground for at least six (6) feet. Any and all necessary openings in said fence, wall or barrier, shall be provided with suitable gates or doors constructed of the same material and in the same manner of construction as is authorized by this Section as suitable and sufficient for a fence, wall or barrier under this Section. Outside storage areas shall also conform to the requirements of Title 17, Zoning. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6338.1)  
5.52.040 - Rubbish. 
If any business referred to in this chapter shall be located in whole or in part in a yard, enclosure, lot or open area, such premises and area shall be kept clean and free from rubbish at all times and all material kept, stored or accumulated in said place shall be neatly and carefully piled or deposited in containers. 
(Prior code § 6338.2)  
5.52.050 - Fire extinguishers. 
No person shall permit any such business referred to in this chapter to be carried on unless there shall be kept on said premises in good working order, at all times, fire extinguishers in the number and of the style designated by the Fire Chief, as reasonably necessary to minimize and eliminate fire hazard on said premises. 
(Prior code § 6338.3)  
Chapter 5.56 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS/THERAPISTS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2878, § 9, April 5, 2016, repealed former ch. 5.56, §§ 5.56.010—5.56.160, and enacted a new ch. 5.56 as set out herein. Former ch. 5.56 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2779, § 2, adopted October 18, 2011. 
 
5.56.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The City Council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, while recognizing massage as a legitimate business interest that provides benefits to its patrons in a therapeutic setting. 
B.  This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the State Constitution, Sections 51030 et seq. of the Government Code, Sections 460, 4600 through 4620 and Section 16000 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 13 of the Chiropractic Act (initiative measure approved by the electors November 7, 1922, as amended), and California Assembly Bill 1147. 
C.  There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by persons improperly trained and/or educated in providing massage services, and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss. 
D.  There is opportunity for acts of prostitution, lewdness, and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments, as well as problems relating to human trafficking in massage establishments. Courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that massage establishments are often brothels in disguise. The establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public health. 
E.  The provisions of this chapter are intended to enhance the efficient processing of permits for massage establishments, owners and managers and the ongoing regulation of those permittees and certificate holders by the city. The provisions of this chapter in no way limit the authority of the city to inspect massage establishments or conduct investigations to ensure permittees are complying with applicable rules and regulations. 
F.  The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to stop the practice of massage establishments changing ownership upon the discovery of criminal activity by law enforcement authorities. 
G.  The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to be in addition to, and not in lieu of, (i) the requirement to obtain a valid business license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 (Business Licenses General) and 5.08 (Business License Taxes) of Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations) of the El Monte Municipal Code; (ii) where applicable, the requirement to separately apply for and secure any discretionary land use approvals required under Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code; (iii) the requirement to obtain any and all building permits required under Title 15 (Building and Construction) of the El Monte Municipal Code; (iv) the requirement to obtain any certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy required under Chapter 17.16 (Certificate of Occupancy) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code; or (v) or any other permit, authorization or approval which may be required under the laws of the United States of America, the State of California, the County of Los Angeles, the El Monte Municipal Code or any other public agency or entity with jurisdiction over the applicants profession or business operations. 
H.  The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution, and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved within the confines allowed by state law. 
I.  The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal service businesses. 
J.  The California Massage Therapy Council ("CAMTC") can better, and more efficiently, regulate massage technicians in order to best protect the public and it is in the public interest that all persons providing massage in the city have a certificate from CAMTC. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"California Massage Therapy Council" or "CAMTC" mean the nonprofit organization created to regulate and issue massage practitioner and therapist certificates pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. 
"CAMTC certificate" means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate issued by CAMTC. 
"CAMTC identification card" means a massage practitioner or massage therapist identification card issued by CAMTC. 
"Chief of Police" means the Chief of Police of the City of El Monte, or his designee. 
"City" means the City of El Monte. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of El Monte, or his designee. 
"Compensation" means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value. 
"Conviction" or "convicted" means a conviction following a guilty plea, nolo contendere plea, or judgment or verdict where the time for appeal has elapsed or conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code allowing the applicant to withdraw his plea of guilty or nolo contendere and to enter a plea of not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information. 
"Employee" means any person, other than a massage practitioner, massage therapist, or operator, who renders any service, with or without compensation, to the operator or agent of an operator of a massage establishment relating to the day-to-day operation of the massage establishment whether as an employee or independent contractor. 
"Finance Director" means the Finance Director of the City of El Monte, or his designee. 
"Main entry door" means a door from the outside of the establishment leading into the reception area. 
"Manager" means the person(s) designated by the owner of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the owner in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, the ability of the individual to direct, hire, and/or dismiss employees, control of hours of operation of the massage establishment, create policies or rules, purchase supplies for the massage establishment, and ensure that the massage establishment complies with the requirements of this code and other laws. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must have a valid operator permit. 
"Massage" means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose. "Massage" includes, but is not limited to, treatment by means of manual pressure, acupressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, with or without the aid of or by means of any mechanical, electronic, or electrical apparatus or appliance, and with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, aromatics, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. Massage specifically includes the application of any of these methods to the scalp, neck, or feet of any individual. (Some persons practicing massage may be exempt all or parts of the permit requirements, please consult Section 5.56.030). 
"Massage establishment" means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definition of "massage" in this section. 
"Massage establishment certificate" means the certificate issued by the Finance Director entitling a business to be operated as a massage establishment. 
"Massage practitioner" means a person who is certified as such by CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act. 
"Massage technician" means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certified by the CAMTAC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act. 
"Massage therapist" means a person who is certified by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act. 
"Massage Therapy Act" means Chapter 406 of the 2013—2014 legislative session as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Operator" means all persons who are the owners of a massage establishment as well as all persons who serve as the designated manager(s) of a massage establishment. 
"Operator permit" means the permit issued by Chief of Police allowing a person to own and/or manage a massage establishment. 
"Out-call massage" means and refers to massage services performed or otherwise provided for compensation at a location within the city other than a massage establishment. 
"Owner" means all of the following: 
A.  The sole provider or sole proprietor of a massage establishment/business entity, i.e., where the owner is the only person performing massage at that establishment and is also the holder of a state certificate; 
B.  In the case of a general business, each owner of the business entity; 
C.  In the case of a business entity that is a corporation, each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the corporation and each officer and director of the corporation; 
D.  In the case of a business entity that is a partnership of any variety, each partner, excluding limited partners owning less than ten (10) percent of the partnership, and where a partner is a corporation, the provisions pertaining to a corporate applicant in subsection C apply; 
E.  Any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage establishment; 
F.  All owners/members of any other type of business entity that owns a massage establishment. 
"Patron" means an individual on the premises of a massage establishment for the purpose of receiving a massage. 
"Permit" means an operator permit or massage establishment certificate, unless the context dictates otherwise. 
"Permittee" means any person who has obtained an operator permit or massage establishment certificate from the city. 
"Person or business entity who has engaged in disqualifying conduct" means a person or business entity who: 
A.  Within ten (10) years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten (10) years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following: 
1.  A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or 
2.  Conduct in violation of Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22, 653.23, or subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647, or 
3.  An attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or 
4.  When the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of Penal Code Section 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or 
5.  A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058, or 
6.  Any offense under a statute of any state or ordinance of any city or county, which is the equivalent of any of the aforementioned offenses. 
B.  Within ten (10) years preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten (10) years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has had any massage establishment, operator, technician, practitioner, therapist or trainee certificate, license or permit issued by any state, local agency or other licensing authority, including the CAMTC, denied, revoked or suspended for any reason other than lack of sufficient education; or has had to surrender such a certificate, license or permit as a result of pending criminal charges or administrative proceedings for suspension or revocation of any such certificate, license or permit; or 
C.  Within five (5) years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five (5) years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following: 
1.  Any crime, other than an infraction or those listed above, involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit himself or another, or substantially injure another; or 
2.  Any crime, other than an infraction or crimes relating to those offenses listed above, where the crime or act is substantially related to the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage; or 
D.  Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the Penal Code as the same may be amended from time to time, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California; or 
E.  Has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with the same or similar type of business. 
"Proof of bona fide employment" means proof of an employer-employee relationship between the operator of the massage establishment and any person working at the massage establishment. Satisfactory proof of bona fide employment must be shown by written payroll documentation evidencing the employer's compliance with California Employment Development Department (EDD) requirements for the withholding of California income tax, unemployment insurance contributions and disability contributions from the employee and written payroll documentation of the employer's compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements for the withholding of federal income taxes, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare contributions from the employee. Such written documentation can include, but is not limited to, W-2 wage and tax statements. 
"Reception area" means an area immediately inside the main entry door of the massage establishment dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons and visitors of the massage establishment and which is not a massage room or otherwise used for the provision of massage services. 
"Residence address" means the actual physical home address and shall not include a P.O. Box, mailbox service, or other similar location. 
"Sexually-oriented material" means any element of sexually-oriented merchandise or any books, periodicals, magazine, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
"Sole provider" means a massage business where the owner owns one hundred (100) percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active CAMTC certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors. 
"Spa" means facilities such as mineral baths, salt rooms, mineral rooms, saunas, steam rooms, whirlpools and other therapeutic baths. 
"Specified anatomical areas" mean any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, without a health care referral and written consent of the patron. 
"Visitor" means a nonemployee who has entered the massage establishment for purposes other than receiving services. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.030 - Exceptions. 
A.  Complete Exception. The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to: 
1.  Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, or physical therapist licensed to practice such profession in the State of California, within the scope of their license; or 
2.  Any registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse, licensed to practice under the laws of the State of California, who is an employee of and working under the on-site direction of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, duly licensed to practice their respective professions in this state. 
a.  Any other person providing massage services that is employed by a physical surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist shall be required to have a valid CAMTC certificate, as well as work under the on-site direction of such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist. 
b.  If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to provide massage therapy to his or her clients by an individual(s) other than him- or her-self, said individuals(s) must have a valid CAMTC certificate and the office of the acupuncturist shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other applicable provisions of this code. 
3.  Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Division 2, commencing with Section 500, when engaging in such practice within the scope of such license. 
4.  State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other healthcare facilities duly licensed by the State of California, and the employees of such facilities while working on the premises of such state-licensed facilities. 
5.  Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment. 
6.  Barbers, beauticians, or manicurists who are duly licensed by the State of California pursuant to the Barbering and Cosmetology Act set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 7300 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, while engaging in practices within the scope of such license, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or, in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves, and/or feet at a state licensed facility. However, if a state licensed establishment also has a massage establishment certificate from the city to operate as a massage establishment, the business must also comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
7.  Schools of cosmetology or barbering which comply with the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7362 et seq. when instructors are acting within the scope of their employment or when students are working as unpaid externs pursuant to the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7395.1. 
8.  Any other business or professions exempt by state law. 
B.  Partial exemption. 
1.  Businesses that offer massage services that are ancillary to the primary business shall only be required to comply with the provisions set forth subsection (B)(2) of this section. Ancillary massage services shall be those services where less than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the business is devoted to massage. 
2.  Massage services provided under (B)(1) of this section shall be required to comply with the following: 
a.  Massage services must be performed by the holder of a valid CAMTC certificate. 
b.  The business shall comply with the following provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Section 5.56.130(A) relating to hours; 
(2)  Section 5.56.130(C) relating to instruments, equipment, and personnel; 
(3)  Section 5.56.130(D) relating to personnel lists; 
(4)  Section 5.56.130(E) relating to prohibited conduct; 
(5)  Section 5.56.140 relating to building and facility requirements; and 
(6)  Section 5.56.150 relating to inspections. 
C.  Evidence of Exception. Any person claiming exception under this section shall furnish satisfactory evidence upon request that he or she is entitled to such exception, including, proof of bona fide employment, or if applicable, a citation to the particular provision of state law upon which that person relies. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.040 - Business license and other permits required. 
A.  No permit or other authorization granted pursuant to this chapter shall in any way relieve any person or business entity from the separate obligation to: (i) obtain a valid business license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 (Business Licenses General) and 5.08 (Business License Taxes) of Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations) of the El Monte Municipal Code; and (ii) as appropriate, the obligation to apply for and secure any discretionary land use approvals required under Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code; any and all building permits required under Title 15 (Building and Construction) of the El Monte Municipal Code; any certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy required under Chapter 17.16 (Certificate of Occupancy) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code; or any other permit, authorization or approval which may be required under the laws of the United States of America, the State of California, the County of Los Angeles, the El Monte Municipal Code or any other public agency or entity with jurisdiction over the applicants profession or operations. 
B.  Any person applying for a business license as a massage practitioner or a massage therapist shall provide proof of a current CAMTC certificate before being issued a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.050 - Floor plans required. 
A.  All massage establishments shall be required to submit a scaled floor plan as part of their application for a massage establishment certificate. 
B.  All businesses that claim a partial exemption from this Chapter pursuant to subsection 5.56.030(B) shall be required to submit scaled floor plans in order to verify the applicability of the exemption. 
C.  Once the floor plan has been approved, no changes can be made without written approval from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.060 - CAMTC certificate required (massage practitioners and massage therapists). 
A.  No person shall perform or provide the services of massage for compensation, including out-call massage, from any location in the city without having been issued a CAMTC certificate, regardless of whether such person is the holder of an operator permit or the massage establishment where the person provides such massage services possesses a valid massage establishment certificate. 
B.  Any holder of a CAMTC certificate who desires to own, operate and/or manage a massage establishment, must obtain an operator permit in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  No massage establishment shall hire as an employee or utilize as an independent contractor any person to perform massage unless such person has been issued a CAMTC certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.070 - Certificate and permit required (massage establishment certificate and operator permit). 
A.  No person shall own, operate or manage a massage establishment in any location within the city without first having obtained an operator permit. No business entity shall own, operate or manage a massage establishment unless the persons whose names must be included in any application submitted on behalf of a business entity each obtain an operator permit as required under Section 5.56.080, below. 
B.  No massage establishment shall be allowed to operate within the city unless the business first obtains a massage establishment certificate. No massage establishment shall be allowed to operate unless the establishment has identified and designated all person(s) who shall act as the operator(s) and/or manager(s) of the massage establishment and such operator(s) and/or manager(s) each become the holders of an operator permit as required under Section 5.56.080, below. 
C.  Any person or business entity desiring to obtain a massage establishment certificate and/or an operator permit shall make application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  All applications shall be dated and shall contain the following statements: 
1.  A certification under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct; and 
2.  An authorization for the city, its officers, agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and to ensure continual compliance with all applicable provisions of law. 
3.  The provisions of Sections 5.56.050, 5.56,130, 5.56.140, 5.56.150, and 5.56.160 shall apply to any business that operates as a massage establishment, even if such business fails to obtain a massage establishment certificate or an operator permit. The city may immediately order any business that fails to have a massage establishment certificate or an operator permit to cease operation. 
4.  Within thirty (30) business days following the receipt of a completed application the Finance Director shall either issue the massage establishment certificate and the Chief of Police shall issue an operator permit or mail a written statement for denial thereof. Notwithstanding the above, failure of the city to act upon a completed application within the time frame set forth above shall not be deemed approval of the application pursuant to this chapter. Any massage establishment certificate or operator permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed conditional pending the city's receipt of the California Department of Justice report on the relevant applicant's fingerprints. If the fingerprint report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.080 - Operator permit. 
A.  Application—Contents. Applicants for operator permits shall submit the following information to the El Monte Police Department on a form supplied by the department: 
1.  The full true name of the applicant; 
2.  A complete statement listing and explaining any and all aliases and fictitious names used by the applicant within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the application; 
3.  The current residence address and business address and current residence and business telephone number of the applicant; 
4.  A list of all previous residential and business addresses for a minimum of eight (8) years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address; 
5.  The applicant's place of birth, and original documentation to verify both the applicant's identity and employment authorization (if applicable), as listed under 8 USC 1324a(b)(1) and 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(1). Documentation to satisfy this requirement may include, but is not limited to, a California driver's license, California identification card, Social Security card, resident alien ("green") card, United States passport (unexpired), unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary 1-551 stamp, or an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States Government in compliance with 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(1)(v)(A); 
6.  The history of the applicant as to any similar business or occupation within ten (10) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, the names and addresses of any other massage establishments or similar businesses the applicant has owned, managed, provided massage services at, or worked at, whether the applicant has had a permit or license to operate, manage, provide massage services at, or work at a massage establishment denied, revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction; the reasons for any such denial, revocation or suspension; and the business, activity or occupation the applicant engaged in subsequent to such denial, revocation or suspension; 
7.  All criminal convictions within the last ten (10) years and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor, excluding minor traffic violations; 
8.  Such other reasonable identification and information as the Chief of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matter specified as required to be set forth in the application; and 
9.  The applicant shall have his or her picture taken by the El Monte Police Department or otherwise supply a recent photograph of the applicable as directed by the Police Department; and 
10.  An acknowledgment that, by applying for an operator permit, the applicant understands that they are responsible for all violations of employees or independent contractors that may take place in the massage establishment which they own or manage, and that such violations are grounds for revocation of the operator permit. 
B.  Once the information required by subsection A is submitted, the applicant shall have his/her fingerprints taken for a criminal history background (Livescan) check in the manner directed by the El Monte Police Department. 
C.  The Chief of Police shall issue the operator permit, unless after investigation he or she makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant has failed to provide any or all information, documentation and assurances required by this chapter or by the Chief of Police; has failed to reveal any fact material to qualification; or has supplied information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria; or 
2.  The applicant is a person or business entity who has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or 
3.  There is substantial evidence that the applicant has engaged in disqualifying conduct, even if there is no conviction for such conduct; or 
4.  The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments; or 
5.  The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age; or 
6.  The applicant is delinquent in paying city fees or penalties owed in relation to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall remain in effect, unless revoked, for a period of one year. Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed on a form supplied by the city with the Chief of Police. Temporary permits shall not be issued and expired permits are not valid unless the permittee has a written receipt showing that the renewal application was filed at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration. Renewal applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by resolution of the city council. A permittee shall be required to update the information contained in his or her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the Chief of Police in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed, including all information required by subsection A of this section. Failure to provide this documentation shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the permit. 
E.  If the criminal history background check report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial. 
F.  Automatic issuance and renewal for CAMTC certificate holders. 
1.  Any person who holds a valid CAMTC certificate shall only be required to provide the following information on a form that also includes the statements set forth in subsection 5.56.070(D). 
a.  The full true name of the applicant; 
b.  The current residence and business address and current residence and business telephone of the applicant; and 
c.  The name and address of the massage establishment for which the operator permit is being sought. 
2.  A copy of the applicant's CAMTC certificate and CAMTC identification card shall be provided with the application, along with a fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. 
3.  The applicant shall be required to have his or her picture taken as specified above. 
4.  The operator permit shall automatically be issued upon completion of the form and verification of the validity of the CAMTC certificate by the Police Department. No background check shall be required. 
5.  Renewals shall be required in accordance with subsection D of this section, but such renewals shall be automatic so long as the permittee maintains and provides a copy of his or her valid CAMTC certificate. 
G.  Every person to whom an operator permit has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall be issued an identification certificate/badge by the Police Department which shall contain the person's name, photograph, expiration date and any other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police. The identification certificate/badge shall be worn so as to be readily visible at all times while on the premises of the massage establishment. 
H.  Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be assigned or transferred. 
I.  It is the duty of each operator or manager to notify the Chief of Police and Finance Department whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in the application for the operator permit in the first instance. Such notification shall be in writing and made within ten (10) business days of the change on a form provided by the city. 
J.  Each operator of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors working on the premises of the business. Failure of the employees or independent contractors to comply with this chapter may result in the revocation of the operator's permit. 
K.  The operator of the massage establishment is responsible for verifying that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC certificate as required by this chapter. 
L.  Any requirements of this chapter applying to an operator of a massage establishment shall apply to each and every operator of such massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.090 - Massage establishment certificate. 
A.  Applications for a massage establishment certificate shall be filed with the Finance Department and shall include the information set forth below. 
1.  The full name of the applicant; 
2.  The name under which the business is to be conducted, which name must match the name of the business under which the corresponding business license is issued under Chapter 5.04 of the El Monte Municipal Code. No massage establishment business shall operate under any business name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the massage establishment certificate. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as shown on the articles of incorporation or on a valid DBA ("doing business as"); 
3.  The address of the proposed massage establishment, a detailed floor plan indicating how the use is proposed to be conducted within the premises, and a description of any other business operated on the same premises; 
4.  The full name of each manager and operator of the massage establishment; 
5.  A detailed floor plan drawn to scale showing entrances, exits, windows, interior doors, restrooms, all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including, but not limited to closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; location of massage tables and chairs; 
6.  The full name, address, and phone number of the legal owner of the property, if other than the applicant, on which the massage establishment is to be located; and 
7.  The hours and days of operation. 
B.  The Finance Director shall issue a massage establishment certificate upon verification of the following: 
1.  The massage establishment complies with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to building, fire, zoning, health and safety regulations, as well as any conditions which have been imposed to comply with such laws; and 
2.  Each person identified and designated as an operator or manager has obtained an operator permit. 
C.  Every massage establishment for which a massage establishment certificate has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall display the certificate in a conspicuous place so it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
D.  A massage establishment certificate is not transferable to a separate location of the same business, to a different business at the same location, or to the same business under different ownership at the same location. 
E.  It is the duty of each owner, manager and/or operator of a massage establishment to notify the Finance Department whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in the application for the massage establishment certificate in the first instance. Any sale or transfer of any reportable interest of an owner in a massage establishment, which interest would be required to be reported under subsection A of this section in the first instance, shall render the massage establishment certificate temporarily suspended and subject to revocation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless, prior to the effective date of such sale or transfer, the new owner applies for and obtains an operator permit. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision(s) of this code to the contrary, where a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, or a notice of suspension or revocation has been issued regarding a massage establishment, or the business has otherwise been required to close because of suspension or revocation proceedings against the operator, the Finance Department shall not process or issue a new application for a massage establishment certificate for said location unless or until the revocation or suspension proceedings are dismissed or a final determination is made that the current massage establishment certificate should not be suspended or revoked, or a two-year period has passed since the occurrence of the activity which gave rise to the suspension or revocation proceedings or other criminal actions. 
G.  Notwithstanding any other provision(s) of this code to the contrary, when a massage establishment has been closed due to criminal activity and such decision is final, no new massage establishment may open in such location and no massage establishment certificate shall be issued for such location for a period of two (2) years from the date of such final determination. For purposes of this section, closure due to criminal activity includes voluntary closure of the business after there have been arrests at the location or other notices relating to criminal activity or notices relating to suspension or revocation proceedings. 
H.  Where the applicant for the massage establishment certificate is not the record owner, as shown on the latest county assessment roll, then upon issuance of the massage establishment certificate, the city shall send written notice to the property owner advising of the issuance of the certificate and a copy of this chapter in order to advise of the regulations applicable to the message establishment and the property. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.100 - Suspension and revocation of permits and certificates. 
A.  Subject to the procedures set forth in this section, the Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a permit or certificate issued pursuant to this chapter whenever the Chief of Police determines that any of the following has occurred: 
1.  The permittee, employee, or independent contractor working on the premises is conducting operations in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code; 
2.  The permittee, employee, or independent contractor working on the premises is conducting operations in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance; 
3.  The permittee, employee, or independent contractor working on the premises is conducting operations in a manner which is detrimental to the health, safety, and/or welfare of the city or its inhabitants; 
4.  There is substantial evidence of prostitution; 
5.  The permittee, employee, or independent contractor working on the premises is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct, as defined in Section 5.56.020; or 
6.  The Chief of Police makes any of the findings that would have justified denying the application in the first instance. 
B.  If, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, an alleged violation is minor and capable of correction, then prior to suspension or revocation, a written notice shall be given to the permittee of the alleged violations involved to allow a period of time to correct the alleged violation(s), which period shall not exceed five (5) business days, at the end of which period an inspection shall be conducted to determine whether the alleged violations(s) has been corrected. For purposes of this section, written notice shall include either a notice violation or an administrative citation. 
C.  If the Chief of Police determines that an alleged violation is not minor or capable of correction, that an alleged violation(s) continues without correction, or that there have been previous violations of this chapter, even if for difference reasons, then the Chief of Police may issue a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, along with an administrative or criminal citation. Examples of a violation which will be determined by the Chief of Police to be not capable of correction include, but are not limited to, substantial evidence of prostitution activity on the premises of the massage establishment or an immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
D.  Notice of Intent to Suspend or Revoke. A notice of intent to suspend or revoke shall contain a statement of an alleged violation(s) which constitutes the basis for the suspension or revocation, notice of the right of the permittee to respond to the charges, either orally or in writing to the Chief of Police for a pre-appeal determination, notice of the right to appeal to the City Manager, and notice that a failure to respond in the time specified shall constitute a waiver of the right to respond, but not the right to appeal. If an alleged violation is capable of correction, the notice shall also advise the permittee to correct the alleged violation(s) within the time to respond. 
E.  Reponse to notice of intent/pre-appeal determination. 
1.  The time to respond and request a pre-appeal determination shall be five (5) business days from the date of service of the notice, regardless of whether the materials upon which the notice of intent is based are provided to the permittee at that time. 
2.  If there is no response, the permit shall be considered suspended or revoked upon the expiration of time in which to respond request a pre-appeal hearing. 
3.  If there is a response, the permit shall remain in effect until a determination is made by the Chief of Police. In no event shall the Chief hold a hearing until at least five (5) business days have passed from the time the city provides the materials upon which the notice of intent is issued to the permittee. 
F.  Suspension or Revocation. 
1.  If, after consideration of the permittee's response, the Chief of Police determines that the notice of intent to suspend or revoke should be upheld, then the Chief of Police shall issue a notice of suspension or revocation and serve it upon the permittee as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. Where all massage activity is required to cease, notice shall also be served on the owner of the property if different from the operator or certificate holder. The notice shall include information about the right of appeal. 
a.  Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of a massage establishment certificate, all massage activity at the relevant massage establishment shall cease and no activity for which the massage establishment certificate is required shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending. 
b.  Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of an operator permit, the operator must cease all work at the relevant massage establishment. If there is no other person who has an operator permit which is not the subject of a suspension or revocation proceeding, then all massage activity at the massage establishment shall also cease and no massage activity shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending. 
G.  Surrender of massage establishment certificate and permits. Any permittee shall immediately surrender his or her permit or certificate to the Chief of Police upon its suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.110 - Appeals to city manager. 
A.  Appeals. 
1.  Appeals shall be in writing and filed with the Clerk within the following time frames: 
a.  Appeals from any decision of the Chief of Police or Finance Director to deny a permit shall be in writing, shall clearly state the applicable basis for the appeal, and shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than ten (10) calendar days following the giving of a notice of denial. 
b.  Appeals from a notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit where no response is filed in accordance with Section 5.56.100(E) above shall be filed not later than ten (10) calendar days following the expiration of the response period. 
c.  Appeals form a notice of suspension or revocation issued after a response is filed in accordance with subsection 5.56.100(E) above shall be filed not later than ten (10) calendar days following the giving of the notice of suspension or revocation. 
2.  The City Clerk shall not accept an appeal pursuant to this section unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal without timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely. 
3.  The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be limited to those issues raised by the written appeal, as submitted pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
B.  City Manager Action. 
1.  Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Manager. The hearing shall be held not fewer than ten (10) calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual consent of the parties. For the purposes of this section, "City Manager" may include a hearing, officer appointed by the City Manager to act in his or her place. 
2.  The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing. 
3.  At the time of such hearing, the City Manager shall review the records and files related to the decision. 
a.  The City Manager shall permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing upon the issues involved in the matter. 
b.  In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. 
c.  In determining whether a person should be disqualified for meeting the definition of a "person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct," as defined in Section 5.56.020, the City Manager may consider the nature and severity of the act(s) or crime(s), whether there were any additional subsequent act(s) or crime(s), and/or the number of act(s) or crime(s), and how recent the act(s) or crime(s) occurred. 
4.  The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the requirements for issuing the permit or certificate in the first instance. The city shall have the burden in proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew a permit. 
5.  Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City Manager shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified, or reversed. 
6.  The City Manager's decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant within ten (10) working days after the close of the hearing and submission of the matter to the City Manager for decision. The City Manager's decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified, or reversed and the reasons therefor. 
7.  The City Manager's decision shall include notice that the decision is final and conclusive and judicial review may be sought by writ of mandate. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.120 - Notices. 
A.  All notices required to be given pursuant to this chapter shall be served on the responsible party (i.e. permittee, applicant, appellant, or representative thereof) either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope postage prepaid addressed to such responsible party as the name and address appear in the most recent application on file with the city. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed on the date deposited in the mail. Notices shall include information regarding appeal rights and a statement that the failure to file an appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
B.  In all cases where the permit or certificate holder is not the property owner, notices shall also be sent to the property owner of record where the notice relates to possible closure of the business due to suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.130 - Operational requirements. 
A.  Hours and conditions of operation. 
1.  No massage establishment shall operate nor shall any massage be administered in any massage establishment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 11:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 11:00 p.m. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment. These hours of operation may be modified pursuant to a conditional use permit. 
2.  During hours of operation, no person other than the holder of a valid permit or patron shall be allowed beyond the front lobby of the massage establishment. 
3.  Patrons and visitors shall only be permitted in the massage establishment during the hours of operation. 
a.  Visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the massage establishment. 
b.  Patrons shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at least one massage technician is on the premises. 
4.  The massage establishment shall be supervised during all hours of operation by a manager who is one of the operators specified in the applicable permit application. The name and photograph (minimum size of four (4) inches by six (6) inches) of the on-duty manager shall be posted in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment at all times that the business is open. This provision shall not apply to sole providers. 
5.  No massage establishment shall be used for residential purposes. There shall be no massage tables, cots, or beds in the establishment other than shown on the approved floor plan. Locker facilities shall be provided for all employees and independent contractors and all personal items of the employees independent contractors shall be kept in the lockers while at the massage establishment. 
B.  Posting requirements. In addition to any other requirements for posting set forth in this chapter, the following shall also apply: 
1.  A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of this chapter shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment. 
2.  A list of each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in English and such other languages as may be convenient to communicate such service, in a conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. Nothing herein prohibits a voluntary tip from being paid by the patron. 
3.  Any posted signs which are in a language other than English shall also be posted in English. Any brochures, cards, flyers or other similar hand-out materials distributed to patrons on site which are in a language other than English shall also contain a translation in English. 
C.  Instruments, equipment, and personnel. 
1.  Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use. 
2.  Massages shall be administered only on standard or portable massage tables or chairs which are covered with a durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material. Beds, mattresses, water beds, futons, sofa beds, any type of portable or convertible beds, and foam pads more than four (4) inches thick or with a width of more than four (4) feet shall not be permitted in the establishment. 
3.  No massage technician shall massage the genitals or any anal area of any patron, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such massage to the above-specified areas. 
4.  No massage technician shall massage the breasts of a female patron without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified area. 
5.  A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of any massage establishment staff unless the patron's genitalia, and, if a female patron, the female patron's breasts, are fully covered by a fully opaque, nontransparent covering. 
6.  Massage technicians shall not be dressed: in attire that is transparent, see-through, substantially exposes undergarments, or exposes the masseuse's breasts, buttocks, or genitals; in a manner which has been deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California; or in swim attire unless such person is providing CAMTC approved water-based massage modality. 
7.  All massage establishments shall be so equipped, maintained and operated as to effectively control the entrance, harborage, and breeding of vermin, including flies. When flies or other vermin are present effective control measures shall be instituted for their control or elimination. 
8.  Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
9.  All massage tables must be at least two (2) feet away from walls at all times. 
D.  Personnel lists. 
1.  Within seven (7) calendar days of receiving a massage establishment certificate, the operator shall provide the Police Department with: a complete list of all massage technicians who are working or will work, be employed, or provide massage services in the massage establishment; a copy of the CAMTC certificate and CAMTC identification card for each such massage technician; and the name and residence address of the manager principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment and of any other manager. 
2.  The operator shall have a continuing obligation to notify the Chief of Police in writing of any change to the list provided pursuant to subsection (D)(1) of this section within seven (7) calendar days of such change, including but not limited to, changes in massage technicians and managers. 
3.  The operator shall maintain copies of each massage technician's CAMTC certificate and CAMTC identification card on file on the premises of the massage establishment which shall be available to any individual upon request. Additionally, the operator shall be required to file copies of each such CAMTC certificate and CAMTC identification card with the Police Department within seven (7) days of a massage technician beginning to work at the massage establishment. Information required by this section shall be maintained at the massage establishment for a minimum of two (2) years following the date that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment. 
4.  The operator shall maintain on the premises of the massage establishment a register of all non-state certified persons employed, working or providing other services at the massage establishment. The register shall be maintained for a minimum of two (2) years following the time that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment. The operator shall make the register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the Police Department, the Neighborhood Services Division, or any other official charged with enforcement of this chapter. The register shall include but is not limited to the following information: 
a.  Name, nicknames and/or aliases; 
b.  Home address and relevant phone number, including but not limited to home, cellular and pager numbers; 
c.  Age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes; 
d.  The date of employment, and termination, if any; 
e.  The duties of each person; and 
f.  In a separate portion of the register, Social Security numbers, which shall only be available for review by the Police Department or other law enforcement personnel, but not health officers or other officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
E.  Prohibited conduct. 
1.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or furnished on the premises of any massage establishment without a valid alcoholic beverage license from the State of California and a conditional use permit from the city. 
2.  No storage or sale of condoms or spermicides shall be permitted within the massage establishment. 
3.  No operator shall hire, employ or allow a person to perform massage services unless such person possesses a valid CAMTC certificate. Each operator of a massage establishment shall verify that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC certificate required by this chapter. Nothing herein prevents an operator from hiring, employing, or allowing a person to perform services allowed by such person's cosmetology or barber license, if the business has a state establishment license in addition to a massage establishment certificate. 
4.  No person shall use or possess, nor shall there be any storage of any sexually-oriented implements or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity. 
5.  No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be used by any massage establishment staff for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, of the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms, without the knowledge and written consent of the patron. 
6.  No massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons or clients that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required in this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.140 - Building and facility requirements. 
A.  The building or unit within the building where the massage establishment is located shall comply with all applicable building code requirements. 
B.  All massage rooms and dressing rooms shall be screened off by hinged doors that can open inward. Swinging doors that open inward, draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures in lieu of doors are acceptable on all inner dressing rooms and massage therapy rooms or cubicles. Except for bathroom doors, interior doors may not have locks on them. 
C.  In addition to the minimum lighting required by applicable provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code, at least one artificial light equivalent to a minimum of forty (40) incandescent watts shall be provided and turned on in each room or enclosure where massage services are to be administered during the administration of such services. No dimmer switches shall be allowed in massage rooms. No strobe or flashing lights shall be used. No colors lights shall be used nor shall any coverings or other apparatus be used which changes the color of the light source. 
D.  Any locker facilities provided for the use of patrons shall be fully secured for the protection of the patron's valuables and the patron shall be given control of the key or other means of access. 
E.  The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable mold-resistant surface. 
F.  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use. 
G.  One main entry that enters into the reception area shall be provided for patron use. All patrons and any persons other than those providing services at the massage establishment shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the establishment. 
H.  All exterior doors (except rear exterior doors used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours, and the establishment shall comply with the provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code pertaining to the posting of signs stating that doors shall remain unlocked during business hours. Exits for fire safety purposes may be allowed where deemed necessary by the appropriate public safety agency. The foregoing notwithstanding, the front door may be locked if there is no staff available to assure security for the clients and massage establishment staff who are behind closed doors, provided that the massage establishment is owned by one individual with no more than one employee or independent contractor. 
I.  There shall be no buzzer alarm or intercom system. 
J.  No massage business located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs or darkens the view into the premises or by signs that cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of any windowpane. The interior business shall be plainly visible form the exterior of the business by passing vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.150 - Inspections. 
A.  Representatives of the city's Police Department, the Los Angeles County Fire Department, the El Monte Code Enforcement Division, Community Development Department, and Finance Department, and agents for the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health and representatives of any state or local agencies with regulatory authority over massage establishments shall have the right to enter massage establishments, from time to time and without prior notice, during regular business hours, or at any time that the massage establishment is occupied or open for business, to verify the massage establishment is being operated in compliance with all applicable laws. Should the owner or operator of a massage establishment refuse such an inspection the local and/or state representatives shall secure an inspection or abatement warrant. 
B.  The operator shall cause to be conspicuously posted so that the same may be readily visible to persons in the reception area of the massage establishment, in letters that are a minimum of one inch, a notice in English which provides substantially as follows: 
THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY CITY AND HEALTH OFFICIALS 
In addition, operators are encouraged to post this notice in language(s) that are best understood by the customers of the massage establishment. 
C.  No person shall refuse to permit, cause delay of, or interfere with a lawful inspection or compliance check of the premises by the officials listed in subsection A of this section at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
5.56.160 - Penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in conduct that violates any provision of this chapter, to engage in conduct which fails to meet the standards set forth in this chapter, or to own, manage, or operate a massage establishment that is not fully in compliance with the operational standards set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor unless, in the sole discretion of the City Prosecutor, it is charged as, or reduced to, an infraction. Citations and warning notices may be utilized as determined appropriate to the circumstances by the enforcing personnel. 
C.  In addition to the above, any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, including any code enforcement procedures established pursuant to the laws of the State of California or the City of El Monte; and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. If an injunction is sought, attorneys' fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the party subject to said injunction. 
D.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 9, 4-5-2016)  
Chapter 5.58 - SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES USED TO SOLICIT PROSTITUTION OR USED TO ACQUIRE OR ATTEMPT TO ACQUIRE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 
Sections: 
 
5.58.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"City" means the city of El Monte. 
"Controlled substance" means a drug, substance or immediate precursor as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11007, or any controlled substance analog as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11401. 
"Department" means the Police Department of the city of El Monte. 
"Owner" means the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle that is used to solicit prostitution and/or acquire or attempt to acquire a controlled substance, as shown on records of the Department of Motor Vehicles or similar state entity. 
"Peace Officer" means any El Monte Police Officer. 
"Solicit or soliciting controlled substances" means the solicitation of controlled substances as these are defined in this section. 
"Solicit or soliciting prostitution" means the solicitation of prostitution as defined in California Penal Code Section 647(b). 
"Vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 670. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.020 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any person, or his or her servant, agent or employee who owns, leases, conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting prostitution and/or acquiring or attempting to acquire any controlled substance shall be guilty of committing a nuisance. Any vehicle used to solicit an act of prostitution and/or to acquire or attempt to acquire any controlled substance is also declared to be a nuisance. Such vehicle shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture as provided in this chapter. Declaration of this nuisance is made according to the authority of Government Code Section 38771. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.030 - Vesting of title. 
Subject to the requirements of Section 5.58.010, and except as further limited by this chapter, all right, title, and interest in any vehicle used to solicit an act of prostitution and/or to acquire or attempt to acquire any controlled substance shall vest in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to forfeiture. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.040 - Seizure of vehicles subject to forfeiture; seizure proceedings. 
A.  A vehicle subject to forfeiture under this chapter may be seized by any Peace Officer of the city upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the vehicle. Seizure without process may be made if any of the following situations exist: 
1.  The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search under a search warrant; 
2.  There is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used or is intended to be used in violation of this chapter; 
3.  There is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is directly or indirectly dangerous to the health or safety of persons or property. 
B.  The city may notify the Franchise Tax Board of a vehicle seized where there is reasonable cause to believe that the value of the seized vehicle exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000). 
C.  Receipts for vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter shall be delivered to any person out of whose possession such vehicle was seized, in accordance with California Penal Code Section 1412. There shall be a presumption affecting the burden of proof that a person to whom a receipt was issued is the owner thereof. This presumption may, however, be rebutted at the forfeiture hearing specified in Section 5.58.070. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.050 - Seized vehicles as evidence. 
A vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter, where appropriate, may be held for evidence. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.060 - Return of seized vehicles if no authorization to hold. 
Within fifteen (15) days after seizure, if the Peace Officer does not hold the vehicle for evidence or if the department does not refer the matter in writing for institution of forfeiture proceedings by the City Attorney, the Peace Officer or department shall comply with any notice to withhold issued to the city with respect to the vehicle by the Franchise Tax Board. If no notice to withhold has been issued with respect to the vehicle by the Franchise Tax Board, the Peace Officer or the department shall return the vehicle to the registered owner. Alternatively, the city may return the vehicle to the registered lienholder upon the lienholder's filing of a hold harmless agreement on behalf of the city. Said vehicle shall not be released unless the hold harmless agreement is accepted by the department and the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.070 - Forfeiture of vehicle; procedures. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection G of this section, if the City Attorney determines that factual circumstances warrant that the vehicle is subject to forfeiture, and are not automatically made forfeitable by another provision of this chapter, the City Attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture with the Superior Court of Los Angeles County. 
B.  A petition for forfeiture under this subsection shall be filed as soon as practicable, but in any case a petition must be filed within one year of the seizure of the vehicle which is subject to forfeiture. 
C.  Physical seizure of the vehicle shall not be necessary in order to have the vehicle alleged to be forfeitable in a petition pursuant to this section. The City Attorney may seek protective orders for any such vehicle. 
D.  The City Attorney shall cause notice of the seizure and of the intended forfeiture proceedings, as well as a notice stating that any interested party may file a verified claim with the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, to be served by personal delivery or by registered mail upon any person who has an interest in the vehicle. Whenever a notice is delivered pursuant to this section, it shall be accompanied by a claim form as described in Section 5.58.090, as well as directions for the filing and service of a claim. Notice shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in Los Angeles County. 
E.  An investigation shall be made by the department as to any claimant to the vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate federal agency. If the department finds that a person, other than the registered owner, is the legal owner of the vehicle, and such ownership did not arise subsequent to the date and time of arrest or notification of the forfeiture proceedings or seizure of the vehicle, it shall forthwith send a notice to the legal owner at his or her address appearing on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate state agency. 
F.  All notices shall set forth the time within which a claim of interest in the vehicle seized or that is subject to forfeiture is required to be filed pursuant to Section 5.58.090. 
G.  The City Attorney may, pursuant to this subsection, order the forfeiture of the vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter. The City Attorney shall provide notice of the proceedings under this subsection, including: 
1.  A description of the vehicle; 
2.  The date and place of seizure; 
3.  The violation of law alleged with respect to forfeiture of the vehicle; 
4.  The instructions for filing and serving a claim with the City Attorney pursuant to Section 5.58.090 and time limits for filing a claim. 
H.  If no claims are timely filed, the City Attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the city and dispose of the vehicle in accordance with this chapter. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the City Attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle. The City Attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
I.  If a claim is timely filed within fifteen (15) days, then the City Attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture pursuant to this section within thirty (30) days of receipt of the claim. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.080 - Innocent parties; return of vehicle. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the department shall return a seized vehicle upon the filing of a timely claim pursuant to Section 5.58.090 and upon a showing by the claimant that: 
A.  The vehicle is owned by two (2) or more persons and there is a community property interest in the vehicle by a person other than the person who used or maintained the vehicle for the purpose of soliciting prostitution and/or acquiring or attempting to acquire any controlled substance, and the vehicle is the sole vehicle available to the person's immediate family; 
B.  The vehicle is owned by the employer of the person who used or maintained the vehicle for the purpose of soliciting prostitution and/or acquiring or attempting to acquire any controlled substance; or 
C.  The vehicle is owed by a rental car agency with a duly executed contract with the person who used or maintained the vehicle for the purpose of soliciting prostitution and/or acquiring or attempting to acquire any controlled substance. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.090 - Claim procedures/post-seizure probable cause hearing. 
A.  Any person claiming an interest in the vehicle seized must at any time within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice of seizure, file with the Superior Court of Los Angeles County a claim, verified in accordance with Section 446 of the Code of Civil Procedure, stating his or her interest in the vehicle. An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served by the claimant on the City Attorney within ten (10) days of the filing of the claim. 
B.  Any claimant who timely files a claim may file a written request for a post-seizure probable cause hearing using the form provided by the department. 
1.  If the department does not receive a request for a post-seizure probable cause hearing within thirty (30) days from the date that the notice of seizure is published in a newspaper of general circulation, any rights to request such hearing will be deemed waived, and the requirements for post-seizure probable cause hearing will be satisfied. 
2.  If a request for a post-seizure probable cause hearing is timely filed within thirty (30) days, then the department shall provide such a hearing as provided for in subsection C of this section. 
C.  A post-seizure probable cause hearing will be conducted by the department, before a neutral decision-maker, within twelve (12) business days following the receipt of the first request for a post-seizure probable cause hearing filed with the department in accordance with this section. For purpose of this section, "business days" shall be defined as Monday through Thursday, excluding state or federal holidays. If there are multiple claimants, the department shall not be required to conduct multiple post-seizure probable cause hearings for each seized vehicle. A finding of probable cause for seizure of the vehicle is conclusive as to all claimants. 
1.  The department may authorize a hearing officer to conduct the post-seizure probable cause hearing. The authorized hearing officer must not have participated in the seizure of the vehicle. 
2.  At the post-seizure probable cause hearing, the department will be required to show that probable cause existed for the initial seizure of the vehicle pursuant to this chapter. 
3.  If the post-seizure probable cause hearing officer determines that probable cause did not exist for the seizure, the vehicle shall be released as soon as practicable to the appropriate claimant without imposing any towing and/or storage charges. The City Attorney and each claimant shall be notified of the release. 
4.  If the post-seizure probable cause hearing officer determines that probable cause existed for the seizure, then forfeiture proceedings against the vehicle will continue as provided in Section 5.58.100 et seq. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.100 - Forfeiture hearing. 
With the respect to a vehicle for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used for the solicitation of prostitution and/or to attempt to solicit or solicit drug sales as these crimes are defined in this chapter. Trial shall be before the court or jury. The presiding judge of the Superior Court shall assign actions brought pursuant to this chapter for trial. 
A.  Court proceedings shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  If a verified claim is filed, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set for a hearing on a day not less than thirty (30) days therefrom; 
2.  The hearing shall be before the court; 
3.  The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to proceedings under this chapter unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter. However, there shall be no joinder of actions or coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints and the issues shall be limited strictly to questions related to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.110 - Forfeiture of vehicles determined to be nuisances. 
Upon proof that a vehicle was used for any of the purposes set forth in Section 5.58.020, the court shall declare such vehicle a nuisance and order that the vehicle be seized, forfeited and sold and the proceeds distributed in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.120 - Alternative settlement procedures. 
Any person, or his or her servant, agent or employee who owns, leases, conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting prostitution and/or acquiring or attempting to acquire any controlled substance and whose vehicle has been seized in accordance with this chapter may request to execute a voluntary settlement agreement with the city for the return of the vehicle. Such request shall be made in writing to the department. The settlement amount incorporated in the settlement agreement shall be sufficient to cover all of the city's reasonable administrative costs, including attorney's fees and personnel time for the seizure and forfeiture action and shall be set by resolution. The executed settlement agreement shall be accompanied by the appropriate settlement fee amount in the form of a money order or cashier's check. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.130 - Proceeds of forfeiture. 
In all cases where a vehicle is seized and forfeited to the city, the vehicle shall be sold, or if cash is paid as settlement in lieu of forfeiture of the vehicle, and the proceeds shall be distributed and appropriated as follows: 
A.  To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional sales vender, mortgage or lien holder of the vehicle, if any, up to the amount of his or her interest in the vehicle, when the court or City Attorney declares the forfeiture and orders a distribution to that person. 
B.  To the city for all expenditures made or incurred by it in connection with the publication of the notices set forth in this chapter, and sale of the vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs, storage or transportation of any vehicle seized under this chapter. 
C.  The remaining funds shall be distributed to the department to cover the costs of implementing the program. Such funds shall be placed in a separate account titled "The Vehicle Forfeiture Account." The Vehicle Forfeiture Account shall be subject to appropriate accounting controls and financial audits for all deposits and expenditures. 
D.  All the funds distributed to the department pursuant to subsection C of this section shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this chapter, be made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of the department. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
5.58.140 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for the solicitation of prostitution and/or the acquisition or attempt to acquire controlled substances. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2681 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 2580 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 5.60 - MODEL STUDIOS AND PICTURE ARCADES 
Sections:  
Article I. - Definitions 
 
5.60.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Figure model" means any person, male or female, who poses to be observed, viewed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted. 
"In the nude" or "semi-nude" means completely without clothing or covering, or with partial clothing or covering, but with any pubic area exposed or with any portion of the crease of the buttocks exposed or with the breasts exposed by a female so that the nipples or that portion of the breast which has a different pigmentation than the main portion of the breast are exposed. 
"Model studio" means and includes: 
1.  Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing figure models who pose for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly depicted in the nude or semi-nude for persons who pay a fee, or other consideration or compensation, or a gratuity, for the right of opportunity so to depict the figure model, or for admission to, or for permission to remain upon, or as a condition of remaining upon the premises; 
2.  Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing or providing or procuring for a fee, or other consideration or compensation or gratuity, figure models to be observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly depicted in the nude or semi-nude. 
3.  Exception. "Model studio" shall not include any studio which is operated by any State College, or public Junior College or school wherein the persons, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating it has met the requirements established in Division 21 of the Education Code for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer a diploma or honorary diploma. 
"Picture arcade" means any premises where there is maintained one or more machines or contrivances to show filmed still or motion pictures and for which any charge, consideration or payment is required, and which machines or contrivances are designed for use by not more than five (5) people at any one time. 
(Prior code §§ 6399.301—6399.305)  
Article II. - Model Studio Regulations 
 
5.60.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall operate or manage a model studio without first having obtained and having in effect a valid written permit secured in accordance with Chapter 5.12 of this title. 
(Prior code § 6399.401)  
5.60.030 - Grounds for denial and revocation. 
In addition to the grounds for permit denials specified in Section 5.12.120 of the El Monte Municipal Code and the grounds for permit revocation specified in Section 5.12.240 of the El Monte Municipal Code, the permit required by this article shall be denied, or if already issued shall be revoked, as to any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, or upon a finding that the applicant or permittee is not of good moral character, has been convicted of an offense involving moral turpitude including but not limited to all offenses enumerated in Section 311 of the California Penal Code or proscribed by Sections 220, 262, 266 through 266(i), 267 through 269(b), 273(f), 288, 288(a), 309, 315, 316 or 653(f) of the California Penal Code. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6399.402)  
5.60.040 - Signs prohibited. 
No operator or manager of a model studio nor any other person shall erect or maintain or permit the erection or maintenance on the outside of any model studio any sign which in whole or in part depicts the human form or any portion or portions thereof, whether clothed or unclothed. 
(Prior code § 6399.403)  
5.60.050 - Hours. 
No person shall conduct or operate a model studio between the hours of ten p.m. and ten a.m. of the following day. 
(Prior code § 6399.404)  
5.60.060 - Supervision. 
No person shall conduct or operate a model studio unless the permittee personally, or a manager previously fingerprinted by the City Police Department, shall be present on the premises at all times while the establishment is open or in operation. 
(Prior code § 6399.405)  
5.60.070 - Visibility. 
No person operating or managing a model studio shall permit conditions to exist whereby the interior of said model studio is visible from outside the building or premises. 
(Prior code § 6399.406)  
5.60.080 - Inspection. 
Every person operating or managing a model studio shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room or area used for the purpose of figure modeling shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be opened to view in its entirety for inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
(Prior code § 6399.407)  
5.60.090 - Location. 
No permittee shall permit or conduct figure modeling on any premises other than that to which the permit has been issued. 
(Prior code § 6399.408)  
5.60.100 - Records. 
Every person operating or managing a model studio shall maintain a current file of all figure models employed upon or using the premises. This file shall contain the true name and aliases used by each figure model, the age, birth date, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, home address, phone numbers, Social Security number and the date of employment and termination. Inactive file cards shall be maintained on the premises for the period of one year following termination of employment. Every such person shall make all such records available immediately upon demand of any Peace Officer. 
(Prior code § 6399.409)  
5.60.110 - Communication devices. 
No person operating or managing a model studio shall permit communication devices to be installed or used in any manner on the premises so as to interfere with or hinder inspections by Peace Officers. 
(Prior code § 6399.410)  
5.60.120 - Figure model permit. 
No permittee shall permit any person to function as a figure model unless such person has in his or her possession a valid and current permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title or issued by the county. 
(Prior code § 6399.411)  
5.60.130 - Register. 
The permittee shall maintain a complete and current register of all patrons. The register shall contain, but is not restricted to the following information: 
A.  Time, date and duration of appointment; 
B.  Complete and true name of patron; 
C.  Age; 
D.  Address; 
E.  Phone numbers; 
F.  Occupation; 
G.  Business name and address and/or school's name and address; 
H.  Name of figure model used. 
The permittee shall keep the register in numerical sequence with a new registration for each appointment. No registration shall be removed from the register. The permittee shall make this register available immediately upon demand of any Peace Officer. 
(Prior code § 6399.412)  
5.60.140 - Identification. 
The permittee shall require every patron to exhibit a driver's license, Social Security card or other license or permit issued to such patron by an agency of local, state or federal government. The permittee shall check such permit, license or card against the register signed by the patron and shall note upon such register any discrepancies between such permit, license or card and the register, and shall add to such register any identifying information or numbers contained in such permit, license or card not already upon the register. 
(Prior code § 6399.413)  
5.60.150 - Posting. 
The permittee shall post and continuously keep posted a copy of this chapter in a conspicuous place inside the licensed premises. 
(Prior code § 6399.414)  
Article III. - Figure Models 
 
5.60.160 - Permit required. 
No person shall act in the capacity of a figure model in any premises requiring a permit unless such person has in his or her possession a valid and current permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title or issued by the county. 
(Prior code § 6399.501)  
5.60.170 - Grounds for denial and revocation. 
In addition to the grounds for permit denials specified in Section 5.12.120 of the El Monte Municipal Code and the grounds for permit revocation specified in Section 5.12.240 of the El Monte Municipal Code, the permit required by this article shall be denied, or if already issued shall be revoked, as to any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, or upon a finding that the applicant or permittee is not of good moral character, has been convicted of an offense involving moral turpitude including but not limited to all offenses enumerated in Section 311 of the California Penal Code or proscribed by Sections 220, 262, 266 through 266(i), 267 through 269(b), 273(f), 288, 288(a), 309, 315, 316 or 653(f) of the California Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 6399.502)  
Article IV. - Picture Arcades 
 
5.60.180 - Permit required. 
No person shall own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain a picture arcade without first having obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title. 
(Prior code § 6399.601)  
5.60.190 - Age requirement. 
A picture arcade license shall not be issued to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or to a corporation any of whose officers are under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6399.602)  
5.60.200 - Grounds for denial and revocation. 
In addition to the grounds for permit denials specified in Section 5.12.120 of the El Monte Municipal Code and the grounds for permit revocation specified in Section 5.12.240 of the El Monte Municipal Code, the permit required by this article shall be denied, or if already issued shall be revoked, as to any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, or upon a finding that the applicant or permittee is not of good moral character, has been convicted of an offense involving moral turpitude including but not limited to all offenses enumerated in Section 311 of the California Penal Code or proscribed by Sections 220, 262, 266 through 266(i), 267 through 269(b), 273(f), 288, 288(a), 309, 315, 316 or 653(f) of the California Penal Code. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6399.603)  
5.60.210 - Hours. 
No permittee shall conduct or operate a picture arcade between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. of any day or fail to exclude all customers, patrons and visitors therefrom between those hours. 
(Prior code § 6399.604)  
5.60.220 - Supervision. 
The permittee or a manager previously fingerprinted and approved by the City Police Department, shall be present on the arcade premises to supervise activities at all times when the establishment is in operation. 
(Prior code § 6399.605)  
5.60.230 - Visibility of interior. 
No permittee shall maintain any picture arcade unless the entire interior of such premises wherein the pictures are viewed is visible immediately upon entrance to such premises and the entire body of every viewing person is also visible immediately upon entrance to the premises. 
(Prior code § 6399.606)  
5.60.240 - Visibility from exterior. 
No permittee shall permit conditions to exist wherein any portion of the interior of a picture arcade shall be visible from the outside of the premises. 
(Prior code § 6399.607)  
5.60.250 - Lighting. 
The permittee shall maintain a minimum of one-foot candle illumination generally distributed in all parts of the premises at all times when the picture arcade is open or when the public is permitted to enter or remain therein. 
(Prior code § 6399.608)  
5.60.260 - Inspections. 
No permittee shall permit any doors on the arcade premises to be locked during business hours and shall make every room or area on the arcade premises readily accessible at all times and open to view in its entirety for inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
(Prior code § 6399.609)  
5.60.270 - Examination of pictures. 
The permittee shall examine the nature and content of the filmed pictures prior to showing or displaying to patrons. 
(Prior code § 6399.610)  
5.60.280 - Alcohol or drugs. 
No permittee shall permit any person under the influence of alcohol or drugs to be, or remain, on the arcade premises. 
(Prior code § 6399.611)  
5.60.290 - Communication devices. 
No permittee shall permit communication devices to be installed or used in any manner on the arcade premises so as to interfere or hinder inspection by any Peace Officer. 
(Prior code § 6399.612)  
5.60.300 - Minors. 
A.  No permittee, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of a picture arcade shall allow or permit any persons under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, remain in, enter or visit such premises unless such minor person at all times is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age. 
B.  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall remain in, enter or visit any picture arcade unless such minor is accompanied at all times by his or her parent, guardian, or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Prior code §§ 6399.613, 6399.614)  
5.60.310 - Posting of regulations. 
The permittee shall post and continuously keep posted a copy of this article in a conspicuous place inside the licensed premises at all times. 
(Prior code § 6399.615)  
Chapter 5.64 - MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PRODUCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.64.010 - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the city to permit the motion picture and television production industry to utilize the variety of backdrops afforded within the city as locations for filming or videotaping for motion picture and television production so long as the use of locations within the city does not unreasonably interfere with the public health and safety or unreasonably endanger any property. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits for filming or video taping on location within the city in order to ensure that motion picture and television companies wishing to use locations within the city will not be unduly restricted so long as their activities in this regard are not inconsistent with considerations of the public health and safety and the protection of property. 
(Prior code § 6901)  
5.64.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"News purposes" means the filming or video taping for television news broadcasting by reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity, of news events concerning those persons, scenes, or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest. 
(Prior code §§ 6900, 6900.1)  
5.64.030 - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided it is unlawful for any person to engage in the business or activity of filming, video taping or producing motion pictures on motion picture film or electronic videotaping for public exhibition as motion pictures or for television, at any place within the city, other than at or in an established motion picture or television studio, without a permit from the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code § 6902)  
5.64.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  The filming or videotaping of motion pictures solely for private or family use. 
B.  The filming or videotaping of motion pictures for use in a criminal investigation or civil proceeding. 
C.  The filming or videotaping or production of motion pictures for news purposes. 
D.  The filming or videotaping of motion pictures for noncommercial purposes. 
(Prior code § 6903)  
5.64.050 - Application form. 
The Chief of Police shall furnish application for such permit. Such forms shall request the following: 
A.  Full legal name of applicant; 
B.  Business name of applicant (if different); 
C.  Business address of applicant; 
D.  Business telephone of applicant; 
E.  Location(s) of proposed filming or taping; 
F.  Date(s) and time(s) of proposed filming or taping; 
G.  Security/cleaning bond one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) posted; 
H.  Services of city employees desired or required on location during filming; 
I.  Description of the scene(s) to be filmed or taped; 
J.  Name of person in charge on location; and 
K.  Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary or desirable. 
(Prior code § 6904)  
5.64.060 - Time for filing application. 
Applications shall be presented to the Chief of Police at least five (5) business days in advance of the time that the proposed filming, taping or production is to commence. 
(Prior code § 6905)  
5.64.070 - Filing fee. 
Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application and investigation fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the city. In the event that weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant require that the date(s) or time(s) of the proposed filming or taping be altered, no additional application and investigation fee shall be required because of such alteration provided reasonable notice of the alteration is given to the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code § 6906)  
5.64.080 - Use of court building (costs). 
"Court building" refers to the second floor of the structure located at 11301 Valley Boulevard in the city of El Monte. Use of the court building by motion picture and television production companies is subject to approval by the Chief of Police through the permit process. The rental rate for such usage shall be subject to review by the City Administrator except that the minimum fee to he levied for the use of the court building is five hundred dollars ($500.00) per shooting day and except further that if the user is a nonprofit corporation as defined by State Law in Sections 23701a through 237012 of the Revenue and Taxation Code there shall be no minimum fee. Also, rental rates for the use of the court building by production companies to prepare for filming shall be set at one-half that rate which is set for the rental on days reserved for filming. 
(Prior code § 6907)  
5.64.090 - Public services (costs). 
Expenses incurred by the Public Services Department shall be reimbursed to the city according to the actual cost of such services. 
(Prior code § 6908)  
5.64.100 - Determination by Chief of Police. 
Before granting any permit pursuant to this chapter, the Chief of Police shall first determine that such filming or videotaping for motion picture or television production will not unreasonably interfere with the public health and safety or unreasonably endanger any property. In making this determination, the Chief of Police shall take into consideration the noise, traffic hazards, fire hazards and other health and safety problems that are likely to be caused by such activities. 
(Prior code § 6909)  
5.64.110 - Cost of police, fire protection. 
If the Chief of Police determines that any potential danger to health, safety or property would be eliminated by the presence of police or fire protection at the site of the filming or videotaping for motion picture or television production, the Chief of Police may grant the permit upon condition that the permittee pay in advance to the city the costs of such police or fire protection as may be required. It shall be the policy of the city to have at least one Police Officer on duty on any day of filming. In addition, a representative from the Fire Department will be required if filming is to be done within any building or structure, public or private. 
(Prior code § 6910)  
5.64.120 - Insurance. 
It shall be a condition of the issuance and continued validity of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter that the permittee first obtain, pay for and maintain a policy of general liability insurance approved as to form by the City Attorney which shall insure the city, its officers and employees against any liability, or claims of liability, brought or made by or on behalf of any person for personal injury or property damage caused by or arising out of any negligent act or omission of either the permittee, his agents or employees, including any officers or employees of the city, or caused by or arising out of the condition of any city-owned or controlled property, whether real or personal, and occurring during the period and as a result of the activities for which such permit was issued. The amount of coverage to be provided by such policy shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit. The permittee may satisfy the requirement imposed by this Section through the presentation of a certificate of insurance, for at least the required amount of coverage, which indicates that, by endorsement thereto, the city, its officers and employees have been added as additional insureds. Such certificate shall additionally provide that the required insurance will not be modified, changed or terminated until at least ten (10) days written notice thereof has been transmitted to the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code § 6911)  
5.64.130 - Indemnity. 
It shall be a condition of the insurance of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter that the permittee shall agree to defend and to hold the city, its officers and employees harmless, from any and all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the issuance of such permit. 
(Prior code § 6912)  
Chapter 5.68 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.68.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Pawnbroker" means any person operating the business of loaning money on the security of personal property pledged in his or its keeping, or of purchasing personal property, and agreeing at or before the time of purchase to resell the same to the vendor at a stipulated price. A "pawnshop" is any room, store, or place in which the business of pawnbroker is conducted. 
"Secondhand dealer" means and includes any person, copartnership, firm or corporation whose principal business is primarily that of engaging in buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. Secondhand dealer also includes any person who engages in the business of buying or selling secondhand tangible personal property in excess of twenty (20) percent of the gross sale and purchases of goods or merchandise sold or purchased in the regular course of business. Secondhand dealer, as used in this chapter, does not include any person who performs the services of an auctioneer for a fee or salary. 
"Tangible personal property" means and includes, but is not limited to, all secondhand tangible personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription or which, at the time it is acquired by the secondhand dealer, bears evidence of having had a serial number of personalized initials or inscriptions. Tangible personal property also includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  All tangible personal property, new or used, received in pledge as security for a loan by a pawnbroker or a secondhand dealer acting as a pawnbroker; 
2.  All tangible personal property that bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription which is purchased by a secondhand dealer or a pawnbroker or which, at the time of such purchase, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription; and 
3.  All personal property commonly sold by secondhand dealers which statistically is found through crime reports so the California Attorney General so constitute a significant class of stolen goods as is determined and supplied to the Chief of Police by the California Attorney General. Tangible personal property as used in this chapter does not mean and include any new goods or merchandise purchased from a bona fide manufacturer or distributor or wholesaler of such new goods or merchandise by a secondhand dealer. For the purpose of the chapter, however, a secondhand dealer shall retain for one year from the date of purchase, and shall make available for inspection by any law enforcement officer, any receipt, invoice, bill of sale or other evidence of purchase of such new goods or merchandise. 
(Prior code §§ 6310—6310.2, 6310.4)  
5.68.020 - Secondhand dealer—Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  The receipt or sale of any secondhand goods, wares or merchandise by any person who receives the same as part payment on new goods, wares or merchandise, if such person is the authorized representative or agent of the manufacturer, jobber or distributor; 
B.  Junk and/or salvage dealers or automobile junk dealers; 
C.  Any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational organization or association, which as part of its activities operates as a secondhand dealer solely for the purpose and objectives for which such organization or association was formed and from which secondhand dealership the net gain, monetary or otherwise, is used only for the purposes and objectives for which such organization or association was formed; 
D.  Used car dealers unless a used car dealer receives or accepts anything of value other than cash or another used vehicle as a down payment, part payment or full payment on, of, or for the sale of a used vehicle. In the event that any used car dealer accepts or advertises or holds himself or herself out as willing to accept anything of value other than cash or another used vehicle as a down payment, part payment or full payment on, of or for any used vehicle sold by him or her, such used car dealer shall conclusively be presumed, held and construed to be a secondhand dealer for all purposes and subject to all the regulations of this chapter and the license fee imposed by Section 5.08.360 of this title; 
E.  Tangible personal property which has been: 
1.  Acquired in good faith in a transaction involving the stock in trade of another secondhand dealer who previously has made the report or reports required by this chapter of such property included in the transaction and who states in writing that the report or reports so required have been made, provided the acquiring secondhand dealer submits a copy of such statement to the Chief of Police, on forms prescribed and provided by the Department of Justice for all tangible personal property which he or she acquired in such transaction. Each of the secondhand dealers involved in the transaction shall retain a copy of the statement and the report referred to in this Section for a period of three (3) years as a matter of record which shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer, 
a.  No report to the Chief of Police shall be required of the acquiring secondhand dealer if the other secondhand dealer states in writing under penalty of perjury, on a form prescribed and provided at actual cost by the Department of Justice, that the report or reports required by this chapter have been properly made and submitted by such dealer. Such a declaration shall be delivered to the acquiring dealer, who shall retain it for a period of three (3) years as a matter of record, and shall make it available for inspection by any law enforcement officer, 
2.  Acquired in a nonjudicial sale, transfer, assignment, assignment for the benefit of creditors, or consignment of the assets or stock in trade, in bulk, or a substantial part thereof, or an industrial or commercial enterprise for purposes of voluntary dissolution or liquidation of the seller's business, or for the purpose of disposing of an excessive quantity of personal property; or which has been acquired in a nonjudicial sale or transfer from an owner of his or her entire household of personal property, or a substantial part thereof; provided, the secondhand dealer retains in his or her place of business for a period of three (3) years a copy of the bill of sale, receipt, inventory list, or other transfer document as a matter of record which shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer; and provided further, that the secondhand dealer notifies the Chief of Police that exemption from reporting is being claimed under this Section, do not include a secondhand dealer, 
3.  Acquired in a sale made by any public officer in his or her official capacity, trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, receiver, or public official acting under judicial process or authority, or which has been acquired in a sale made upon the execution of, or by virtue of, any process issued by a court, or under the provisions of the California Commercial Code, 
4.  Acquired as the surplus property of the United States government or of a state, city, county, city and county, municipal corporation, or public district and which after requisition or acquisition by the United States government or by a state, city, county, city and county, municipal corporation, or public district has never thereafter been sold at retail, and 
5.  Reported by a secondhand dealer as an acquisition or a purchase, or which has been reported as destroyed or otherwise disposed of (1) to a state agency by the authority of any other law of this state or (2) to a city, county, city and county, officer or agency by the authority of any other law of this state or a city, county, or city and county ordinance. 
Notwithstanding the aforementioned exemptions, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any tangible personal property which has been acquired by a secondhand dealer with the understanding or expectation that such property would later be reacquired by the transferor or an agent thereof. 
(Prior code § 6310.3)  
5.68.030 - Permit required. 
No person shall carry on the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer without having first obtained a permit from the city so to do in the manner herein provided, which permit shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the premises where such business is conducted. 
(Prior code § 6311)  
5.68.040 - Permit application. 
A.  In addition to all requirements specified in or imposed under Chapter 5.12 of this title, the application for a permit for any business or occupation described in this chapter shall contain a statement as to whether or not an application for a similar permit has been refused or any similar permit canceled by this city or by any other agency of government, and if so, a full statement of the reasons for such refusal or cancellation. 
B.  Execution. All applications for a permit must he filed by the applicant and, if the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the same must be signed by a duly authorized officer on behalf of the corporation, or any member of the partnership. 
(Prior code §§ 6312, 6312.1)  
5.68.050 - Permit to offenders prohibited. 
A permit to carry on any business mentioned in this chapter shall not be granted to any person who has failed, refused, or neglected to comply with the laws and ordinances relating to and regulating the business for which such permit is sought. 
(Prior code § 6313)  
5.68.060 - Renewal of revoked permit. 
If the permit or license of any person to engage in or conduct any business described in this chapter is revoked, no permit or license shall be granted to such person to carry on or engage in any such business within twelve (12) months after the date of such revocation. 
(Prior code § 6316)  
5.68.070 - Required reports—Pawnbrokers. 
Every pawnbroker shall daily file with or mail to the Chief of Police all reports required by Section 21208 of the California Financial Code on forms prescribed and provided at actual cost by the Department of Justice. 
(Prior code § 6318)  
5.68.080 - Required reports—Secondhand dealers. 
Every secondhand dealer shall report daily, or on the first working day after receipt or purchase of such property, on forms prescribed and provided at actual cost by the Department of Justice, all tangible personal property which he or she has purchased, taken in trade, taken in pawn, accepted for sale on consignment or accepted for auctioning, by forwarding the original and the duplicate copy thereof to the Chief of Police. The triplicate copy thereof shall be retained by the secondhand dealer in his place of business for a period of three (3) years and shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the intended seller of the property; 
B.  A complete and reasonably accurate description of such property, including serial numbers or other identifying marks or symbols; 
C.  A certification by the intended seller that to his or her knowledge and belief the information is true and complete; and 
D.  All other information provided for on forms prescribed and provided by the Department of Justice. 
(Prior code § 6318.1)  
5.68.090 - Business machine dealer reports. 
Every business machine dealer shall report all used business machines which he or she has purchased, repaired, taken in trade, or accepted for sale or consignment, from an individual, to the Chief of Police in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.68.080. No report of repair shall be required from a dealer servicing or repairing a machine in the possession of the owner to whom that dealer sold that machine when it was new. As used in this Section, the term "business machines" means and includes, but is not limited to, typewriters, adding machines, check-writing devices, cash registers, calculators, addressing machines, copying and accounting equipment, letter-sorting and folding devices, and recording equipment, but does not include office furniture or fixtures. 
(Prior code § 6318.1.1)  
5.68.100 - Posting of regulations. 
A copy of this chapter, to be furnished by the City Clerk, shall be kept conspicuously posted in the place of business of every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. 
(Prior code § 6318.2)  
5.68.110 - Language of required reports. 
Every report and record required by the terms of this chapter to be filed or kept shall be written or printed in the English language in a clear and legible manner. 
(Prior code § 6320)  
5.68.120 - Report confidential—Filing. 
The Chief of Police upon receipt of a form filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall cause the original to be submitted daily to the Department of Justice. The Chief of Police shall cause the duplicate copy of all such reports to be filed in the office of the Police Department and the same shall be open to inspection only by members of the Police Department or upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 6321)  
5.68.130 - Enforcement. 
No person engaged in the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, or any agent or employee of any such person, shall fail, refuse or neglect to file any report in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or fail, refuse or neglect to keep any record or records as required by this chapter, or fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to any Police Officer of the city, immediately upon demand for such inspection, any such record of any goods or things pledged to or purchased or received by such person. 
(Prior code § 6322)  
5.68.140 - Waiting period. 
Every secondhand dealer shall retain in his or her possession for a period of thirty (30) days all tangible personal property reported under the provisions of Sections 5.68.080 and 5.68.090. The thirty (30) day holding period with respect to such tangible personal property shall commence with the date the report of its acquisition was made to the Chief of Police by the secondhand dealer. The Chief of Police may for good cause, as specified by the Department of Justice, authorize prior disposition of any such property described in a specific report, provided that a secondhand dealer who disposes of tangible personal property pursuant to such authorization shall report the sale thereof to the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code § 6323)  
5.68.150 - Separate businesses. 
If any person shall carry on, at the same time, more than one of the businesses defined and referred to in this chapter, such person shall be deemed to be carrying on each such business separate and apart from the other such business. 
(Prior code § 6324)  
Chapter 5.72 - SIDEWALK VENDORS[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2941, § 3, adopted January 8, 2019, in effect, repealed ch. 5.72, §§ 5.72.010—5.72.070 and enacted a new ch. 5.72 as set out herein. Former ch. 5.72 pertained to peddlers, solicitors and itinerant vendors and derived from the prior code. 
 
5.72.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter 5.72 to comply with recent state legislation decriminalizing sidewalk vending and to provide important entrepreneurial and economic opportunities by allowing sidewalk vending in city parks and on public sidewalks and other paved public pedestrian paths. It is a further purpose and intent of this Chapter 5.72 to regulate sidewalk vending in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of El Monte in a manner consistent with state law. In order to meet these objectives, business licenses and sidewalk vending permits shall be required to vend in city parks, on sidewalks, or on other paved public pedestrian paths. The provisions of this Chapter 5.72 are in addition to any other permits, licenses and approvals which may be required to conduct business in the city, and are in addition to any permits, licenses and approval required under state, county, or other law. 
(Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
5.72.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following meanings shall apply: 
A.  "Food" means an edible substance or beverage. 
B.  "Merchandize" means any goods or other items which are not food. 
C.  "Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
D.  Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other paved public pedestrian path. 
E.  "Stationary sidewalk vendor" means any sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location for a period of thirty (30) minutes or longer. 
F.  "Sidewalk" means any surface in the public right-of-way intended for use by pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
5.72.030 - Business license required. 
Only sidewalk vendors with valid business licenses issued in accordance with Chapter 5.04 may vend upon the city's public sidewalk or other paved public pedestrian path or in city parks. A separate business license shall be required for each pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyances utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
5.72.040 - Sidewalk vending permits. 
A.  Only sidewalk vendors with valid sidewalk vending permits issued by the Permit Committee may vend upon the city's public sidewalk or other paved public pedestrian path. Only one permit is required, regardless of the number of pushcarts, stands, displays, pedal-driven carts, wagons, showcases, racks, or other non-motorized conveyances utilized by a vendor or business. 
B.  A sidewalk vending permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or abandoned. A sidewalk vending permit may be revoked for a violation of this Chapter 5.72, pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 5.12.240. 
(Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
5.72.050 - Sidewalk vending regulations. 
Sidewalk vendors shall be subject to such additional regulations as may be adopted by the City Council in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of El Monte residents. 
(Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
5.72.060 - Trespassing prohibited. 
Nothing in this Chapter 5.72 is intended to authorize sidewalk vendors to enter into any private premises without the consent of the owner or lawful occupant thereof, or to trespass upon any private property or to refuse to leave any private property or premises when requested so to do by the owner or person in lawful possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2941, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
Chapter 5.76 - POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS 
Sections: 
 
5.76.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Pool and billiard table" means every table or device designed, intended or used for the playing of pool, bank pool, snooker, billiards or any similar game regardless of its size and irrespective of whether or not the same be coin-operated. 
"Public billiard hall" or "pool room for let or hire" means and includes every room, enclosure or portion of any building containing one or more billiard tables, pool tables, snooker tables, bank pool tables, or any similar table or device by whatever name known, any of which tables or similar devices are available for use by the public upon the payment of anything of value or upon the making of any purchase. 
(Prior code §§ 6399.101, 6399.101.1)  
5.76.020 - Minors prohibited. 
A.  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall enter or remain in any public billiard ball or pool room for let or hire. 
B.  Exception. SubSection A of this Section shall not apply to a public billiard hall or pool room which is a part of a recreational center or establishment within the same building and under the same management during such times as an adult in charge of such recreational center or establishment is on the premises, a valid permit from the city for the operation of such recreational center or establishment is in effect, and the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverage is prohibited within such billiard hall or pool room. 
(Prior code §§ 6399.102, 6399.102.1)  
5.76.030 - Sign posting required. 
Every manager and proprietor of a public billiard hall or pool room for let or hire shall obtain notice at the entrance thereof that persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are prohibited from entering the same, and no manager, proprietor or person in charge of any public billiard hall or pool room for let or hire shall allow any person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter or remain in any public billiard hall or pool room for let or hire. 
(Prior code § 6399.103)  
Chapter 5.80 - RENTAL DWELLING USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
5.80.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings as described below: 
"Dwelling unit" has the same meaning as found at Chapter 17.04 of this code and the term shall include a motel unit or any other dwelling unit occupied on a transient basis and any other residential occupancy subject to a tax as levied under Section 13 of Ordinance No. 2357. 
"Dwelling unit location" means the legal parcel of land owned by the landlord on which one or more dwelling units are situated. 
"Landlord" means the individual, partnership, tenancy in common, corporation or other ownership entity which owns a fee title interest in a legal parcel of land on which one or more dwelling units (or mobilehome spaces) are situated and rented by the landlord to third persons or reserved for rental occupancy by the landlord for third persons. 
"Mobilehome park" shall have the same meaning as found in the Mobilehome Residency Law of the Civil Code. 
"Mobilehome space" shall have the same meaning as found in the Mobilehome Residency Law of the Civil Code. 
"Rent" means the payment of cash or other valuable consideration on a periodic basis to the landlord by the occupant of a dwelling unit. 
(Prior code § 6208.2 (part))  
5.80.020 - Rental dwelling unit tax. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in Section 5.80.030, the landlord of each dwelling unit shall pay a license tax each year calculated as follows: 
1.  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit location per year; plus 
2.  Twenty dollars ($20.00) per dwelling unit at the dwelling unit location per year. 
B.  The landlord of each mobilehome park shall pay a license tax each year calculated as follows: 
1.  Thirty dollars ($30.00) per mobilehome park location per year; plus 
2.  Ten dollars ($10.00) per mobilehome space at the mobilehome park location per year. 
(Prior code § 6208.2 (part))  
5.80.030 - Rental dwelling unit landlord notification to city. 
Concurrently upon submission of application materials for issuance of a business license, each landlord shall provide the City License Department with its business address and telephone number. In the case of a landlord organized as a partnership, the business address and telephone number of the general partner(s) shall be provided to the City License Department. In the case of a landlord organized as a trust, or a corporation, the business address and telephone of its officers shall be provided to the City License Department. The landlord shall also provide the City License Department with the name, address and telephone number of the person who is responsible for the day to day management, maintenance and care of the dwelling unit(s) or mobilehome spaces, as applicable, at each dwelling unit location. In addition, each landlord shall provide to the City License Department at the time that an application for the business license is submitted the name of the person as authorized by the landlord as the proper person to receive service of process along with that person's business address and telephone number. Any change in the information as required by this Section shall be reported in writing to the City Licensing Department within ten (10) days from the date on which the change is proposed by the landlord to be effective. 
(Prior code § 6208.3)  
5.80.040 - Rental dwelling unit tax exemptions or reductions for certain landlords. 
A.  Certain landlords are exempt from the rental dwelling unit tax as levied each year under Section 5.80.020A as follows: 
1.  Each landlord who owns no more than one dwelling unit location which has been improved with (2) dwelling units shall be exempt provided that a landlord who is eligible to claim the exemption by subsection (A)(1) of this Section shall occupy one of the two (2) dwelling units at the dwelling unit location as the principal residence of the landlord; 
2.  Each landlord who owns no more than one dwelling unit location which has been improved with three (3) or less dwelling units shall be exempt provided that a landlord who is eligible to claim the exemption authorized by subsection (A)(2) of this Section, shall as of the commencement of each calendar year either qualify as a person who is a member of a "lower income household," as defined under Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, or shall be a blind or disabled person and be a recipient of Supplemental Social Security Income under Title XVI of the Social Security Act, as amended. 
B.  Certain landlords are eligible as provided in subsection B of this Section for a reduction in the rental dwelling unit tax as payable under subsection (A)(1) of this Section each year under the following circumstances: 
1.  Each landlord who owns two (2) or more separate dwelling unit locations which have been improved with three (3) or fewer dwelling units at each separate dwelling unit location shall pay no more than an aggregate of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per year under subsection (A)(1) of this Section for all dwelling unit locations as improved with three (3) or fewer dwelling units owned by the landlord in the city. Such landlord shall also pay all amounts due under subsection (A)(2) of this Section for each dwelling unit at the dwelling unit locations. 
C.  The Director of Finance shall prepare appropriate written forms and procedures as necessary for the administration of the rental dwelling unit tax exemptions and reductions as authorized by this Section. 
(Prior code § 6208.4)  
5.80.050 - Dwelling unit tax payable on dwelling unit locations improved with three or fewer dwelling units. 
A landlord who owns a dwelling unit location as improved with three (3) or fewer dwelling units shall pay the rental dwelling unit tax as levied by Section 5.80.020A, subject to the exemptions and reductions, if applicable, under Section 5.80.040, each year on a city fiscal year basis from July 1st to June 30th of the following calendar year. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6208.6)  
5.80.060 - Suspension of tax. 
A.  The licensing of and the imposition of the tax on owners of property containing three (3) or less residential rental units is suspended. 
B.  The licensing of and the imposition of the tax on the owners of commercial rental property is suspended. 
C.  The licensing of and the imposition of the tax on the owners of properties containing four (4) residential units is suspended. 
D.  All delinquency penalties paid since July 1,1995 by the owners of properties containing three (3) or less residential units shall be refunded to the persons making the payment. 
E.  The suspension of the tax set forth in this Section shall remain in effect until further action on this suspension by City Council. (Res. 8000 §§ 1—5, 2000)  
Chapter 5.84 - TIP SHEET SALES 
Sections: 
 
5.84.010 - Tip sheets. 
A.  Every person engaged in the business or practice of disseminating, distributing, handing out, selling, offering for sale, or soliciting for the sale of any sheet, dodger, handbills, circulator letter, booklet, or any other written material of any kind pertaining to any horse race, choice of a horse or horses, recommending any horse or horses or giving or conveying any purported information about any horse or race or contest of endurance or speed between horses, whether at a fixed place of business within the city or otherwise shall pay a license tax of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each fiscal year or portion thereof. Such license shall entitle the licensee to disseminate such aforesaid materials through not more than two (2) persons during any one day, provided however, that no person shall be entitled to act for or on behalf of any such licensee until such licensee has filed with the Chief of Police the name, address, fingerprints and photograph of the person(s) so authorized by such licensee to act; and provided further that the license issued under this Section shall permit the dissemination of the aforesaid materials in not more than two (2) types of format and under not more than two (2) trade names throughout the entire period of such license period. 
B.  Exception. The provisions of subsection A of this Section shall not prohibit, or require a license or payment of a fee for the sale, distribution or delivery of newspapers of general circulation as defined by Section 6000 of the California Government Code, nor shall said Section apply within any racing enclosure duly licensed by the state to conduct horse racing under and in accordance with the laws of said state relating to such matter; nor to sales of such materials or items made by a merchant duly licensed by the city, provided such sales are made only inside a building in which his or her licensed business is conducted. 
(Prior code §§ 6205.1, 6205.2)  
5.84.020 - Tip sheet sales—Location. 
No person shall, in doing any act for which a license has been issued under Section 5.84.010A, interfere with or cause interference with the normal flow of traffic upon the city streets. For the purpose of preventing congestion of traffic upon the public street of the city, the location occupied by each person in the conduct of any business licensed under Section 5.84.010A, whether such location be on public or on private property, shall be subject to the approval of the Permit Committee. No person shall disseminate, distribute, pass out, give away, hand out, sell, offer for sale, or solicit the sale of any of said material on or from that portion of any street in the city customarily traveled by motor vehicles, or in violation of any other provision of this code. 
(Prior code § 6307)  
5.84.030 - Tip sheets—Filing and hours of sale. 
No person shall sell, solicit for the sale of, or offer to sell any materials described in Section 5.84.010A and for which a license is thereby required, on any day unless a true copy of such material has been filed in the office of the Chief of Police at or before eleven a.m. of said day. No person shall disseminate, distribute, pass out, give away, hand out, sell, offer for sale, or solicit for the sale of any such material after three p.m. on any day or before nine a.m. on any day. 
(Prior code § 6308)  
Chapter 5.88 - TAXICABS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2835, § 3, adopted Dec. 17, 2013, amended Ch. 5.88 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.88, §§ 5.88.010—5.88.050, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 6355—6355.2 and §§ 6356—6360 of the prior code, and Ord. No. 2810, § 2, adopted Dec. 18, 2012. 
 
5.88.010 - Definitions. 
"City" means the city of El Monte. 
"Driver" means any natural person who drives a taxicab or other vehicle for hire, whether or not the natural person is the owner of the taxicab or vehicle for hire, including without limitation, any natural person who drives the taxicab or vehicle in for an operator in his or her capacity as (i) an employee, contractor, subcontractor or agent of the operator entity; (ii) a shareholder, partner or equity owner of any kind of an operator entity; (iii) a member of an operator entity that is a cooperative, including a taxicab cooperative. 
"Employee" includes any person who is self-employed as an independent driver. 
"Motor vehicle" means every motor vehicle used for public hire propelled by mechanically produced power and intended for use on public streets and highways, except street cares, trains, and motor buses. 
"Operator" means any entity engaged in the business of providing vehicles for the purpose of carrying passengers in a taxicab or other vehicle for hire, whether such entity is comprised of an individual, a group of individuals working in collaboration, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a limited partnership, a limited liability company, a limited liability partnership, a joint venture, a corporation, a cooperative (including but not limited to any taxicab cooperative) or any other organizational structure of any kind. 
"Owner" means a person or entity engaged in the business of carrying passengers in a taxicab. An owner may be an individual, group of individuals, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, corporation or any other organizational structure identified by name, phone number, central dispatch, color scheme, monogram, or insignia distinguishing itself from any other entity engaged in such business. 
"Person" includes an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, and any other similar organization. 
"Taxicab" means and includes every automobile and motor-propelled vehicle which is designed to carry not more than eight (8) persons, excluding the driver, and is either equipped with a taximeter or a top light or has the words "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab" displayed on the exterior of the vehicle, and used for the transportation of passengers for hire within and without the boundaries of the city, at rates for distance traveled, or for waiting, standby or traffic delay time, or for any combination of such rates, and not operating over a defined route. 
"Taximeter" means any mechanical or electronic device by which the charge for hire of a motor vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled by time consumed, or both, and upon which device the charge is indicated by figures. 
"Vehicle for hire" includes taxicabs, charter-party carriers of passengers other than limousines as defined in the Public Utilities Code, and every motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers within and without the boundaries of the city not over a defined route, at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week or per month. Motor vehicles leased or rented for a period of time to be driven by the lessee or designee are not included. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 3—6, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.020. - Permitting requirements—Generally. 
A.  No person or entity may provide or otherwise offer taxicab or other vehicle for services within the city wherein paying passengers are transported from a point origin within the city to any point of destination within or outside of the city, unless such person or entity (i) maintains a valid and unexpired business permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter; and (ii) maintains a valid and unexpired city business license issued pursuant to Chapters 5.04 (Business Licenses Generally) and 5.08 (Business License Taxes) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
B.  No person may drive or otherwise operate a taxicab, vehicle for hire or other motor vehicle within the city wherein such person is using the vehicle to transport paying passengers from a point of origin within the city to any point of destination within or outside of the city, unless such person maintains a valid and unexpired driver permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  No taxicab, vehicle for hire or other motor vehicle may be operated within the city for the purpose of transporting paying passengers from a point of origin within the city to any point of destination within or outside of the city, unless such vehicle has been issued a vehicle permit by the city pursuant to this chapter and such vehicle permit has not yet expired. The subject vehicle permit shall be in the form of a decal issued by the city that is affixed on the vehicle where indicated by the city. 
D.  Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, all business permits, driver permits and vehicle permits issued under this chapter shall be valid from January 1 st of the calendar year to which the permit corresponds and expire at 11:59 pm on December 31 st of the same calendar year. Any such permit issued after January 1 st of the calendar year to which it corresponds shall be valid from the date of issuance and expire at 11:59 pm on December 31 st of same year in which the permit was issued. No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain valid after it has expired. 
E.  Applications for business permits, driver permits and vehicle permits issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be on a form prepared and provided by the city and shall include such other documentation and information as may be required under this chapter. 
F.  Except as otherwise provided under Section ______, all applications for driver permits and vehicle permits must be submitted in conjunction with and are part of an application for a business permit issued pursuant to this chapter. No driver permit or vehicle permit shall be issued unless it is issued in conjunction with, and as part of, the city's issuance of a business permit under this chapter. 
G.  Applications for all permits under this chapter shall be submitted to El Monte Permit Committee. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth under this chapter, the El Monte Permit Committee shall have the authority to approve or deny all permits contemplated under this chapter. 
H.  The Council, by resolution, may establish, and from time to time adjust a schedule of fees for the processing and review of applications for business permits, driver permits and vehicle permits and to recover the cost of administering and enforcing all aspects of the regulatory program set forth under this chapter. All such fees shall be due and payable to the city at the time applications for business permits, driver permits and vehicle permits are submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 7, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.030. - Operator business permits. 
A.  Each business permit applicant shall submit a complete application on a form provided by the city. The application shall be signed by the applicant and set forth all information required, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  The name of applicant-business entity, as well as the applicant's business address, business telephone number, business fax number. The applicant shall also disclose: (a) the legal organizational structure of the business entity (e.g., whether it is a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a limited partnership, a limited liability company, a limited liability partnership, a joint venture, a corporation, a cooperative (including but not limited to any taxicab cooperative) or any other organizational structure of any kind); (b) the names and titles all persons who are owners, co-owners, partners, principal shareholders, joint ventures, members and/or executive officers of the entity and the names of all persons who will serve in management capacity for operations within the city under business permit; and (c) the business address, business phone number and business fax number of all of the foregoing persons; 
2.  The applicant's federal taxpayer identification number or social security number; 
3.  A live scan summary criminal history report prepared by a city-approved, private service provider ("live scan operator") authorized by the California Department of Justice to submit requests for criminal offender record information reviews directly to the California Department of Justice using the statewide electronic applicant commination network maintained by the California Attorney General, for each of the following persons: 
(a)  The person who signs and submits the application submitted by the applicants; 
(b)  All persons with controlling or majority ownership interest in the applicant-entity, including all partners in the case of partnerships; all majority shareholders/owners in the case of corporations; all members in the case of cooperatives; 
(c)  All executive officers of the applicant-entity; 
(d)  All personnel responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of the applicant in the city under the business permit; and 
(e)  All persons listed by the applicant as being those persons who will drive taxicabs, vehicles for hire or other motor vehicles on behalf of the applicant under the business permit. 
All such reports must be up to date at least as of September 30 th of the calendar year in which a business permit application is submitted. 
4.  The following information for all persons who will drive taxicabs, vehicles for hire or any other motor vehicle in connection with the applicant's operations under the business permit: (i) the driver's legal name; (ii) the driver's age; (iii) the driver's driver license number issued by the State of California; (iv) the driver license class/type; (v) the expiration date of the driver license; (vi) the driver's home address as indicated in the driver license; and (vii) any special restrictions that have been placed on the driver license by the California Department of Motor Vehicles; 
5.  For each person listed by the applicant as being those persons who will drive taxicabs, vehicles for hire or other motor vehicles on behalf of the applicant under the business permit, each business permit applicant shall provide the following with their application: 
(a)  A true and correct photo copy on eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) paper of the front and back of the Class C California-issued driver license. City reserves the right to require the applicant-driver to present the driver license to city personnel for physical inspection as a condition to processing and/or approving any driver permit application. The photocopying of such license shall be in keeping with Vehicle Code Section 13004(f) which does not prohibit the photocopying of a driver license where the manner of copying does not result in the creation of a copy that could in any way be mistaken for a valid driver license. 
(b)  A report issued by a city-designated, certified laboratory or testing agency demonstrating that the driver has passed with negative results, a controlled substances and alcohol test in accordance with Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3) (as the same may be amended from time to time). Such tests shall be taken no more than thirty (30) days before the date the application is filed. For purposes of this subsection, "controlled substances" shall refer to those controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. As used in this subsection, a negative test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent. 
6.  A true and correct copy of the applicant's controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program which shall comply substantially with the provisions of Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3); 
7.  The total number of motor vehicles that will make up the applicant's motor vehicle fleet under the business permit. With respect to this information, the applicant will also list each such motor vehicle and include each motor vehicles (i) class/type, (ii) make, (iii) model, (iv) model year; (v) motor vehicle identification number and (vi) California license plate number. If any one or more of the vehicles that make-up the applicant's vehicle fleet is owned by a person or entity other than the applicant, the applicant shall also disclose the name of the registered owner of each motor vehicle that will make up the applicant's motor vehicle fleet under the business permit, regardless of whether the registered owner of each such motor vehicle is the applicant itself or some other person or entity; 
8.  The distinctive, uniform color scheme, name, monogram and/or insignia which the applicant will use on all motor vehicles that will comprise the motor vehicle fleet that will operate within the city under the business permit (An applicant may only use one color scheme and name as part of its operations under a business permit); 
9.  Written documentation, in a form reasonably satisfactory to the city, that establishes that each motor vehicle to be used as part of the applicant's taxicab and/or vehicle for hire operations under the business permit is covered under the policies of insurance required under Section 5.88.070 (Liability insurance requirements and indemnification) of this chapter and that such policies will afford coverage regardless of the identity of any person driving or otherwise operating the covered motor vehicle when a covered accident or occurrence occurs; 
10.  Proof that all persons who will be driving taxicabs, vehicles for hire or any other motor vehicle as part of the applicant's operations under the business permit are covered by a policy of worker's compensation insurance procured by the applicant at limits mandated by state law, except to the extent applicable state law does not mandate that the applicant cover any specific driver under such insurance, in which case, the applicant shall explain in detail, citing applicable legal authority, why such coverage is not required; 
11.  A complete and accurate schedule of fare to be charged to members of the public by the applicant, provided, however, that such fares may not exceed any maximum rates set by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  A business permit shall be granted unless the city finds any one or more of the following to be true: 
1.  The applicant fails to timely submit a complete application; 
2.  The applicant is determined to have made a false statement or representation or omission in the application or has provided documentation which is fraudulent or otherwise false; 
3.  The proposed company name, color scheme or insignia will tend to confuse the applicant with another operator; 
4.  Any one or more of the following persons has been convicted of a felony offense, or a misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude, theft, fraud, including any such convictions following a plea of no contest: (a) the person signing the application on the applicant's behalf; (b) any with a controlling or majority ownership interest in the applicant-entity, including any partner in the case of a partnership; all majority shareholders/owners in the case of corporations; any member in the case of a cooperative; (c) any executive officer of the applicant-entity; (d) any personnel responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of the applicant in the city under the business permit; 
5.  The applicant has not otherwise complied with this chapter or has had its current operator permit suspended or revoked. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a business permit to also ensure that all drivers and motor vehicles that will be part of its operations under the business permit have applied for and been issued a driver permit and a motor vehicle permit. Applications for all such permits shall be submitted along with the application for the business permit. If any driver for an operator ceases to be employed or otherwise affiliated with the operator during the term of the business permit, the operator shall promptly notify the city in writing but in no event later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the driver ceases to be employed by or otherwise affiliated with the operator. Similarly, if any motor vehicle identified as being part of the operator's motor vehicle fleet under the business permit is sold, destroyed and/or permanently removed from the operator's motor vehicle fleet, the operator shall promptly notify the city of such even in writing but in no event later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of such event. 
D.  Business permits are personal in nature and may not be transferred from one permitted entity to another entity. Any attempted transfer shall be null and void and of no legal effect 
E.  Permit term and permit process. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided under this subsection below, a business permit, driver permit or vehicle permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a maximum term of one (1) year commencing from 12:00 am on January 1 st of the permit year to which the permit corresponds and expiring at 11:59 pm on December 31 st of the same permit year. Business permits, driver permits and vehicle permits issued after the start of a specific permit year shall take effect on the date of issuance by the El Monte Permit Committee and shall expire at 11:59 pm on December 31 st of the same permit year. 
2.  Applications for a business permit shall be submitted in conjunction with applications for driver permits and vehicle permits for drivers and vehicles that will be used by the applicant under the business permit. The application packet shall be submitted by the operator-applicant via personal delivery to the city care of the License/Treasury Division no earlier than the first Monday in October of the calendar year immediately preceding the permit year for which the permits being applied for correspond. The deadline for submitting such applications shall be 5:00 pm on October 31 st of the same month, unless such date falls on a date in which the License/Treasury Division is closed for business in which case the deadline shall be extended to 5:00 pm of the next city business day immediately following October 31 st . The city shall not accept applications for a business permit, driver permits or vehicle permit during any period other than the period set forth under this subsection (E)(2) or the period set forth under subsection (E)(5), below. 
3.  When submitting an application for a business permit, the applicant shall also submit along with such application all materials and information necessary for the issuance of driver permits and vehicle permits for all drivers and vehicles that will be part of the applicant's operations under the business permit. The City will not accept applications for driver permits or applications for vehicle permits separately from an application for a business permit. The entity applying for business permit, shall be jointly and severally responsible with the person(s) applying for a driver permit and/or the person or entity applying for a vehicle permit for purposes of ensuring that all such applications are complete and that all information contained in such applications is true and correct. Except as otherwise provided under subsection (E)(4), below, any business permit application that is incomplete at the time of submission shall be rejected by the city and returned to the applicant. 
4.  Subsection (E)(3), above, notwithstanding, if the only information or documentation missing from a business permit application is information or documentation relevant to the issuance of one or more driver permits or vehicle permits, the city reserves the right to process and approve the business permit application and issue driver permits and vehicle permits only to those drivers and vehicles for which complete information is supplied and which otherwise qualify for the issuance of permits. Permits will not be issued to drivers or vehicles with incomplete information or documentation. 
5.  Subsection (E)(2) of this section, notwithstanding, from the first Monday in March of each permit year to 5:00 p.m. on March 31 st of the same permit year, the city will allow operators possessing a valid and unexpired business permit the opportunity to submit applications modifying the terms of their business permit to account for changes to the drivers and vehicles that are part of its permitted operations and to allow replacement drivers and replacement vehicles to be issued driver permits and vehicle permits. The operator may not add additional drivers or vehicles to its fleet but may apply for the issuance of driver permits and vehicle permits for drivers and vehicles that will replace at one-to-one ratio drivers who have departed or have had their driver permit revoked and vehicles that have been taken out of service for any reason or that have had their vehicle permit revoked. 
6.  Subsection (E)(2) of this section, notwithstanding, the City Manager shall have discretion to authorize the processing of a business permit application pursuant to this chapter and the corresponding processing of applications for driver permits and vehicle permits for drivers and vehicles to be operated under the business permit at a time other than the time specified under subsection (E)(2), only in those instances where the applicant for the business permit is a newly formed entity that was not in existence during the period of time specified under subsection (E)(2) of this section, above, for the processing of business permit applications. It is the obligation of the applicant to submit a written request for such authorization to the City Manager with information sufficiently proving that the applicant was not in existence during the time period specified under subsection (E)(2) of this section, above. All permits which may be processed and approved in accordance with this subjection shall be required to meet all of the requirements of this chapter and all such permits shall expire on December 31 st of the year in which they are issued. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 8, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.040 - Driver permits. 
A.  No person may drive a taxicab, vehicle for hire or other similar motor within the city for the purpose of transporting paying passengers from a point of origin within the city to any point of destination within or outside of the city, without first having been issued a driver permit. Any natural person who is also the holder of a business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be relieved of the obligation to separately obtain a driver permit to the extent such person will also be driving or otherwise operating a taxicab, vehicle for hire or other motor vehicle as part of the operations authorized under the business permit. 
B.  The person who is the applicant for a driver permit shall submit a complete application in the form provided by the city. As provided under Section 5.88.030, above, a driver permit application shall be submitted along with the application for the business permit care of the applicant-operator on whose behalf the applicant-driver will be driving. The driver permit application shall be signed by both the applicant-driver and the operator of the entity whose business permit the driver will be driving under. The application for a driver permit shall include the following information: 
1.  The applicant-driver's (i) legal name; (ii) age; (iii) Class C driver license number issued by the State of California; (iv) driver license class/type; (v) expiration date of the applicant's driver license; (vi) home address as indicated in the driver license; (vii) contact telephone number, if any; and (viii) any special restrictions that have been placed on the driver license by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. Only persons possessing a Class C driver license or better may drive a taxicab or other vehicle for hire in the city; 
2.  All of the materials required under Section 5.88.030(A)(3) through 5.88.030(A)(6) of this chapter, above. 
3.  A written disclosure indicating whether any state driver license or local taxicab driver permit or license previously held by the applicant-driver, has ever been revoked or suspended within the past ten (10) years from the date of application submission; 
4.  Such additional information as the city may require. 
C.  Each applicant-driver for a driver permit shall submit to a background investigation by a city-approved, private service provider ("live scan operator") authorized by the California Department of Justice to submit requests for criminal offender record information reviews directly to the California Department of Justice using the statewide electronic applicant commination network maintained by the California Attorney General. 
D.  The city shall grant a driver permit unless the city finds any one or more of the following to be true: 
1.  The applicant-driver fails or the operator responsible for submitting the applicant-driver's application information fails to timely submit all application materials and/or information required under this section; 
2.  The applicant-driver is under eighteen (18) years of age as of the submission date of the driver permit application; 
3.  The live scan report called for under Section 5.88.030(A)(3) of this chapter discloses that the applicant has been convicted of, or plead no contest to any one of the following offenses within the time periods indicated: 
(a)  The applicant-driver has three (3) or more moving violations under the California Vehicle Code within the last three (3) years from the submission date of the driver permit application; or, alternatively, more than two (2) such violations within the last year from the date of submission of the driver permit application; 
(b)  The applicant-driver has been convicted of violating Vehicle Code Section 20002, 23103, 23152, or 23330 within the last three (3) years from the date of submission of the driver permit application; 
(c)  The applicant-driver has been convicted of violating Vehicle Code Section 20001, 20003, 20004, or 23104 at any time; 
(d)  The applicant-driver is required to register as a sex offender under California Penal Code Section 290; 
(e)  An administrative action has been taken against the applicant-driver by any State agency which has resulted in the actual suspension or revocation of the applicant's driver's license; 
(f)  The applicant-driver has three (3) or more chargeable motor vehicle accidents within the last three (3) years from the submission date of the driver permit application or, alternatively, more than one such accident within the last year from the submission date of the driver permit application; and 
(g)  The applicant-driver has been convicted of a felony offense, or a misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude, theft, or fraud. 
4.  The report referenced under Section 5.88.030(A)(5)(b) of this chapter indicates that the applicant-driver has failed to pass with negative results for controlled substances and/or alcohol. 
E.  A driver permit application will not be accepted by the city unless it is submitted in conjunction with an application for a business permit under which the applicant-driver will drive a taxicab, vehicle for hire or other motor vehicle under the business permit. If any driver for an operator ceases to be employed or otherwise affiliated with the operator during the term of the business permit, the driver permit issued pursuant to this section shall become null and void. The operator and the driver shall be jointly and severally responsible for immediately returning the driver permit to the city upon such occurrence. 
F.  The issuance of a driver permit shall be conditioned upon, among other things, the driver complying with the mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing and program certification set forth in Government Code Section 53075.5. 
G.  Driver permits are personal in nature and may not be transferred from one permitted entity to another entity. Any attempted transfer shall be null and void and of no legal effect. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 9, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.050 - Vehicle permits. 
A.  No motor vehicle shall be put to use for the purpose of transporting paying passengers from a point of origin within the city to another point within or outside of the city by any person or entity unless the motor vehicle has been issued and maintains a valid and unexpired vehicle permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The vehicle permit application shall be signed by both the applicant-owner of the motor vehicle and the operator whose fleet the motor vehicle will be part of under a business permit. The application for the vehicle permit shall include the following information: 
1.  A true and correct copy of the motor vehicle's vehicle registration certification issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles; 
2.  The motor vehicle's (i) class/type, (ii) make, (iii) model, (iv) model year; (v) vehicle identification number and (vi) California license plate number; 
3.  Written proof that the motor vehicle is covered by the policy of insurance required under Section 5.88.070 of this chapter by the operator whose fleet the motor vehicle will be a part of; 
4.  A valid inspection certificate issued by the Los Angeles County Agricultural Commissioner/Weights and Measures, stating the name and model number of the taximeter and the vehicle number for which it is assigned; and 
5.  Valid "certificate of safety" vehicle inspection certificate for each motor vehicle to be operated in the city for taxicab/vehicle for hire use from an automobile mechanic certified by the National Institute of Automotive Service Excellence ("NIASE") verifying that the motor vehicle complies with the requirements of this chapter and is in safe operating condition. 
C.  Motor vehicles issued a vehicle permit under this section must be driven by persons holding a valid and unexpired driver permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The vehicle permit shall take the form of an adhesive decal which shall be affixed to the motor vehicle at a location acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 10, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.060 - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
A.  The City Manager, Chief of Police or the El Monte Permit Committee may immediately suspend, upon written notice to the permit holder, any business permit; driver permit and/or vehicle permit granted pursuant to this chapter for any of the grounds by which such a permit may also be revoked under subsection (C) of this section, below. The written notice of suspension shall specify the grounds for suspension, the effective date of the suspension and the procedures for challenging the suspension and any possible revocation that may arise from the suspension. 
B.  Upon a factual showing that the stated grounds for the suspension have been corrected (to the extent the grounds are susceptible to correction) or where it is determined that the stated grounds for the suspension are not true, such permit suspension may be lifted either (i) by the City Manager, the Chief of Police or the El Monte Permit Committee voluntarily prior to the conduct of a hearing before the El Monte Permit Committee; or (ii) following a hearing before the El Monte Permit Committee to determine whether or not there are grounds for the suspension and whether or not the suspension should be lifted or the suspension should be extended or the permit in question should be revoked outright The hearing conducted by the El Monte Permit Committee shall be commenced within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the permit holder submits a written request for a hearing filed at the Office of the City Clerk during the city's normal business hours. It is the obligation of the permit holder to request a hearing and the failure to submit a written request for such a hearing within ten (10) calendar days from the effective date of the suspension shall constitute an admission that the grounds for suspension were true and valid and in such event, the City Manager, the Chief of Police or the El Monte Permit Committee shall have discretion to administratively order the revocation of the permit without further hearing on the matter. It is unlawful for the holder of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter to exercise any of the rights granted under such permit during the time in which the permit is suspended. 
C.  A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked for any one or more of the following: 
1.  The existence of any fact, which if known at the time of application of any permit, would have caused the city to deny the application, whether such fact existed at the time of the application or occurred after the issuance of the permit; 
2.  The occurrence of any violation of State law which would have served as grounds for the denial of the permit had the violation occurred prior to the effective date of the permit; 
3.  The holder of a driver permit violates any laws relating to the operation of a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, reckless driving, driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, or other violations indicating that a driver is not competent to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire; 
4.  The holder of a driver permit is arrested or issued a citation for the commission of any crime punishable as a felony while driving a taxicab, whether in city or in another jurisdiction; or 
5.  The occurrence of a motor vehicle accident resulting in injuries to persons or property caused, either in whole or in part, by the acts or omissions of the holder of any type of permit; 
6.  The holder of any permit fails to pay any judgment for damages the holder is responsible for arising out of the unlawful or negligent operation of any motor vehicle that is part of an operator's motor vehicle fleet or which is otherwise covered under a vehicle permit; 
7.  A motor vehicle that is part of any operator's motor vehicle fleet is driven without the required insurance coverage or valid motor vehicle registration or the motor vehicle is driven by a person who is not licensed to driver under the laws of the State of California or who has not been issued a valid and unexpired driver permit under this chapter; 
8.  The failure of any person or entity to maintain any motor vehicle in a safe and clean condition or the failure of any person to maintain a motor vehicle in a condition required for purposes of obtaining a vehicle permit; 
9.  It is determined that a permit, license or other like authorization issued to an operator by another jurisdiction for the same type of activities authorized under a business permit has been suspended or revoked; 
10.  It is determined that a permit, license or other like authorization issued to a driver by another jurisdiction for the same type of activities authorized under a driver permit has been suspended or revoked; 
11.  It is determined that a permit, license or other like authorization issued by another jurisdiction for a motor vehicle that is part of an operator's motor vehicle fleet in El Monte under a business permit has been suspended or revoked; 
12.  The holder of a permit issued under this chapter has violated a term or condition of the permit or this chapter; 
13.  A motor vehicle that has been issued a vehicle permit has been destroyed or has suffered damage or a mechanical malfunction that renders the motor vehicle unsafe to drive or carry passengers; 
14.  The holder of a business permit or a driver permit violates rule or regulation, or federal, state, or local law relating to the operation of taxicab or vehicle for hire services. 
D.  In the event the City Manager, the Chief of Police or the El Monte Permit Committee allege there are grounds for the revocation of any permit pursuant to this section, the permit may be immediately suspended as provided under subsections (A) and (B) of this section above, or if the permit is not immediately suspended, the City Manager, the Chief of Police or the El Monte Permit Committee shall separately issue a notice of revocation specifying the grounds for revocation, the effective date of the revocation and the procedure for appealing such revocation. The permit holder shall have ten (10) calendar days from the date of such notice of revocation to submit a written request to contest the matter before the El Monte Permit Committee in accordance with Section 5.88.160 of this chapter. It shall be the obligation of the permit holder to submit a written request for a hearing to contest the revocation of a permit and the failure to timely submit a written request for a hearing shall constitute an admission that the grounds for revocation are correct. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 11, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.070 - Insurance requirements and indemnification. 
A.  As a condition precedent to the issuance of any business permit or any renewal of a business permit, the permit applicant shall deliver to the city a policy of automobile liability insurance, listing the city and city's elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers as additionally insured, executed by a company duly authorized under the laws of this state to sell commercial automobile liability and be an admitted carrier member of the California Insurance Guarantee Fund, or maintain an AM Best rating of "A" or better for non-admitted carriers (with proof of licensing or rating to be provided by the permit applicant), which insurance business, through the provisions of the policy, promises and undertakes to pay in full all legal liability incurred by the insured for damages to persons or property resulting from the operation of the taxicabs all taxicabs that are part of the permit applicant's fleet, including but not limited to motor vehicles that make up the fleet of a taxicab cooperative entity; and, that the insurance policy complies with the minimum total coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), per vehicle, per accident, for any liability for any injuries, death, or destruction of property with an amount specified of no less than one hundred dollars ($100,000.00) for individual bodily injury to any person and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any property damage. 
B.  As a condition precedent to receiving a business permit, the operator must execute on a form prepared and provided by the city, an affidavit agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and the city's elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any and all liability, expenses, including defense costs and legal fees, and claims for damages, whatsoever, including but not limited to, those arising from bodily injury, death, personal injury, property damage, loss of use or property loss, however the same may be caused and regardless of the responsibility for negligence. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 12, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.080 - Registration, licensing, and conspicuous posting. 
A.  All drivers of taxicabs or vehicles for hire shall have on their person while operating a taxicab or vehicle for hire their California-issued driver license and their driver permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  All taxicabs or vehicles for hire operating within the city shall have within the motor vehicle the California Department of Motor Vehicles registration form. 
C.  Every motor vehicle issued a Vehicle permit under this chapter shall have the Vehicle permit decal affixed to the motor vehicle in the location designated by the city. 
D.  Every motor vehicle issued a Vehicle permit shall have conspicuously displayed in full view of the passenger(s) a card not less than two inches (2") by four inches (4") in size which shall have stated thereon the name of the owner, together with the business address and telephone number of the business, and the identifying number of such motor vehicle, and also the rates of fare to be charged for the use of such motor vehicle. Rates of fare are also must be conspicuously displayed in both the front and rear of the interior of the motor vehicle. No person may charge fares at rates that exceed those established by City Council resolution. 
E.  The driver permit shall be posted in full view of the passenger(s) at all times while the driver is operating the motor vehicle. Every driver permit shall show, at a minimum, the photograph of the driver, the name of the driver, the expiration date of the driver permit, the operator on whose behalf the driver is driving the taxicab or vehicle for hire and the business telephone number of the operator the driver is driving on behalf of. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 13, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.090 - Vehicle color scheme and markings. 
A.  No name, color scheme, insignia, monogram, logo, or identification of an operator's motor vehicle fleet shall conflict with or imitate any color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, logo, or identification used by another operator's motor vehicle fleet in such a manner as to be misleading or to tend to confuse or defraud the public. 
B.  An operator may only [use the] color scheme and name and those insignias, monograms, logs and identifications indicated in the operator's application for a business permit. 
C.  It is unlawful to operate a taxicab or other vehicle to hire within the city which does not have printed or placed upon doors on both sides of the motor vehicle the name and telephone number of the operator on whose behalf the motor vehicle is driven or otherwise operated. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 14, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.100 - Equipment requirements. 
A.  As a condition to the grant of an application for a vehicle permit and as an ongoing condition throughout the term of any vehicle permit granted by the city, all motor vehicles issued a vehicle permit must satisfy the following equipment and maintenance requirements: 
1.  A trunk device which will permit the opening of the trunk lid from the inside of the trunk; 
2.  A permanent fixture to display the taxicab driver's permit in prominent view of passengers; 
3.  No fewer than four (4) working doors, except that a handicapped accessible minivan may be utilized; 
4.  A fully charged fire extinguisher; 
5.  Four (4) flares; 
6.  At least two (2) emergency reflectors; 
7.  Spare tire and jack; 
8.  Windows which patrons can open from the inside; 
9.  Working headlights, taillights, turn signals, back up lights and brake lights; 
10.  A light of not less than two (2) candlepower within such vehicle, so arranged as to illuminate the entire passenger compartment. The light shall be kept constantly lighted at all times while any passengers are being loaded into or unloaded from any such vehicle from one-half (½) hour after sunset of any day until one-half (½) hour before sunrise of the next day, and no shades or blinds shall be drawn over the windows of any such vehicle while the same is occupied; and 
11.  Safety belts in good working order for passengers' use. 
12.  A steering system; vehicle horn; emergency brake; spare jack; and windshield wipers that are in good working condition; 
13.  Tires that are maintained at appropriate air pressure and with a tread depth deemed acceptable under State law. 
B.  It is unlawful for any taxicab or other vehicle for hire to be operated in a condition which is unsafe. The operator on whose behalf a motor vehicle is driven, the driver of the motor vehicle and the owner of the motor vehicle shall be jointly and severally responsible for complying with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, §§ 15—19, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.110 - Maintenance and inspection. 
A.  Each vehicle to be used under a business permit in the city must maintain a valid "certificate of safety" vehicle inspection certificate from an automobile mechanic certified by the National Institute of Automotive Service Excellence ("NIASE") verifying that the vehicle complies with the requirements of this chapter and is in safe operating condition. Annual reinspections are required at the time of renewal of a business permit. 
B.  The interior of any taxicab, vehicle for hire or other motor vehicle subject to a vehicle permit under this chapter shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once every twenty-four (24) hours. 
C.  Any sworn police officer of the city shall have the right to inspect any taxicab, vehicle for hire or like motor vehicle subject to this chapter, to inspect the vehicle for purposes of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, §§ 20—22, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.120 - Taximeters and rates. 
A.  Every motor vehicle that is part of the vehicle fleet of an operator under the operator's business permit must be equipped with a taximeter that is of a type and design approved by the California Department of Food and Agriculture and that has been inspected and certified by the Los Angeles County Agricultural Commissioner/Weights and Measures. Every taxicab must at all times keep such meter accurate and in conformity with the requirements of California Department of Agriculture. 
B.  Taximeters are subject to inspection at any time by the City Manager, the Chief of Police, the El Monte Permit Committee as a body or any sworn police officer of the city. Any motor vehicle equipped with an inaccurate taximeter is subject to impound unless said taximeter shall have been correctly adjusted, inspected, and certified by the Los Angeles County Agricultural Commissioner/Weights and Measures. 
C.  By resolution, the City Council may set, and from time-to-time adjust, the maximum rates that may be charged per flag drop, per mile, and per minute of waiting time, or traffic delay time. In the event such a resolution is adopted, it shall be unlawful for any operator or driver to fix, charge, collect, or receive a rate in excess of the rates established and set by the resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 23, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.130 - Record maintenance. 
Every person or entity authorized under a business permit to provide taxicab service in the city shall maintain and keep an accurate and legible record of all passengers carried by motor vehicles within its motor vehicle fleet, including the pick-up and drop off points, the date and time carried, the starting and ending mileage of the taxicab for each trip, the charges authorized and made for each trip. Such record shall be retained for at least three (3) years by the operator and shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 24, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.140 - Operational regulations. 
A.  No person granted a permit as provided herein shall maintain a stand for any vehicle for which a permit is issued upon any street, without the permittee having first obtained in writing permission from the City Council, and the owner or lessee or other person in charge of the property in the front of which such stand is maintained. 
B.  No taxicab driver shall seek fares by repeatedly driving his or her vehicle back and forth in a short space in front of, or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from any public place or gathering or by leaving his or her vehicle or by otherwise approaching and soliciting patronage by any pedestrian upon the sidewalk. 
C.  The driver of any taxicab shall carry any passengers safely and expeditiously to his or her destination by the most direct and accessible route unless specifically directed otherwise by the hiring passenger. 
D.  There shall be no smoking of tobacco or any other combustible material by the driver or any passenger inside the taxicab while the taxicab is in service. 
E.  The driver of a taxicab, while the motor vehicle is in service, shall disengage any child safety locks except where a passenger consents to or expressly requests the use of the child safety locks. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 25, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.150 - Exemptions. 
A.  A taxicab, vehicle for hire or other motor vehicle which has not been issued a vehicle permit, may transport paying passengers from points of origin located outside of the city to points of destination within the city without such motor vehicle having been issued a vehicle permit, without the driver of such motor vehicle maintaining a driver permit and without the operator on whose behalf the motor vehicle is driven having obtained a business permit. No such motor vehicle, however, may be used to transport paying passengers from points of origin within the city to any other location whether such location is within the city or outside of the city. No operator who does not hold a valid and unexpired business permit may use any motor vehicle within its fleet to pick-up passengers from points of origin within the city to any other location whether such location is within the city or outside of the city. 
B.  The holder of a business permit issued pursuant to this chapter may not transport paying passengers from points of origin within the city to any other location within or outside the city using motor vehicles or drivers who have not been issued a vehicle permit or driver permit, respectively. 
C.  This chapter shall not apply to any person or entity or motor vehicles driven on behalf of any person or entity which qualifies as a "transportation network company" under the regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission. This chapter shall not apply to an "charter-party carrier of passengers" within the meaning of the Passenger Charter-Party Carriers' Act (Public Utilities Code Section 5351 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 26, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.160 - Request for hearing to reconsider/appeal denial, suspension or revocation of permits. 
A.  Any person or entity (i) denied approval of a business permit, a driver permit and/or a vehicle's permit; or (ii) whose permit issued pursuant to this chapter has been suspended or revoked pursuant to Section 5.88.060 of this chapter, may request a hearing to before the El Monte Permit Committee wherein the El Monte Permit Committee will be asked to reconsider any denial, suspension or revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter or to appeal the suspension or revocation of any permit suspended or revoked by the City Manager or the Chief of Police. 
B.  Such appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the Office of the City Clerk not more than ten (10) calendar days following the mailing of the notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation. The written request for a hearing state all of the grounds for challenging the action taken by the city and may include such evidence as the person or entity challenging the action deems relevant in support of its challenge. The scope of the hearing pursuant to this section shall be limited to those grounds and issues raised in the written request for a hearing. 
C.  Upon receipt of a timely filed written request for a hearing, the El Monte Permit Committee shall set the matter for hearing, which shall be held not more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the written request is filed with the City Clerk. 
D.  The person or entity requesting the hearing shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least seven (7) calendar days prior to such hearing. 
E.  At the time of such hearing, the El Monte Permit Committee shall review the records and files relating to the decision, and shall permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter. 
F.  In conducting the hearing, technical rules pertaining to evidence and witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. 
G.  The person or entity requesting the hearing shall have the burden of proving that a permit was erroneously denied, suspended or revoked. 
H.  Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the El Monte Permit Committee shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified, or reversed. 
I.  The El Monte Permit Committee's decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant within ten (10) calendar days after the close of the hearing. Such decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2895, § 27, 9-6-2016)  
5.88.170 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision or to fail to comply with a requirement of this chapter. The city may enforce this chapter by any lawful means, including suspension or revocation of a permit, and any remedy set forth in Chapters 1.18, 1.19, and 1.24 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
B.  Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and up to six (6) months in jail. Each day during which a violation occurs is a separate office. The City Attorney may punish such violations as infractions, in accordance with Section 1.24.010(B) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
C.  If, after notice and hearing, [a person] is found to have been operating a taxicab service in the city without a valid license or permit shall be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation, in accordance with Government Code Section 53075.9. The city may additionally assess the person an amount sufficient to cover the reasonable expense of related investigations incurred by the city. 
D.  A city police officer may impound a vehicle used in violation of this chapter, following the procedure set forth in Government Code Section 53075.61. Any city police officer is considered a transportation inspector under this chapter, within the meaning of Government Code Section 53075.61. 
E.  The city may take enforcement action to disconnect the telephone service of unauthorized taxicab operators who advertise passenger transportation services, following the procedures set forth in Government Code Section 53075.8. 
(Ord. No. 2835, § 3, 12-17-2013)  
5.88.180 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2895, § 28, adopted September 6, 2016 repealed § 5.88.180 which pertained to the effect of taxicab franchise and derived from Ord. No. 2835, adopted December 17, 2013.  
Chapter 5.92 - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
5.92.010 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter: 
"Alternative transportation" means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycle. 
"Applicable development" means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 5.92.030. 
"Buspool" means a vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule. 
"Carpool" means a vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. 
"California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means California Public Resources Code Section 21000—21177 and corresponding "State CEQA Guidelines" for implementation. 
"Developer" means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and/or construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner. 
"Development" means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in Section 5.92.030 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage. 
"Employee parking area" means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. Unless otherwise specified employee parking shall be calculated as follows: 
Type of Use 	Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees 
Commercial 	30 
Office/ professional 	85 
Industrial/ manufacturing 	90 
 
"Preferential parking" means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles. 
"Property owner" means the legal owner of a development who may also serve as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or agent. 
"South Coast Air Quality Management District" (SCAQMD) is the regional authority appointed by the California Sate Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties). 
"Tenant" means the lessee occupying or using floor space at an applicable development project. 
"Transportation demand management (TDM)" means the alteration of travel behavior—usually on the part of commuters—through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks). 
"Trip reduction" means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles. 
"Vanpool" means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. 
"Vehicle" means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. 
(Ord. 2373 § 1, 1993)  
5.92.020 - Transportation demand and trip reduction measures. 
A.  Applicability of Requirements. 
1.  Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provisions for, as a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures. 
2.  This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed "complete" by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a draft environmental impact report has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
3.  All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. 
B.  Development Standards. 
1.  Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
i.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site; 
ii.  Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators; 
iii.  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations; 
iv.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; 
v.  A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
2.  Nonresidential development of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsection (B)(1) of this Section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  Not less than ten (10) percent of employee parking area, shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of city. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided that at all times at least one space for projects of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and two spaces for projects over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles. 
b.  Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven (7) feet two (2) inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas. 
c.  Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four (4) bicycles per the first 50,000 square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city. 
3.  Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this Section, and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of city: 
a.  A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers; 
b.  Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development; 
c.  If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops; 
d.  Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on-site. 
(Ord. 2373 § 2, 1993)  
5.92.030 - Monitoring. 
The city shall monitor effected development projects for compliance with the applicable provisions contained in this chapter, as a part of the site inspection provisions during the certificate of occupancy procedure as described in Chapter 17.16 of this code. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; Ord. 2373 § 3, 1993)  
5.92.040 - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Department of Community Development. The remedies for noncompliance shall be similar to those contained in Section 2.52.050 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2373 § 4, 1993)  
Chapter 5.96 - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
5.96.010 - Arcades. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain an arcade as defined by Chapter 17.04 of this code without having first obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title, nor at any time when a permit thus obtained is not in full force and effect, nor in violation of any term or condition of a permit thus obtained. 
B.  Application Procedures. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 5.12 of this title, the applicant shall provide a three hundred (300) foot radius property ownership list as required in Section 17.20.180 of this code and the Secretary of the Permit Committee shall notify all such property owners of all Permit Committee hearings not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 6399.901, 6399.902)  
5.96.020 - Circuses, carnivals and sideshows. 
A.  No person shall conduct or engage in any circus, carnival or sideshow business or occupation without having first obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title. 
B.  Location Restricted. No circus, carnival or sideshow shall be placed, located or operated on any unimproved dirt lot or on any residentially zoned property. No circus, carnival or sideshow shall be placed, located or operated on any commercially zoned or publicly zoned property if it will interfere with the business or parking conducted on the property. No circus, carnival or sideshow shall be permitted at any one site or location for more than ten (10) consecutive days, more than four (4) times per calendar year, or more frequently than once in any sixty (60) day period. 
(Prior code §§ 6380, 6380.1)  
5.96.030 - Kennels. 
No person shall own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain a kennel at defined by Chapter 17.04 of this code without having first obtained a permit so to do pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title nor at any time when a permit thus obtained is not in full force and effect, nor in violation of any term or condition of a permit thus obtained. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6399.701)  
5.96.040 - Motels and hotels. 
A.  Defined. For purposes of this Section, a motel and hotel shall be as such terms are defined in Section 3.16.010 and Chapter 17.04 of this code. 
B.  Permit Required. No person shall conduct or engage in any motel or hotel business or occupation without having first obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 6399.201, 6399.202)  
5.96.050 - Noncommercial car washes. 
No person shall conduct a noncommercial car wash as such term is defined in Section 5.04.010 of this title without having first obtained a permit from the city pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title. Each application for any such permit shall state the name and address of the person submitting the application and the name and address, if any, of the group of persons or the organization on whose behalf the noncommercial car wash is conducted. 
(Prior code § 6375)  
5.96.060 - Office trailers. 
A.  Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, "trailer" and "trailer coach" shall be defined as is set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state. 
B.  Prohibition. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person shall use a trailer or a trailer coach for any purpose, except as provided in subsection C of this Section. 
C.  Exceptions. This Section shall not prohibit the use of trailers: 
1.  For the transportation of goods, wares and merchandise; and 
2.  For a construction office during the construction of a project; and 
3.  For use by a nonprofit organization. 
D.  Effective Date. The city will cease the issuance of temporary office trailer permits effective January 1, 1998. 
(Ord. 2467 § 1, 1997: prior code §§ 5100, 5101)  
5.96.065 - Computer gaming or internet access centers. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain a computer gaming or internet access center as defined by Chapter 17.04 of this code without having first obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title, nor at any time when a permit thus obtained is not in full force and effect, nor in violation of any term or condition of a permit thus obtained. 
(Ord. 2595 § 1, 2003)  
5.96.070 - Tanning businesses. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall engage in the business of tanning, curing, preserving or embalming of skins, hides or any decayable substance, where in the tanning, curing, preserving or embalming of which the process used causes or permits the emitting or discharging of any obnoxious or offensive odor or causes or permits the emitting or discharging of dust, fine particles, or any substance that may be carried through or upon the air beyond the limits or confines of the place of business being so operated, without having first obtained therefrom a permit to operate any such business or plant. 
B.  Application. In addition to the requirements specified in or imposed under Chapter 5.12 of this title, each such application shall specify the distance to the nearest residence and the approximate number of residents living within one thousand (1,000) feet of the place of such contemplated operation. 
C.  Exception. This Section shall not apply to any business or profession regulated or licensed under Chapter 12 of Division III of the Business and Professions Code of the state. 
(Prior code §§ 6385, 6386, 6389.1)  
5.96.080 - Used car dealers. 
No person shall conduct business as a used car dealer without having first obtained a permit from the city pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title except where the sale of used cars is an incidental function of a new car dealership. 
(Prior code § 6376)  
5.96.090 - Spiritual specialty shops. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain a spiritual specialty shop as defined by Chapter 17.04 of this code without having first obtained a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this title, nor at any time when a permit thus obtained is not in full force and effect, nor in violation of any term or condition of a permit thus obtained. 
(Ord. 2671 § 3, 2006)  
Chapter 5.98 - ADULT BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.98.010 - Legislative purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are in addition to the words and phrases defined in Chapter 17.76.020 (Definitions), and shall have the meaning and significance attached to them in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context: 
"Adult business operator" or "operator" means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed business. 
"Applicant" means a person who is required to file an application for a license under this chapter, including an individual owner, manager, employee, or agent of an adult business or an entertainer of an adult business. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the city or the City Manager's authorized representative. 
"Independent contractor" means any person or individual who works, dances, entertains and/or provides any services in association with the activity of, or for, an adult business establishment permitted in the city that is not an employee of such an establishment. 
"Licensee" means the person to whom an adult business license or adult business entertainer's license is issued. 
"Notice address" means the address designated by the licensee for the mailing of all notices, legal mail, and other written communications from the city to the licensee. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust or combination of individuals or persons. 
"Planning Services Manager" means the Planning Services Manager or the authorized representative(s) thereof. 
"Police Chief" means the Police Chief of the city or the authorized representative(s) thereof. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.030 - Exceptions to chapter. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person holding a valid license or certificate issued by the state of California to practice any such art or profession under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code of California or of any other law of the state. 
B.  Massage administered at a massage establishment or by a massage practitioner duly authorized to provide massage services in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 5.56 (Massage Establishments and Massage Practitioners) of the El Monte Municipal Code. For purposes of this subsection, the terms "massage," "massage establishment" and "massage practitioner" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Chapter 5.56 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2779, § 3, 10-18-2011)  
5.98.040 - Zoning requirements. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all adult businesses subject to this chapter shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.76 (Adult Entertainment Establishments) of this code and city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.050 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, the activities of a regulated adult business without a valid license issued for the specific activity pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every such regulated adult business. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities in an adult business unless the person first obtains and continues in force and effect an adult business entertainer license from the city as herein required. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.060 - License required for each location—Display of license. 
A separate adult business license is required for each location within the boundaries of the city at which a regulated adult business is to be established. The requirements of this chapter for an adult business license are separate and in addition to a business license required under Chapter 5.04 of this title. Every regulated adult business shall display its adult business license prominently in an area open to the public at each such location at all times when the location is open for business. Every regulated adult business and every person subject to the licensing requirements of this chapter shall make available upon request by the city the adult business entertainer license required by Section 5.98.130 for each regulated employee of the adult business. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.070 - Transfer of ownership or control. 
A.  It is a violation of this chapter to operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business license at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the application upon which the license was issued. 
B.  Upon the transfer of ownership or control of an adult business, the adult business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the adult business to continue operating, a new application and license is required. 
C.  Any attempt to transfer an adult business license either directly or indirectly in violation of this Section is void, and the license shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.080 - Change of location or name. 
A.  Upon the change of location of the premises where an adult business is conducted, the adult business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the adult business to continue operating, a new application and license is required. 
B.  No licensee shall operate a regulated adult business under any name or designation not specified in the license. Upon a change of name of the adult business, the adult business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the adult business to continue operating, a new application and license is required. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.090 - Term and expiration of adult business license. 
An approved adult business license shall be valid for one year, and shall be renewed on an annual basis on the anniversary date of the original application. Application for renewal of an unrevoked adult business license shall be made pursuant to Section 5.98.110, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the current, valid license. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.100 - Application for adult business license. 
A.  An applicant requesting issuance or renewal of an adult business license shall file a written, signed, and verified application or renewal application in a form provided by the Planning Services Manager. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for filing or renewal in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council, which fees will be used to defray the cost of investigation, inspection and processing of such application. License fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter or title of this code. 
B.  An application for an adult business license shall contain the following information: 
1.  If the application is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, dates of birth, and aliases used by all of the partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete corporate name, the date and state of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the legal names, dates of birth, all aliases used, and the capacity of all officers and directors and principal stockholders (i.e., all stockholders with ten (10) percent or more of all outstanding shares of stock), and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
C.  The application must list whether, preceding the date of application, the applicant or any of the individuals listed pursuant to subsection B of this Section has: 
1.  Had a previous permit under this chapter revoked, as well as the date of such revocation; 
2.  Whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose permit under this chapter has been revoked, as well as the date of the revocation; and 
3.  Whether the applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, have been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere within the past four (4) years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense, and if so the date and place of the conviction; 
4.  Whether the applicant has had a license pursuant to this chapter or other similar regulations of another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension, revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this Section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this Section whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; 
5.  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to this Section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter or other similar adult business ordinance in another city or county and if so, the names and location of such other permitted and/or licensed business(es) and the permitting jurisdiction; 
6.  A recent photograph of the applicant, and the applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and/or his/her/its state or federally-issued tax identification number. 
D.  The application shall include the applicant's mailing address, name and phone number of the person who is responsible for providing access to the proposed use for inspection purposes, and the notice address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed (if different). 
E.  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than the individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application. If the application is signed by the property owner's agent, proof of status is required. 
F.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name. 
G.  A detailed description of the type of adult business and proposed use for which the license is requested, including reference to definitions in this chapter and Section 17.76.010 of this code, and the proposed address and assessor's parcel number of the site where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site. 
H.  The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult business, who are required by Section 5.98.130 to obtain an adult business entertainer license. 
I.  Applicants for a license under this chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this Section in the event that said information required by this Section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the Planning Services Manager shall be grounds for suspension of a license. 
J.  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of a total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. 
K.  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult business, and the location of all "sensitive uses" and other adult businesses in a manner which clearly establishes compliance with Chapter 17.76, and Sections 17.76.040 and 17.76.050 thereof. 
L.  A blue line print showing all four (4) elevations of any proposed structures and signage and listing proposed exterior building materials. Elevation prints shall be colored or a materials board shall be submitted. In the case of existing buildings where a change of use is proposed and no structural changes or exterior modifications are proposed, photographs may be accepted in lieu of elevation drawings if they show a front, sides, and rear elevation of the structure. 
M.  A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult business showing the locations of the lighting system as required by Section 17.76.170. 
N.  The Planning Services Manager shall be responsible for the granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling adult business licenses for proposed or existing adult businesses. The Planning Services Manager shall also be responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed adult business for which a license is being considered complies with all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations. 
O.  In the event that the Planning Services Manager determines or learns, prior to issuing the permit or while the application for a permit is pending, that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed adult business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) business days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
P.  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business license as set forth herein. 
Q.  The applicant for the license must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire and building codes, regulations and laws. 
R.  Prior to obtaining a permit and license to operate any adult business defined in this chapter, and as part of any application for a permit under this Section, the applicant shall obtain from the Planning Services Manager, a certificate that the proposed location of such business complies with the location requirements of Chapter 17.76 of this code. 
S.  By applying for a license under this Section, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter, and to the exercise of their authority by the Planning Services Manager, the Chief of Police and all other city employees and agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the city of their respective responsibilities. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.110 - Investigation and application. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application properly filed and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the Planning Services Manager shall immediately stamp the application received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Official, and any other city departments or other agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed Adult Business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this chapter. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproved, state the reasons therefor. 
B.  A department or agency shall disapprove an application, if it finds that the proposed adult business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the Planning Services Manager. 
C.  Within twenty (20) business days of receipt of the completed application, the Planning Services Manager shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this Section, and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The Planning Services Manager shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation; 
2.  If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial; 
3.  If the application is granted, the Planning Services Manager shall attach to the application an adult business license; 
4.  The application as granted or denied and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the notice address stated in the application. 
D.  The Planning Services Manager shall grant the application and issue the adult business license upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Chapter 17.76 (Adult Entertainment Establishments); and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 5.98.120. 
E.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the adult business is subject to prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc. (1991) 501 U.S. 560 and any applicable local, state or federal law. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult business establishment so that it can be easily read at any time. 
F.  If the Planning Services Manager neither grants nor denies the application within twenty (20) business days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 5.98.100(O), the application shall be forwarded to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration in strict conformance with the provisions of this Section 5.98.110(4). 
G.  If the Planning Services Manager denies renewal of the license, the applicant shall not be issued a license pursuant to this chapter for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Planning Services Manager finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. 
H.  After any final denial of a license authorized by this chapter, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.120 - Denial of application for adult business license. 
The Planning Services Manager shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
A.  That the building, structure, equipment and/or location used by the business for which a license is required herein does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, and fire and safety laws of the state of California and of the city. 
B.  An applicant or the applicant's adult business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this code related to the establishment or maintenance of an adult business. 
C.  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the city in connection with the application. 
D.  That the applicant had had any type of adult business license suspended or revoked by any public entity within two (2) years of the date of the application. 
E.  Within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for a license under this chapter, the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor which offense is classified by the state as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 316, or 647. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. 
F.  That on the date that business, for which a license is required, herein commences, and thereafter, there will be no responsible adult on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
G.  That an applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
H.  That an applicant, manager or any agent or employee of the applicant or manager has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime in conjunction with or as a result of the operation of an adult business prior to the filing of the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. 
I.  The required application or license fees have not been paid. 
J.  The granting of the license would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.130 - Adult business entertainer license. 
A.  No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities in an Adult Business, without a valid adult business entertainer license issued by the city. All persons who have been issued an adult business license shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the license required by Section 5.98.100, with the names of all entertainers required to obtain an adult business entertainer license, within thirty (30) days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult business license. 
B.  The Planning Services Manager shall grant, deny and renew adult business entertainer licenses. 
C.  The application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the Planning Services Manager. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn license application shall be filed with the Planning Services Manager. 
D.  The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
2.  Age, date and place of birth; 
3.  Height, weight, hair and eye color, tattoo description and locations; 
4.  Present residence address and telephone number; 
5.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of: 
a.  Any of the offenses set forth in Section 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those Sections now exist or may be hereafter amended or renumbered; 
b.  The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state of California. 
6.  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered or authorized to engage in prostitution; 
7.  State driver's license, Social Security number or identification number; 
8.  Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
9.  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face, taken within the last six (6) months of the date of the permit application. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant; and 
10.  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed. 
E.  The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the application fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
F.  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the Planning Services Manager shall immediately stamp the application received and promptly investigate the application. 
G.  If the Planning Services Manager determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, or that the application is otherwise invalid, the Planning Services Manager shall, within ten (10) business days of the filing of the application, notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension, not to exceed (10) business days, of the time for the Planning Services Manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.140 - Investigation and action on adult business entertainer license application. 
A.  Within five (5) business days after receipt of the properly completed application, the Planning Services Manager shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The Planning Services Manager shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation; 
2.  If the application is denied, the Planning Services Manager shall attach to the application a statement of reasons for denial; 
3.  If the application is granted, the Planning Services Manager shall attach to the application an adult business entertainer license; 
4.  The application as granted or denied and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application. 
B.  The Planning Services Manager shall grant the application and issue the license unless the application is denied for one or more reasons set forth in subsection D of this Section. 
C.  If the Planning Services Manager neither grants nor denies the application within five (5) business days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 5.98.130(G)), the application shall be forwarded to the City Council at its regularly scheduled meeting for consideration in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The Planning Services Manager, or in the case of the Planning Services Manager not acting within the time period under this Section, the City Council shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license or in any report or document required to be filed with the application; 
2.  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
3.  The Adult Business Entertainer license is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law; 
4.  The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute. 
E.  Each adult business entertainer license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the Police Chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the license to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the license. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for licenses. 
F.  The city deems confidential license applications required pursuant to this Section and all information contained therein. Absent an order from a court of competent jurisdiction, the city shall not disclose for public review the applications or the information contained therein. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.150 - Suspension or revocation of adult business license and adult business entertainer license. 
An adult business license or adult business entertainer license may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Section: 
A.  On determining that grounds for license revocation exist, the Planning Services Manager shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the licensee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code Sections and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the licensee, or shall be delivered to the licensee personally, at least ten (10) business days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Planning Services Manager, but at a minimum shall include the following: 
1.  All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this Section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The Planning Services Manager's decision may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Section 5.98.160. 
B.  A licensee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his/her/its license, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the licensee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of an adult business: 
1.  The licensee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city; 
2.  The licensee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of an adult business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business, or in the case of an adult business entertainer, the licensee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult business: 
a.  Giving false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's opportunity for obtaining an adult business license or adult business entertainer license; 
b.  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation; 
c.  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur; 
d.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
e.  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, 318 or subdivision (b) of Section 547 of the California Penal Code; 
f.  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4; 
g.  Refused to allow an inspection of Adult Business premises as authorized by this Chapter; 
h.  An employee or permittee who allowed or knew or should have known of gambling by any person on the Adult Business premises; 
i.  An employee or permittee who allowed or knew or should have known of such activity, has allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
j.  Operated the adult business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute, violation, the Planning Services Manager shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow seven (7) consecutive day period, the Planning Services Manager shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension; 
k.  Operated the adult business in violation of the hours of operation as set forth in this chapter; 
l.  Been convicted of an act for which initial denial of a license would have been required pursuant to this chapter; 
m.  Any conduct prohibited by this chapter. 
3.  Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official. 
C.  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this Section, if the Planning Services Manager finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the Planning Services Manager shall impose one the following: 
1.  A warning; 
2.  Suspension of the license for a specified period not to exceed six (6) months; or 
3.  Revocation of the license. 
D.  When the city revokes an adult business license, the revocation shall continue for one year from the date of revocation and the permittee shall not be issued an adult business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. 
E.  If the adult business license was revoked under this Section for reasons that the establishment is in noncompliance with the requirements of Chapter 17.76 (Adult Business Regulations) of this code; and if the Planning Services Manager finds that the basis for revocation under this Section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date revocation became effective. 
F.  If the adult business entertainer license issued to an individual and/or employee was revoked under this Section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the number of years required under this Section has elapsed. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.160 - Appeal of denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
A.  Appeal of Denial of Initial License. 
1.  Any decision of the Planning Services Manager to issue or deny a license may be appealed to the City Council. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) business days following notice of issuance or denial, and shall state the grounds upon which review is sought. The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing and the City Council will render a decision all within fifteen (15) business days of the filing of the appeal with the City Clerk. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and other tangible evidence on the issues; may be represented by legal counsel; and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious matters may be admitted. 
2.  If the Planning Services Manager denies the renewal of a license, or if a license has been suspended or revoked, and the aggrieved applicant/licensee timely commences an appeal to review the validity of the denial, suspension or revocation, upon written request of the applicant/licensee, the city shall issue a temporary permit pending the final determination on the appeal. The temporary permit shall remain in effect throughout the administrative appeal process and for ninety (90) days following the date the administrative determination is final. In the event the applicant/licensee fails or refuses to seek judicial review within such ninety (90) days, the temporary permit shall thereon expire further notice and the applicant/licensee shall cease all operations thereunder. Any temporary permit issued pursuant to this Section shall not grant any vested rights to the holder of the temporary permit. 
3.  All decisions made by the City Council regarding the renewal, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license subject to this chapter shall become final five (5) days after mailing of the Notice of Determination. After any final denial of a license authorized by this Chapter, the applicant/licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 et. seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.170 - Adult business development and performance standards. 
The following development and performance standards shall be satisfied by an adult business and included in any approved adult business license: 
A.  The establishment of an Adult Business shall comply with all applicable city site development standards of the zone, district, or area in which the adult business is located, the building and construction codes, maximum occupancy loads, fire codes, and the health and safety regulations in effect in the city. 
B.  An adult business shall comply with the applicable city permit and inspection procedures. 
C.  Each adult business shall have a business entrance separate from any other nonadult business located in the same building. 
D.  No adult business shall be operated in any matter that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. The provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. 
E.  All building openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing of the interior from any exterior area. 
F.  All exterior areas of adult businesses, including buildings, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds, and debris. 
G.  Parking lot lighting shall be provided to illuminate all off-street parking areas serving such use for the purpose of increasing the personal safety of patrons and employees and reducing the incidents of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall provide a level of illumination not less than one foot-candle, measured at the surface of the pavement, at all areas of the parking lot. The lighting shall be shown on the required plot plans and shall be reviewed and approved by the Building and Safety Department. 
H.  A parking plan shall be submitted to the Planning Services Manager for review and approved providing for adequate contiguous on-site parking. 
I.  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the Fire Department and the city's building standards. 
J.  The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area. 
K.  An adult business shall be open or operating for business only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of any particular day. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to cause an adult business to be operated or to allow such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee and/or independent contractor to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
L.  The building entrance to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Building Official. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. It is unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of an adult business to allow any person below the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises or within the confines of any Adult business if no alcoholic beverages are served, or under the age of twenty-one (21) if alcoholic beverages are served. 
M.  Each adult business shall be provided with a manager's station for the purpose of monitoring and supervising activities within the business. A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the adult business is open to the public. All indoor areas of the adult business within which patrons are permitted, or within which viewing is permitted by patrons or the public except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the manager at all times 
N.  An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items: 
1.  All interior areas of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level: 
Area 	Foot Candles 
Adult Bookstores, Video Stores and Novelty Shops 	20 
Adult Theaters and Cabarets 	5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles) 
Adult Motion Picture Theaters 	7.5 
Adult Motels/Hotels 	20 (in public areas) 
Nude Modeling Studios 	20 
 
2.  All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the sexually-oriented business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of four (4) foot-candles of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. A lighting plan, prepared by a licensed lighting engineer, shall be shown on the required site or plot plan and shall be subject to review by the Building Official and Police Chief; 
3.  Adult businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
a.  Adult businesses such as adult motion picture theaters, adult video stores, nude modeling studios, sexual encounter establishments, adult theaters and adult cabarets, or any adult business which features entertainment (live or motion picture viewed from booths) whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, shall provide at least one guard for every fifty (50) occupants permitted by the city's building code, at all times while the business is open, and in no case shall there be less than two (2) guards. One guard shall be stationed outside during all business hours. For businesses where the maximum building fire capacity is fifty (50) or less, video monitoring of the parking lot may be approved by the Police Chief, subject to the submission and approval of a video security monitoring plan; 
b.  Security guards for other adult businesses may be required if it is determined by the Police Chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in Section 5.98.150(B)(2); 
c.  Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed by the state as security guards. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard; 
4.  A video camera surveillance system shall be installed and operational during business hours, providing continuous coverage and recordation of both the interior of the building and the parking lot areas. Location of the surveillance cameras shall be approved by the Police Chief; 
5.  An annual review for adequacy of security will be conducted to ascertain if there has been an increase in calls for emergency services. 
O.  It is unlawful to sell, serve or permit the consumption of alcohol in any portion of a structure occupied by an adult business unless a license has been issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control ("ABC") for such sale, service and consumption. 
P.  The adult business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest rooms(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for males except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any material depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities ("adult material"). Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult materials which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide rest room facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
Q.  Every adult business shall display at all times during business hours the license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business. 
R.  An adult business entertainer shall have his/her license available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult business. 
Failure to comply with each and all of the foregoing development and performance standards shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult business license and/or adult entertainer's license. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.180 - Development and performance standards specific to adult motion picture theaters or establishments which include video viewing booths or rooms which feature specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
In addition to the performance standards set forth in Section 5.98.170, the following development and performance standards shall apply to any adult business which is also an adult motion picture theater or which includes video viewing booths which feature specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
A.  The application for the adult business license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof and specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons shall not be permitted. 
B.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises (except restrooms) to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's station. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
C.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station shall be made without the prior written approval of the Planning Services Manager. 
D.  It shall be the duty of the permittee and/or licensee and any employees present on the premises to insure that the view area remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this chapter. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted and maintained in prominent places in and near video booths. 
E.  The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters: 
1.  If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have individual, separate seats (not couches, benches or the like) to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area; 
b.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area(s) in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
c.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area. 
2.  If the theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, child day care facility, public park, school, or religious institution or any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence. 
F.  The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters and adult businesses where motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which feature specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons in video viewing booths or viewing rooms: 
1.  Video viewing booths/viewing rooms shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, furniture or fixtures, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
2.  No video viewing booth/viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
3.  The walls or partitions between video viewing booths/viewing rooms shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms as would allow viewing from one booth or room into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms. 
4.  Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such viewing room/booth, or to remain in the common area of such business, other than the rest rooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the viewing rooms/booths. 
5.  The floors, seats, walls, and other interior portions of all video booths/rooms shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths or rooms shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the adult business license. 
G.  This Section shall also apply to any adult business, other than an adult motel or hotel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
H.  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than seven and one-half (7.5) foot-candle power as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the owners, operators, their agents and employees present on the premises to insure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times any patron is present on the premises. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.190 - Development and performance standards specific to adult businesses providing live entertainment. 
In addition to the performance standards set forth in Section 5.98.170, the following development and performance standards shall apply to adult businesses providing live entertainment involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities: 
A.  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage at least (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten (10) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a stationary rail, or at least six (6) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded by a solid barrier, which rail or barrier must be at least thirty (30) inches in height, establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons. No patron shall be permitted within the area of the stage established by the barrier ten (10) feet with a rail or six (6) feet with a solid barrier while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. "Live entertainment" means the performance of every form of live entertainment involving specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas, including, but not limited to, a performance accompanied by music, band or orchestra, act, play, burlesque, revue, pantomine, scene, song or dance participated in by one or more persons. "Entertainer" or "live entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment from patrons of adult business. 
B.  If the adult business is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall abide by the rules and regulations established by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control ("ABC") and the regulations provided in this, chapter, unless any regulation of this chapter is preempted by the ABC, in which case the ABC's regulations shall apply. 
C.  For live entertainment involving specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  No live entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. In addition, while on the premises, no entertainer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patrons shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with an entertainer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person's body either before or after any adult live entertainment by such entertainer. When patrons are present at the establishment, they shall not be allowed to, and shall not, directly touch, fondle or caress (as those terms are defined in Kev, Inc. v. Kizsap County (9th Cir., 1986) 793 F.2d 1053) the entertainers while they are performing. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult business. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier between entertainers and patrons, and if necessary by employees of the establishment; 
2.  Live entertainers shall be restricted to performing in accordance with subsection (C)(1) of this Section; 
3.  Each live entertainer for an adult business shall be required to obtain an adult entertainer license pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers dedicated to the entertainers' use. No patron is permitted access to the dressing room facilities. The dressing room facilities shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. 
E.  The adult business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three (3) foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
F.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from any patron. If patrons wish to pay or tip entertainers, payment or tips shall be placed in receptacles which shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the permanently fixed stage (or eight (8) feet, where a solid barrier has been installed pursuant to subsection (F)(1) of this Section. Patrons shall not throw payment or tips to entertainers, hand tips directly to entertainers or place tips in the entertainer's costumes. 
G.  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult business to engage in exposure of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. The provision may not be completed with by applying an opaque, and/or the female with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered. 
H.  No operator, entertainer or employee of an adult business shall encourage or permit a patron upon the premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any entertainer or employee of the adult business. The adult business shall not conduct any massage, acupuncture, body wrapping, tattooing, acupressure or escort services on the premises. 
I.  Every licensee of an adult business which provides live entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas, or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their license numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or health officer of the city. 
J.  The adult business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, at all times that the business is open and occupied for business. 
K.  User parking areas and doorways of an adult business shall be unobstructed so as to allow visibility of these areas from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.200 - Display of license and identification cards. 
A.  Every adult business shall display at all times during business hours the license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business. 
B.  The police chief shall provide each adult business entertainer required to have a license pursuant to this chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and license number of such entertainer. 
C.  An adult business entertainer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult business. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.210 - Prohibitions regarding minors. 
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to operate, or cause to be operated an adult business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this Section, and knowingly, or with reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers, or allows: 
A.  Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the business premises; 
B.  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business premises; 
C.  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises; or 
D.  A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the adult business premises as an employee, or an independent contractor; or 
E.  The interior of the premises to be visible to a minor, wherein any matter harmful to minors is displayed or visible, unless all such materials so visible to minors are covered or obscured as required by city ordinance. 
F.  A sign shall be conspicuously posted on all entrances restricting entrance of minors. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.220 - Inspection. 
An applicant for an establishment or licensee shall permit authorized representatives of the Planning Division, the County Health Department, the Police Department, the County Fire Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult business or the premises at which a licensee is permitted to work, for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to Adult businesses, at any time it is occupied or open for business. A person who operates an adult business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this Section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.230 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.240 - Employment of persons without permits unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of an adult business which provides live entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult business entertainer license. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.250 - Violations—Penalties. 
Any person, whether as principal, employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or trustee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is permitted, committed or continued. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.98.260 - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties set forth above, any adult business which is operating in violation of this chapter or any provision thereof is declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. All costs to abate such public nuisance, including attorney's fees and court costs, shall be paid by the licensee of the adult business, or the property owner of record, pursuant to this code. 
(Ord. 2536 § 5 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 5.102 - ALARM SYSTEMS, FALSE ALARMS AND PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
5.102.010 - Definitions. 
All words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in the Alarm Company Act (Business and Professions Code of the State of California, Section 7590, et seq.) shall have the same meaning as in said act except that certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Alarm Administrator" means that person designated by the Chief of Police or his or her designee as the person responsible for the administration and management of this chapter. 
"Alarm installation company" means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. 
"Alarm monitoring company" means a person in the business of providing monitoring services. 
"Alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device or combination thereof which is designated for the detection of an unauthorized entry on or into any building, place, or premises, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, or for alerting others of any other emergency situation and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message. Alarm systems, include, but are not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms, silent alarms and central station alarms. Not included in this definition are: 
1.  Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone or utility company to protect telephone or utility company systems that might be damaged or destroyed; 
2.  Alarms used in connection with and installed in motor vehicles. 
"Audible alarm" means any device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on or into premises and which emits an audible sound on or about the premises when it is activated. 
"Automatic voice dialers" means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to a law enforcement, public safety or emergency services agency requesting dispatch. 
"Chief" means Chief of Police or his or her designee of the city of El Monte or his or her authorized representative. 
"Direct dial telephone device" means any device which is interconnected to a voice-grade telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmits by prerecorded voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
"False alarm" means an alarm signal, either silent or audible, necessitating response by the Police or Fire Department where an emergency situation for which the alarm system was designed or used does not exist due to mechanical failure, accidental tripping or actuation (human error), misoperation, malfunction, misuse or the neglect of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or his or her employees or agents. Upon failure of the El Monte Police Department or Fire Department to find any evidence of intrusion, fire or attempted intrusion, or other need or cause for activating an alarm system, a presumption of false alarm will arise. False alarm shall not include alarms caused by earthquakes, violent winds, malfunction or telephone line circuits or external causes beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm system. 
"Hearing Officer" means a neutral person designated by the City Attorney who is not a city employee. 
"One-plus duress alarm" means the manual activation of a silent alarm signaled by entering at an arming station a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code: 1234, one-plus duress code: 1235). 
"One year period" means a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days, commencing from the date of the first false alarm activation. 
"Operator" means an alarm installation company, an alarm monitoring company; or a user who owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under contract by an alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, organization, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, institution or agency, whether public or private. 
"SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01" means the ANSI-American National Standard Institute approved Security Industry Association-SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction." 
"Silent alarm" means any device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on or into premises, or any device that is designed to signal or any emergency situation where the police department is expected to respond, and that when activated transmits a signal or message inaudibly to a central station, or other monitoring point. 
"User" means any person, who (which) has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service from an alarm installation company or monitoring company for an alarm system, or who (which) owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under contract. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.020 - License and registration required. 
A.  No alarm installation company, alarm monitoring company or alarm agent as defined by the Business and Professions Code, shall install, maintain, sell, lease, rent, monitor, service, or repair any alarm system within the city of El Monte unless the alarm installation company, alarm monitoring company, or alarm agent has, prior to performing such work, obtained a city business license and registered their name and filed a copy of their state issued identification card with the Chief of Police or his or her designee. Upon such registration, all alarm installation companies, alarm monitoring companies, and alarm agents shall be given a copy of the provisions of this chapter. All past fees, fines and penalties must be paid before registration is completed. 
B.  Said alarm installation company, alarm monitoring company, or alarm agent shall immediately notify the police department upon installation of any alarm system with the city. Said notification shall include information as may be required by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.030 - Permit required. 
A.  No person, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company, shall use an alarm system within the city unless a valid alarm system permit has first been issued by the Chief of Police or his or her designee for the operation of the alarm system at that location. 
B.  The following information shall be included on the alarm system permit application for all permits required under this Section: 
1.  Name of the business or resident located or living at the location where the alarm system is to be used, the exact street address of the location including suite or apartment number, and the telephone number of the location; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number and state identification numbers of the alarm installation company, alarm monitoring company or alarm agent installing, maintaining, or repairing their alarm system; 
3.  A description of the type of alarm or combination of types (such as, but not limited to, silent, audible, direct dial or central station); 
4.  Name, address, and telephone number of at least two (2) persons to be called pursuant to an alarm activation who will respond to the location immediately if requested by the police department; and in no cases shall this person or persons take longer than thirty (30) minutes to respond to the location; 
5.  All types of situations the alarm is designed or intended to alert the police department to, (such as, but not limited to, armed robbery, burglary or medical emergency); 
6.  A statement affirming that the user has not had an alarm system permit denied or revoked within six (6) months of the application; 
7.  A statement affirming that the equipment used in the alarm system meets the standards established pursuant to this chapter; 
8.  Such further information as the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines is necessary to evaluate and act upon the application. 
C.  Each application shall be signed under penalty of perjury. 
D.  Each user shall give written notice whenever any change occurs in any information required under this Section to the police department within twenty-four (24) after the change is effective. 
E.  The alarm system permit fee must be paid by the alarm installation company at the time the alarm system is installed or to the alarm monitoring company at the time the alarm user contracts with the company for monitoring services or the user pays the city directly for self-installed or take-over alarms. There shall be an exemption of said fee for low income senior citizens sixty-two (62) years of age or older, disabled persons and honorably discharged disabled veterans, and the City Council shall further define such classes or persons eligible for exemption of this fee by resolution. There are no exemptions for false alarm penalties or reinstatement fees for permits. 
F.  A separate permit is required for each location where an alarm is used. 
G.  Alarm system permits are valid for one year after issuance or sooner if there is a change in user, location, or equipment, or until revoked pursuant to this chapter. 
H.  Alarm system permits are not transferable to any other user or location. 
I.  The user or any alarm monitoring company shall notify the police department within ten (10) calendar days of any new alarm installation. Said user shall make a complete application for a license within twenty (20) calendar days of said installation. 
J.  Upon the issuance or renewal of any permit, the user shall be given a copy of the Sections of this chapter regarding false alarms, penalties and nuisance abatement and also a copy of the resolution setting the various fees and penalties. 
K.  Failure to obtain a permit within the time requirements of subsection I of this Section shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 5.102.160. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.040 - Findings for alarm system permit. 
The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall issue an alarm systems permit upon his or her determination that: 
A.  The system has been inspected and found to be: 
1.  In good working order; 
2.  Compatible with telephone company equipment; 
3.  One which does not use equipment having a potential for jamming the city telephone system, such as those involving tape dialers; 
4.  In compliance with the equipment standards set for in Section 5.102.060; 
B.  An inspection of the premises by a state-licensed alarm agent and a certificate by such agent that the system is in compliance with the requirements of Section 5.102.060 and the requirements of this Section shall be sufficient for such determination. 
C.  The user is fully conversant with the alarm system and knows how to operate it. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.050 - Alarm system permit—Renewal. 
A.  Each alarm system permit shall be renewed every year. There shall be an exemption of said fee for low income senior citizens sixty-two (62) years of age or older, disabled persons and honorably discharged disabled veterans, and the City Council may further define such classes or persons eligible for exemption of this fee by resolution. No such renewal shall be issued if there are any outstanding fines, penalties or fees owed to the city, or if the alarm system is not in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  An alarm system permit shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of each year and must be renewed every calendar year by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee to the Alarm Administrator, either directly or through an alarm company. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a nonpermitted alarm system and may result in citations and penalties. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 5-17-2011)  
5.102.060 - Alarm system standards. 
All alarm systems and equipment shall meet or exceed the minimum standards for alarm systems as may be established by the Police Chief. Minimum standards include the following: 
A.  All audible alarm systems, excluding fire alarms, which indicate the functioning of an automatic fire sprinkler system, shall include a device, which will limit the generation of the audible sound of the system to ten (10) minutes or less after activation. 
B.  Alarm equipment shall not have a potential for unauthorized telephone seizures. 
C.  Alarm equipment shall be capable of preventing false alarms by using an abort feature. 
D.  Audible alarms shall not duplicate the sounds of police, fire, paramedic, ambulance, other emergency vehicles, or any civil defense warning. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall make the final determination regarding any question of audible alarm within this Section. 
E.  Direct alarm system using telephone lines to transmit alarms shall not use tape dialers. All such dialers shall be of the digital type. 
F.  All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric utility service will not activate the alarm system. Said backup shall provide not less than four (4) hours of independent operation. 
G.  An alarm company shall not use automatic voice dialers. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.070 - Alarm installation; monitoring standards. 
A.  Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one-plus duress alarms. Alarm companies may not continue to report one-plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one-plus duress alarms prior to enactment of this chapter. 
B.  Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter alarm businesses shall not install a device for activating a hold up alarm, which is a single action non-recessed button. 
C.  Ninety (90) calendar days after enactment of this chapter, and conditioned upon reasonable availability, alarm installation companies shall on new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
D.  An alarm installation company shall not install an alarm for a customer who does not have a current valid alarm system permit under this chapter, provided, that the installation company may provide the customer with a permit application form and shall accept from the customer the completed form and the applicable permit fee on behalf of the Alarm Administrator, after which the company may install the alarm system. 
E.  No later than the twenty-fifth (25th) calendar day following the month of collection or receipt, the installation company shall remit to the Alarm Administrator all permit fees collected and completed permit applications received as well as a complete list of existing customers. 
F.  An alarm company shall not service a new customer who does not have a current valid alarm system permit provided that the alarm company may provide the customer with a permit application form and shall accept from the customer the completed form and the applicable permit fee on behalf of the Alarm Administrator, after which the company may service the alarm system. 
G.  No later than December 1 of each year, an alarm company doing business in the city of El Monte shall notify each of its customers of the alarm system permit renewal for the following year and shall bill such customers for the permit fee required under this chapter. Such bill shall be due and payable in not more than thirty (30) calendar days. 
H.  No later than the last day of each month following the month of collection or receipt, the alarm company shall remit to the Alarm Administrator all permit fees collected, completed permit applications received and a complete list of all customers with a designation of those customers who have failed to pay the required fee. 
I.  Upon the effective date of City Council Ordinance No. 2774, each alarm installation company shall provide the alarm administrator with a list of existing customers in a format reasonably acceptable to the Alarm Administrator for the purpose of assisting the Alarm Administrator with creating tracking data. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2774, §§ 2, 3, 5-17-2011)  
5.102.080 - False alarm penalty. 
The city shall assess a penalty against any user whose alarm system has triggered four (4) or more false alarms transmitted or otherwise responded to by the city during any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. There shall be additional penalty assessments if said penalty is not paid within thirty (30) calendar days and the alarm system permit may be revoked pursuant to Section 5.102.090. Also, response to said alarm by city officials may be discontinued pursuant to Section 5.102.100 if said penalties are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 4, 5-17-2011)  
5.102.090 - Denial or revocation of alarm system permit. 
A.  The Police Chief may deny the issuance of an alarm system permit or revoke a permit upon finding any of the following conditions: 
1.  Incomplete, false or fraudulent statements on the alarm system permit application; 
2.  Failure to pay fees, fines, and penalties owed to the city within thirty (30) calendar days; 
3.  Failure to submit current information as required under Section 5.102.030(B) and (D); 
4.  Failure of a responsible person listed under Section 5.102.030(B)(4) to respond immediately (and in no circumstances longer than thirty (30) minutes) to the location of an alarm when it has been determined that the presence of a responsible person is necessary to conduct an investigation into possible criminal activity, to secure the premises, or to turn off an audible alarm; 
5.  The alarm system no longer complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Written notice shall be mailed to the user giving the reason for denial or revocation. 
C.  The user may, by written request within ten (10) calendar days after mailing of the notice, file an appeal of the denial or revocation pursuant to Section 5.102.130. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.100 - Discontinuance of response to alarms. 
A.  The Police Chief may discontinue response by city officers to an alarm at a location when any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  When there are more than six (6) false alarms at a specific location within a three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. 
2.  When a penalty for a false alarm has been levied against an operator and the party responsible for the payment of the penalty fails to pay said penalty within thirty (30) calendar days following notification of the penalty and/or the alarm company has failed to register themselves or their customer with the city. 
B.  At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to discontinuance of response by city officers, the Police Chief shall notify the operator by mail of the action. The operator may, within ten (10) calendar days after mailing of such notice, file a written appeal of said discontinuance pursuant to Section 5.102.130. 
C.  Reinstatement will occur upon application when the operator/alarm location has corrected the underlying condition or problem responsible for causing false alarms and/or when the past due fees and/or penalties have been paid. As a pre-condition to reinstatement, the city may also require that the alarm system be inspected and tested by a state-licensed alarm agent. Proof of inspection and testing shall be submitted along with the application and reinstatement fee. 
D.  Nothing in the chapter is intended to prevent a police officer from responding to a person who calls and advises of a crime in progress or who needs police assistance. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 5, 5-17-2011)  
5.102.110 - Testing. 
An alarm activated during any service, test, repair, maintenance or alteration work of an alarm system shall be counted as a false alarm for the purposes of Section 5.102.080. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.120 - Repairs. 
When any false alarm caused by a malfunction occurs, the user shall cause the alarm system to be repaired to correct the malfunction prior to placing the alarm system in operation again. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.130 - Appeals. 
Any applicant, operator or alarm system permittee shall have the right to appeal to a Hearing Officer any decision or finding made pursuant to this chapter. The notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the Chief of Police or his or her designee within ten (10) calendar days following a decision of the City Official pursuant to this chapter. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal. An appeal fee, to cover the costs actually incurred by the city to hold the hearing may be set by resolution of the City Council and shall be paid when said notice of appeal is filed. The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall notify the City's Hearing Officer of the request for an appeal who will in turn conduct a hearing on the appeal. The applicant shall be notified of the results of the appeal no later than five (5) business days after the hearing. In the event the result of the appeal is to overturn or change the decision of the City Official, the appeal fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action of the suspending or revoking of an alarm system permit until the Hearing Officer has completed his or her review. If a request for appeal is not made within the ten (10) calendar day period, the action of the City Official shall be final and not subject to further appeal. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.140 - Duties and obligation not created. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose upon the city or any officer or employee of the city, any duty or obligation of any kind to a user or any other person. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.150 - Verified alarm cancellations. 
There shall be a procedure established by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, which allows the alarm monitoring companies to provide verified alarm response cancellations, which can be made prior to response at the subject location being made. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
5.102.160 - Manner of charging offense; public nuisance; pursuit of delinquent sums. 
A.  Criminal Prosecution. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided under Section 1.24.010(A) of this code. 
B.  Administrative Citation Process. In lieu of criminal prosecution pursuant to subsection A of this Section, violations of this chapter may be prosecuted by the issuance of an administrative citation issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.18 of this code. 
C.  Any alarm system installed or maintained in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to California Code Section 3479 and shall be abated as provided by law. 
D.  The city reserves the right to pursue delinquent sums in accordance with applicable collection policies set forth under the El Monte Municipal Code or under the laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. 2684 § 2 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2774, §§ 6, 7, 5-17-2011)  
5.102.170 - Establishment and amendment of fees and penalties. 
By resolution and in compliance with any notice and hearing requirements mandated by statute, the City Council may set and from time to time amend or otherwise modify the amount of any fees, fines or penalties relating to the following: (i) the alarm system permit fee and renewal fee contemplated under Sections 5.102.030 and 5.102.050 of this chapter, respectively; (ii) the fines, penalties and additional penalty assessments contemplated under Section 5.102.080 of this chapter; (iii) the reinstatement fee contemplated under Section 5.102.100(C) of this chapter; (iv) the appeal fee contemplated under Section 5.102.130 of this chapter; and (v) any other fees, penalties, fines or other assessments imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 8, 5-17-2011)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL CODE ADOPTED 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Animal control ordinance—Adoption by reference of portions of Los Angeles County Administrative Code. 
Subject to certain amendments and additions as specified in Chapter 6.04 of Title 6 of the El Monte Municipal Code and the deletions set forth in Section 6.04.060, Title 10 of the Los Angeles Administrative Code, including all amendments and ordinances of Los Angeles County up to and including Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 2011-0038, dated August 25, 2011 is hereby adopted by reference for the City of El Monte as the "animal control ordinance" of the City of El Monte. For purposes of this Section 6.04.010 of Chapter 6.04 of Title 6.04 of the El Monte Municipal Code, Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Administrative Code, including all amendments and ordinances of Los Angeles County up to and including Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 2011-0038, dated August 25, 2011, may be referred to as the "City of El Monte Animal Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. 2686 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2641 § 1, 2005: prior code § 4160) 
(Ord. No. 2784, § 1, 1-10-2012)  
6.04.020 - Amendment of definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall be construed to have the following respective meaning: 
"Board" or "Board of Supervisors" means the Council of the city. 
"County" or "County of Los Angeles" means the City of El Monte. 
"Health Officer" means the Health Officer of the city. 
(Prior code § 4160.2) 
(Ord. No. 2784, § 2, 1-10-2012)  
6.04.030 - Fees—Adoption. 
Subject to certain amendments and additions as specified in Chapter 6.04 of Title 6 of the El Monte Municipal Code and the deletions set forth in Section 6.04.060, the fee schedule, as set out, in Section 10.90.010, et seq., of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Administrative Code, including all amendments and ordinances of Los Angeles County up to and including Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 2011-0038, dated August 25, 2011, is adopted by reference as the fee schedule for enumerated services of the city under the El Monte Animal Control Ordinance. The City Council of the city may hereafter make such adjustments in the fee schedule as may be appropriate upon adoption of a resolution of the City Council in the manner authorized by Government Code Section 66016. 
(Ord. 2686 § 2, 2007: Ord. 2641 § 2, 2005: prior code § 4160.4) 
(Ord. No. 2784, § 3, 1-10-2012)  
6.04.040 - Kennels—Residential separation. 
It is unlawful to maintain a dog kennel or a cat kennel within thirty-five (35) feet of any dwelling occupied by human beings other than the owner or operator of such dog or cat kennel. This section shall not preclude the specification of a greater distance in the zoning regulations of this code. 
(Prior code § 4171) 
(Ord. No. 2784, § 4, 1-10-2012)  
6.04.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violation of the City of El Monte Animal Control Ordinance is a misdemeanor. The City may prosecute any violation of the City of El Monte Animal Control Ordinance as a misdemeanor in accordance with El Monte Municipal Code Section 1.24.010. 
(Prior code § 4160.3) 
(Ord. No. 2784, § 5, 1-10-2012)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - HEALTH CODE 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Adoption. 
With the exceptions of the deletions set forth in this chapter and subject to the amendments and additions hereinafter specified, there is adopted by reference for the city, the 1988 version of the Los Angeles County Health and Safety Code, Title 11, as adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors (the "Board") on August 2, 1988, by Ordinance Number 88-0132. 
(Prior code § 5401)  
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in said Health Code and in the following subsections shall apply only to said Health Code: 
"County" or "County of Los Angeles" or any abbreviation thereof means the area to which said Health Code shall apply, such word or words shall be interpreted and deemed to mean "City." 
"County" or "County of Los Angeles" or any abbreviation thereof means the area of enforcement of any provision of said Health Code, it shall be interpreted to mean the city of El Monte. 
"Health Officer" or "Officer" means the authorized enforcement officer of unit for the city of El Monte. 
(Prior code §§ 5402—5402.3)  
8.04.030 - Application and interpretation. 
A.  The definition or regulation of any activity, condition, or structure in said Health Code shall not be interpreted or deemed to permit or allow the conduct of any such activity or the construction or maintenance of any such condition or structure as may be otherwise prohibited or restricted by any other sections of the El Monte Municipal Code or other ordinances of this city heretofore or hereafter adopted. 
B.  Whenever any provision of this chapter is in any respect in conflict with any other provision of the Municipal Code, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Prior code §§ 5403, 5403.1)  
8.04.040 - Deletions. 
Sections 535, 536, 537, 538, 602 and 608 of the Health Code are repealed. 
(Prior code § 5404)  
8.04.050 - Amendments. 
Sections 11.38.520 and 11.38.560 are amended to read respectively as follows: 
 11.38.520. CHEMICAL TOILETS. Where there is no running water or there is no practical means of sewage disposal, or when the operation or maintenance of a water flush toilet would be liable to contemplate or pollute the waters of any stream, water channel, spring, well, pond, lake, reservoir, infiltration gallery, or underground water from which water may be drawn for domestic consumption, a chemical toilet may be maintained. No chemical toilet may be maintained under such circumstances unless a permit therefor shall have been obtained from the Health Officer. Upon ascertaining that the necessity for such permit as herein set forth no longer exists, the Health Officer shall revoke such permit. No person shall continue to maintain a chemical toilet after the permit for maintenance thereof has been revoked. 
 11.38.560. PUBLIC WASH ROOMS, TOILET FACILITIES, SHOWERS AND BATHS. Every person maintaining a toilet room, washroom, bath or shower room for the use of his/her employees, or the public, shall at all times keep the floors, walls, ceiling, toilet facilities, urinals, lavatories, and other equipment therein, in good repair and free from dirt, filth and corrosion. All baths, showers, lavatories, and urinals shall be adequately supplied with running water. Rooms used for such facilities shall be well ventilated and lighted. All lavatories shall be kept supplied with soap and individual towels with a receptacle for their disposal. All toilet facilities shall be kept supplied with toilet paper. In connection with every public toilet hereafter created, there shall be maintained hand washing facilities for the public and employees. 
(Ord. 2470 § 1 (part), 1997; Ord. 2469 § 1 (part), 1997; prior code § 5405)  
8.04.060 - Further amendments to Health Code. 
The city adopts by reference Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 97-0071, which was adopted on December 16, 1997 by the Board of Supervisors and relates to the operation of food establishments and the establishment of a food handler's training certification program. Ordinance No. 97-0071 amends the Health Code, which was previously adopted by reference by the city. 
(Ord. 2485 § 2, 1998: prior code § 5415)  
8.04.070 - Additions. 
A new Section 535 is added to the Health Code, the same to read as follows: 
 Sec. 535. PRIVIES PROHIBITED. No person shall construct, maintain, use or permit the existence of a privy within the City. The material contained in any existing privy pit shall be properly treated as required by the Health Officer and the privy pit shall then be filled with compacted soil at least to the original ground level. 
(Prior code § 5406)  
8.04.080 - Arrests for violations—Penal Code provisions adopted. 
The City Health Officer, and his/her delegated subordinates pursuant to the provisions of Section 836.5 of the Penal Code, may arrest a person without a warrant whenever the City Health Officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor in his/her presence which is a violation of any statute or ordinance referred to by Section 11.02.030 of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Health Code as adopted by reference by ordinance of the city. Upon making such an arrest, the El Monte Health Officer or his/her subordinate may release the person arrested pursuant to the provisions of Section 853.6 of the Penal Code, the provisions of which are adopted by reference as part of this section. 
(Prior code § 5411)  
8.04.090 - Interfering with duties of the El Monte Health Code Officer prohibited. 
No person shall refuse, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the El Monte Health Officer into any railway car, stage, vehicle, building, room, lot or other place or portion thereof in the city in the performance of his/her duty, or shall refuse to obey any lawful order of the El Monte Health Officer made in the performance of his/her duties within the power conferred upon him/her by state law or by this chapter or by Division I of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Health Code as adopted by reference by ordinance of the city. 
(Prior code § 5412)  
8.04.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or the Los Angeles County Health Code as adopted by reference is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter and/or the Los Angeles County Health Code as adopted by reference is committed, continued or permitted makes such violation of a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 5414)  
Chapter 8.08 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Declaration of policy. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determinations made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the El Monte City Council makes the following finds and declarations: 
A.  The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
C.  This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 5710)  
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Commission" means the Property Maintenance Commission. This code is hereby amended by substituting all references to "Property Maintenance Commission" with "Hearing Officer." 
(Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002) 
"Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel and shall include street. The term "public property" does not include "highway." 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. "Vehicle" means only a vehicle as herein defined whose value does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) as that value is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer designated by the Council to make such determination. Any such determination of value may be rebutted at the hearing on the removal and assessment of costs. 
(Prior code §§ 5720—5723)  
8.08.030 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
B.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise; 
C.  A vehicle or part thereof which is located behind a solid fence six (6) feet in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway; 
D.  Any zone other than zones R-1a, R-1b, R-1c, R-2, R-3 and R-4, as such are now or hereafter may be defined by the zoning regulations of this code. 
(Prior code §§ 5730—5730.4)  
8.08.040 - Enforcement. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Costs. The Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs under this chapter. 
(Prior code §§ 5740—5741)  
8.08.050 - Procedures. 
A.  Hearing Required. A public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof against the property on which it is located. 
B.  Notice. Notice of hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing by certified mail, with a five (5) day return requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized county assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If any of the foregoing notices are returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, the hearing shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return. 
1.  Notice of hearing shall also be given to the California Highway Patrol identifying the vehicle or part thereof proposed for removal, such notice to be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
2.  Conduct. All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the Hearing Officer who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The Hearing Officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial. 
C.  Decision. The Hearing Officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He or she may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Hearing Officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. The Inspection Bureau Supervisor shall submit a report to the City Council and the City Council shall determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal so be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. 
1.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Council shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land owner. 
2.  Notice of Decision. If an interested party makes a written presentation to the Hearing Officer but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. In the absence of any appeal to the City Council, the action of the Hearing Officer shall be final and conclusive on the date of service of said decision. 
D.  Appeal. Any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer within nine (9) days after service of the order of the Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of Section. The notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the Secretary of the Hearing Officer, accompanied by a filing fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
The Council may, not later than the regular meeting following the meeting at which the notice of appeal is received, set the matter for a hearing. If the matter is set for a hearing, the Council may, after the hearing, either reverse and close the proceedings or modify or affirm the order, in which case the decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. In the case of an appeal to the City Council, the order of the Hearing Officer shall be stayed until the City Council renders its decision, at which time, unless the order is reversed, the order shall become final as modified or affirmed. 
E.  Removal. Ten (10) days after the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance becomes final, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
1.  Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles. Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. Such notice shall be given and all such evidence of registration shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles by the person removing such vehicle or part thereof. A copy of the resolution or order authorizing disposition of the vehicle or part thereof pursuant to this section shall be delivered by the city to the person who removes such vehicle or part thereof pursuant to such resolution or order. 
2.  Costs. If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to subsection D of this section are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date the order becomes final, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted so the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Prior code §§ 5750—5751.2)  
8.08.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of five (5) days unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 
B.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. 
(Prior code §§ 5752, 5752.1)  
Chapter 8.10 - RETAIL SALES OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2781, § 1, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, amended Ch. 8.10 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 8.10, §§ 8.10.010 and 8.10.020, pertained to vendor assisted sales of tobacco and derived from Ord. No. 2547, § 1 (part), 2002. 
 
8.10.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrase, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  "Arm's length transaction" means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two (2) informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm's length transaction. 
B.  "Cigar" means any roll of tobacco other than a cigarette wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or any substance containing tobacco and weighing more than three (3) pounds per thousand. 
C.  "Cigarette" means: (1) any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco; and (2) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco, which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by consumers as a cigarette described herein. 
D.  "Consumer" means a person who purchases a tobacco product for consumption and not for sale to another. 
E.  "Department" means the Finance Department of the City of El Monte, and any division or person designated by the department to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  "Little cigar" means any roll of tobacco—other than a cigarette—wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or any substance containing tobacco and weighing no more than three (3) pounds per thousand. "Little cigar" includes, but is not limited to, any tobacco product known or labeled as a "small cigar," "cigarillo," or "little cigar." 
G.  "Package" or "packaging" means a pack, box, carton or container of any kind, or, if no other container, any wrapping (including cellophane) in which a tobacco product is sold or offered for sale to a consumer. 
H.  "Person" means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
I.  "Proprietor" means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-today operations of a business. 
J.  "Self-service display" means the open display or storage of tobacco products in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
K.  "Sale" or "sell" means any transfer, exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, or distribution for commercial purpose, in any manor or by any means whatsoever. 
L.  "Smoke" means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization. The term "smoke" includes but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, marijuana smoke or any other weed, herb, flower or plant. 
M.  "Smoking" means the generation of smoke, as defined herein, through the use and/or operation of any tobacco product. 
N.  "Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. The term "tobacco product" shall also include electronic cigarettes. 
O.  "Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2935, §§ 2, 3, 9-4-2018)  
8.10.020 - Requirements and prohibitions. 
A.  Tobacco Retailer Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's permit pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer's permit is a nuisance as a matter of law. 
B.  Lawful Business Operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a permit issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a permittee or any of the permittee's agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products. 
C.  Display of Permit. Each tobacco retailer permit shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the permitted location. 
D.  Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven (27) years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product. 
E.  Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing. 
F.  Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited. 
G.  False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer permit, including, for example, a person whose permit has been revoked: 
1.  Shall keep all tobacco products out of public view. The public display of tobacco products in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a permit under Section 8.10.120; and 
2.  Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location. 
H.  Packaging and Labeling. No tobacco retailer shall sell any tobacco product to any consumer unless such product: (1) is sold in the original manufacturer's packaging intended for sale to consumers; and (2) conforms to all applicable federal labeling requirements. 
I.  Minimum Package Size for Little Cigars and Cigars. No tobacco retailer shall sell to a consumer: 
1.  Any little cigar unless it is sold in a package of at least twenty (20) little cigars. 
2.  Any cigar unless it is sold in a package of at least six (6) cigars, provided, however, that this Subsection I.2. of 8.10.020 shall not apply to a cigar that has a price of at least five dollars ($5.00) per cigar, including all applicable taxes and fees. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2935, § 3, 9-4-2018)  
8.10.030 - Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer permit. 
No permit may issue to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.040 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application for a tobacco retailer's permit shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. 
B.  It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's permit. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a permit as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A permit issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to Section 8.10.110(D) of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's permit any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
C.  All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the department and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a permit. 
2.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a permit is sought. 
3.  A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized address") required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (C)2 above. 
4.  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's permit is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's permit by the California Board of Equalization. 
5.  Whether or not any proprietor or any agent of the proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five (5) years. 
6.  Such other information as the department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter as specified on the application form required by this section. 
D.  A permitted tobacco retailer shall inform the department in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer's permit within ten (10) business days of a change. 
E.  Permit applications must be submitted prior to January 1 of the calendar year for which the permit will be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.050 - Issuance of Permit. 
A.  Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer's permit and the permit fee required by this chapter, the department shall issue a permit unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists: 
1.  The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this chapter. 
2.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which this chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer permits. However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a permit if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction. 
3.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a permit to be issued. 
4.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this chapter, that is unlawful to this Municipal Code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.060 - Permit renewal and expiration. 
A.  Renewal of Permit. A tobacco retailer's permit is invalid if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the permit has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer permit is one year commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31 of the same calendar year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's permit and submit the permit fee no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the term. 
B.  Expiration of Permit. A tobacco retailer's permit that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To renew a permit not timely renewed pursuant to subsection (A), the proprietor must: 
1.  Submit the permit fee and application renewal form; and 
2.  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor: 
a.  Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco products after the permit expiration date and before the permit is renewed; or 
b.  Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a permit, as set forth in Section 8.10.120(A) of this chapter, before seeking renewal of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.070 - Permit Nontransferable. 
A.  A tobacco retailer's permit may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer's permit is required whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in proprietor(s). 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and permit ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
1.  The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and 
2.  The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.080 - Permit conveys a limited, conditional privilege. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's permit any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the permit. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to, any provision of this Municipal Code, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer permit does not make the retailer a "retail or whole tobacco shop" for the purposes of California Labor Code Section 6404.5. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.090 - Fee for permit. 
By resolution, the city council shall establish and may from time to time adjust a schedule of fees for the issuance of a tobacco retailer's permit under this chapter. Fees shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter, including, for example, issuing a permit, administering the permit program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecutions of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this chapter. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.100 - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the department. In addition, any sworn peace officer or City of El Monte Code Enforcement Officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter. The city may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this chapter. 
B.  The department or other person designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall check the compliance of each tobacco retailer at least once per twelve-month period. Nothing in this paragraph shall create a right of action in any permittee or other person against the city or its agents. 
C.  Compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the department to determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with laws regulating youth access to Tobacco. When the department deems appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011)  
8.10.110 - Suspension/revocation of permit. 
A.  Suspension of Permit for Violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer permit shall be suspended or revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the permittee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the permittee, or any of the permittee's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this part or has pleaded guilty, "no contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in Section 8.10.020 of this chapter. A tobacco retailer or proprietor whose permit has been suspended is deemed not to have a valid tobacco retailer permit during the suspension period for purposes of this chapter. 
B.  Tobacco Retailer Permit Suspension/Revocation. 
1.  After suspension for a first violation of this part at a location within any three-year period, no person may engage in the retail sales of tobacco products at the location until fifteen (15) days have passed from the date of suspension. 
2.  After suspension for a second violation of this part at a location within any three-year period, no person may engage in tobacco retailing at the location until thirty (30) days have passed from the date of suspension. 
3.  After suspension for a third violation of this part at a location within any three-year period, no person may engage in tobacco retailing at the location until ninety (90) days have passed from the date of suspension. 
4.  After revocation for four or more violations of this part at a location within any three-year period, no new permit may issue for the location until one year has passed from the date of revocation. 
C.  Appeal of Suspension/Revocation. A decision of the department to suspend or revoke a permit is appealable to the City Manager and/or designee and must be filed with the City Clerk or within ten (10) days of mailing of the department's decision. If such an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. An appeal to the City Manager or designee is not available for a suspension or revocation made pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. 
D.  Revocation of Permit Wrongly Issued. A tobacco retailer permit shall be revoked if the department finds, after the permittee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a permit under Section 8.10.050 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the permit issued. The decision by the department shall be the final decision of the city. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2789, 3-20-2012)  
8.10.120 - Tobacco retailing without a permit. 
A.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer's permit, either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailing permit as follows: 
1.  After a first violation of this section at a location within any five-year period, no new permit may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until thirty (30) days have passed from the date of the violation. 
2.  After a second violation of this section at a location within any five-year period, no new permit may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until ninety (90) days have passed from the date of the violation. 
B.  Tobacco products offered for sale or exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by the department or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the permittee and any other owner of the tobacco products seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. The decision by the department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 8.10.110(C). 
C.  For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this chapter: 
1.  Each day on which a tobacco product is offered for sale in violation of this chapter; or 
2.  Each individual retail tobacco product that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter; 
shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2789, 3-20-2012)  
8.10.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
B.  Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
C.  Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by the city prosecutor or the city attorney and are subject to an administrative fine as established by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of the City Prosecutor or City Attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require. 
E.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
F.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
G.  In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the City Attorney, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 1, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2935, § 4, 9-4-2018)  
Chapter 8.16 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Sale of fireworks. 
No person shall sell any blank cartridge, firecracker or other fireworks without a permit from the city to do so. Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.16.030, no permit required by this chapter shall be issued other than to: 
A nonprofit association, as defined by Section 21000 of the California Corporations Code, including any association set forth in Section 21200 of such code, or a nonprofit corporation formed and conducted in accordance with Part 3 of Division 2 of Title 1 of the Corporations Code; provided, that such association or corporation has its principal and permanent meeting place situated within the city, has for more than five (5) years continuously maintained a local unit, branch, lodge or club with a bona fide membership of at least twenty (20) members within the city, has a valid and current certificate of tax exemption, as provided in Section 214 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and is subject to charitable exemptions, as provided in Article 3 of Chapter 4 of Part 9 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Prior code § 6390)  
8.16.020 - Use of permits. 
The net proceeds of the sale of fireworks under a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter 8.16 shall be expended solely for charitable purposes within the city. On or before August 31 of each calendar year during which a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall file with the Licensing and Treasury Department an itemized account of the receipts and expenditures of such permittee received and made in connection with the purchase and sale of fireworks under such permit. Prior to or concurrent with the filing of an application for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall, if he or she has had a prior such permit, file an accounting of the disbursements of the net proceeds shown by his or her accounting made pursuant to this section. No permit shall be issued to any person or organization which has previously obtained such a permit and has failed or refused to file an accounting as required by this section or who has expended any of the proceeds of the sale of fireworks in any manner or for any purpose other than as specified in this section. Net proceeds, as used in this section, means the gross proceeds emanating from the sale of fireworks less the cost of the fireworks, the cost of providing a fireworks stand or location, and the amount of all taxes, business licenses, permit fees and other similar charges, but excluding any compensation or any remuneration in any way paid to any person for the purpose of assisting in the sale of fireworks under this Chapter 8.16. 
(Prior code § 6390.1) 
(Ord. No. 2839, § 4, 5-27-2014)  
8.16.024 - Fireworks permit fees. 
A.  Fees for fireworks permits issued under this Chapter 8.16 may be established by separate resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution 
B.  In addition to the city's standard collection procedures, failure by any permittee to pay the amount invoice by the city's Finance Department shall be cause to disqualify the permittee from obtaining a permit to sell fireworks in the city in the future. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 4, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 2839, § 5, 5-27-2014)  
8.16.030 - Fireworks permits and stands. 
A.  The maximum number of fireworks permits that may be issued each year by the city shall be established and from time to time amended by resolution of the El Monte City Council, provided, however, that the maximum number of permits authorized by any such resolution may not exceed twenty-five (25) fireworks permits in any calendar year. Any resolution to establish or amend the maximum number of permits issued each calendar year shall require a minimum of three (3) affirmative votes for approval and shall remain effective until repealed and/or superseded by subsequent resolution. Commencing in the year 2008, any resolution to amend the number of fireworks permits issued in a calendar year must be approved by the City Council no later than the last day of February of each calendar year. Applications for fireworks permits shall be submitted between March 1 and May 1 of each calendar year. No more than one fireworks permit shall be issued to any one organization during any one calendar year. Each fireworks permit issued by the city shall authorize the sale of fireworks in one location within the city. No duly permitted fireworks stand may exceed thirty-three (33) feet in length. No fireworks permit issued shall remain valid beyond the expiration date set forth in the permit, or if no such date is set forth, beyond eight p.m. on July 4th of the calendar year in which the permit is issued. 
B.  Cash Deposit. In addition to all fees and deposits required by this code, every application for a permit to construct a fireworks stand shall be accompanied by a deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) in cash to guarantee the removal of such stand within the time specified by the Uniform Fire Code. 
C.  Compliance with Fire Prevention Code. Every permit for the sale of fireworks shall be subject to and shall include by reference all of the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code. 
D.  Every application for a permit to construct a fireworks stand shall be accompanied by written authorization of the owner of record of the property upon which the stand is to be located. If the property is leased, the application shall be accompanied by written authorization of the lessor. The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity granting the authority shall be included in the authorization statement. 
(Ord. 2693 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2674 § 2, 2006; amended during 1999 recodification; Ord. 2487 § 1, 1998: Ord. 2486 § 2, 1998; prior code §§ 6391—6391.3)  
8.16.040 - Permit revocation. 
A.  The Chief of Police or his/her designee may immediately revoke without notice or hearing, the permit of any permittee who violates any section of this chapter or any provision of Chapter 15.34 (Fire Code) of the El Monte Municipal Code. Any permittee whose permit is revoked, shall be barred from receiving a permit under this chapter for up to one year from the date of revocation. 
B.  Upon the revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the Chief of Police may order the immediate removal closure and removal of the previously permitted fireworks stand. The cost of such removal shall be borne solely and exclusively by the permittee. In the event the permittee shall fail to remove a fireworks stand within the period of time authorized by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police may order the fireworks stand removed by the city and the cost incurred by the city for undertaking such removal shall be a joint and several liability of the permittee and all persons who caused the violation or violations giving rise to the revocation of the permit. 
(Prior code § 6395.3) 
(Ord. No. 21, § 5, 3-19-2013)  
8.16.050 - Fireworks wholesalers. 
A.  Each fireworks distributor/wholesaler who is supplying one or more of the non-profit organizations who is a permittee under this chapter, shall annually submit a public education plan to the city care of the City Manager no later than 5:30 p.m. on June 1. The public education plan shall outline the public safety and education efforts for that year that have been initiated supported and/or delivered by each fireworks distributor/wholesaler within the city. Said public education plan should include but is not limited to samples of all the materials and the extent of distribution of all of the safety and education materials discussed in that wholesaler's /distributor's plan. 
B.  All fireworks distributors/wholesalers shall be required to procure and maintain a city of El Monte business license under Chapter 5.04 of the El Monte Municipal Code and pay the city's business license tax pursuant to El Monte Municipal Code Section 5.08.030. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 6, 3-19-2013)  
Chapter 8.20 - SOLID WASTE—REMOVAL, COLLECTION, DISPOSAL AND DIVERSION 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Duty to secure containers. 
All containers used to gather, contain and/or temporarily place solid waste and/or recyclable materials pending collection by a franchisee shall be stored with the tops securely closed or fastened when stored outdoors. All such containers shall also be maintained so that no solid waste or recyclable materials placed therein escape from the container. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.020 - Proper placement/storage of waste and waste containers. 
A.  General Prohibitions. No person shall store or otherwise place solid waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste, medical waste, recyclable materials or any container containing the same: 
1.  Within any public street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way; 
2.  Within any residential front yard setback area; or 
3.  Within any portion of a residential sideyard setback visible from the public street or other public right-of-way. 
B.  Limited Exception to General Prohibition. Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, the temporary placement of a cart within the public right-of-way shall be permitted for purposes of routine collection by a franchisee provided: 
1.  The cart is placed at the specific location within the public right-of-way designated by the franchisee performing collection services or at such other location as may be designated by the city in the interest of public safety; and 
2.  Placement of the cart at the right-of-way location so designated by the franchisee will not result in the obstruction of pedestrian or vehicle traffic or otherwise pose an unreasonable danger to pedestrians or vehicles using the public right-of-way; and 
3.  Such cart is so placed no earlier than four p.m. of the day immediately preceding the day upon which solid waste and/or recyclable materials are routinely collected by the franchisee and are thereafter removed no later than seven p.m. on the collection day. 
C.  Limited Placement of Bins. Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, the temporary placement of a bin within the public right-of-way shall be permitted for purposes of routine collection by a franchisee provided: 
1.  It is impossible or otherwise infeasible for the franchisee to collect waste from the bin while the bin is situated upon the premises to which it has been provided; 
2.  The bin is placed at a specific location within the public right-of-way designated by the franchisee performing collection services or at such other location as may be designated by the city in the interest of public safety; 
3.  Placement of the bin at the right-of-way location so designated by the franchisee will not result in the obstruction of pedestrian or vehicle traffic or otherwise pose an unreasonable danger to pedestrians or vehicles using the public right-of-way; and 
4.  The bin is reflectorized on all four (4) sides. Such bins must also be equipped with such other safety devices as may be mandated by the Environmental Services Division or by way of a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee who has provided the bin; and 
5.  The bin is so placed no earlier than four a.m. of the day upon which solid waste and/or recyclable materials are routinely collected by the franchisee and are thereafter removed no later than seven p.m. of the same day. 
The placement of bins in strict accordance with the terms and conditions of a trash bin encroachment permit issued pursuant to Section 8.20.268 of this chapter is also permitted. 
D.  Exceptions to the Exceptions. No container may be placed or stored on a public street during posted street sweeping hours. No container may be placed or stored on a public street, sidewalk or on any portion of the public right-of-way during such other restricted periods as may be posted by the city. 
E.  Storage in Violation of Land Use Approvals. Except as otherwise authorized under this chapter, no person may store or place solid waste, hazardous waste, hazardous substances, hazardous contaminants, medical waste or radioactive waste or any container containing the same upon any premises or other real property parcel in a manner, or at a location, that violates or is otherwise contrary to any city-approved land use authorization, including but not limited to the terms of any applicable conditional use permit, subdivision map, parcel map, variance or modification. 
F.  Pickup Hours for Franchisees. 
1.  The collection and pickup of solid waste by a franchisee as authorized by way of a franchise agreement shall be restricted to the hours of six a.m. to seven p.m. Monday through Friday and the hours of eight a.m. to six p.m. on Saturday, except as otherwise authorized by way of a valid city permit, franchise agreement or other written authorization from the city. 
2.  No franchisee may conduct pickups or collections on Sunday, except as otherwise authorized by way of a valid city permit, franchise agreement or other written authorization from the city. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.030 - Prohibition against scavenging. 
A.  General Prohibition. No person shall remove, rummage through or scavenge the contents of any container used to gather, contain and/or store solid waste and/or recyclable materials pending routine collection by a franchisee. 
B.  Limited Exceptions to General Prohibition. The prohibition set forth under subsection A of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  The owner of the container; 
2.  The owner (including the agents and employees of the owner) of any premises, or real property parcel to which the container has been provided pursuant to a contractual arrangement authorized under this chapter between the owner and a franchisee; 
3.  The tenant (including the agents and employees of the tenant) of any premises or other real property parcel to which the container has been provided pursuant to a contractual arrangement authorized under this chapter between the tenant and the franchisee who has provided the container; 
4.  The tenant (including the agents and employees of the tenant) of any premises or other real property parcel where the container in question has been provided incident to the tenant's tenancy and for the tenant's exclusive use; 
5.  The agents or employees of any franchisee. 
For purposes of this subsection B, any exception accorded to "agents or employees" shall require that such "agents or employees" be acting in the normal and lawful course and scope of their agency or employment. To the extent such agents or employees are not acting within the normal and lawful course and scope of their agency, the exceptions afforded under this subsection B shall not apply. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.040 - Prohibition against unauthorized tampering or removal of containers or bins. 
A.  General Prohibition. With respect to any container provided by a franchisee to a person, premises or other real property parcel, no person may: 
1.  Tamper or meddle with the container; 
2.  Damage, deface or destroy the container; 
3.  Remove the container from private or public property; or 
4.  Remove the container from any location where it has been lawfully placed for the purpose of having its contents routinely collected by a franchisee. 
B.  Container Owner's Exception to General Prohibition. The prohibitions set forth under subsection A of this section shall not apply to the owner of the container or the owner's agents or employees acting the normal and lawful course and scope of their agency or employment. Nothing in this subsection B shall authorize a container owner or its agents or employees to enter upon any secured and/or restricted portion of private or public property to remove a container without the consent of the real property owner or any person who exercises lawful possession and control over such real property. 
C.  Property Owner's and Tenant's Exception to General Prohibition. The prohibitions set forth under subsections (A)(3) and (4) of this section shall not apply to the owner or tenant of the private or public property to which the container has been provided; nor shall these same prohibitions apply to the agents or employees of the owner or tenant of such real property, provided such agents or employees are acting in the normal and lawful course and scope of their agency or employment. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.050 - Prohibition against burial and improper depositing of wastes. 
No person may deposit or bury, or cause to be deposited or buried, solid waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste or medical waste upon any premises or other real property parcel located within the city. No person may authorize the depositing or burying of solid waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste or medical waste anywhere within the city. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.060 - Prohibition against unlawful collection/retention of franchisee. 
A.  No person, other than a franchisee, may provide any of the following varieties services within the city: 
1.  Solid waste handling services; and/or 
2.  Services for the collection, transportation, storage, transfer or processing of recyclable materials where such services are rendered for compensation in a manner resulting in a net payment to the person rendering such services. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, the owner or occupant of any nonvacant premises must retain the services of a franchisee duly authorized to serve the premises in question in accordance with the franchise it has been awarded and the franchise agreement to which it is a party. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.070 - Prohibition against the depositing of wastes into the container of another. 
No person may take solid waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste, or medical waste generated from one premises or other real property parcel within the city and: 
1.  Deposit the same at another premises or upon another real property parcel within the city; or 
2.  Deposit the same in a container provided for the use of another premises or other real property parcel within the city. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.080 - Prohibition against contamination of recyclable materials/solid waste. 
No person may knowingly contaminate solid waste, recyclable materials and/or green waste which has been placed in a container for collection with any substance which may cause the final disposition of such materials to be unacceptable for potential recycling, reuse or remanufacture regardless of whether or not the material possesses the ability to be cleaned, purified, or otherwise reconditioned for placement into a qualified waste stream or other remanufacture, recycling or reuse process. Such prohibited contaminants include but are not limited to hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste and medical waste. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.090 - Prohibition against placement of wastes in the public right-of-way. 
No person shall scatter or accumulate solid waste; hazardous substances; hazardous waste; hazardous contaminants; radioactive waste; medical waste; or the like upon any public street, sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.100 - Prohibition against accumulation of wastes. 
A.  Any person who owns, leases or otherwise occupies a premises or other real property parcel within the city shall keep the same in a neat, clean and sanitary condition. Any person who acts as the agent or employee of a person who owns, leases or otherwise occupies a premises or other real property parcel within the city shall keep the same in a neat, clean and sanitary condition. 
B.  No person shall accumulate, or permit the accumulation of, solid waste; hazardous substances; hazardous waste; hazardous contaminants; radioactive waste; medical waste; or stagnant water, upon any premises or other real property parcel within the city. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.110 - Prohibition against burning of wastes. 
A.  General Prohibition. No person may burn any solid waste, hazardous substance, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste or medical waste within the city. 
B.  Limited Exception to General Prohibition. Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, the burning of solid waste shall be permitted provided: 
1.  Such burning is conducted at a properly licensed and permitted, city-approved incinerator or transformation facility; or is conducted with the use of a device for which a city permit has been issued; 
2.  The incinerator or transformation facility complies with all applicable orders, rules, regulations and laws of the city; the South Coast Air Quality Management District; the state of California; the federal government of the United States of America; and 
3.  The incinerator facility or transformation facility maintains and is in compliance with any and all required permits issued by South Coast Air Quality Management District and all other agencies with oversight of air quality. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.120 - Prohibition against illegal dumping. 
No person may dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose of solid waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, medical waste, or radioactive waste upon any premises or other real property parcel within the city. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.130 - Prohibition against street transfers. 
A.  General Prohibition. No person may transfer the load of one collection vehicle to another collection vehicle upon any public street, public right-of-way, or public property; or upon any private property, the lawful use of which does not include such handling of solid waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste, or medical waste. 
B.  Exception to General Prohibition. The prohibition set forth under subsection A of this section shall not apply under any circumstance in which a vehicle to vehicle transfer is necessary owing to mechanical failure or damage to the vehicle from which a load is removed. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.140 - Disposition of green waste. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any person from gathering green waste generated by a premises or other real property parcel owned or occupied by such person, provided such gathering is performed in compliance with, and/or in the furtherance of, a composting or other green waste recycling program approved by the city or otherwise authorized under state law. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the gathering, removal and transportation of uncontaminated green waste generated by a premises or other real property parcel by a person possessing a city business license for lawn and gardening services where such green waste is gathered incident to the performance of landscaping and garden services authorized under the city business license. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.150 - Donation and sale of recyclable materials. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person to donate or sell recyclable materials owned by that person, provided that any such donation, sale or other disposal is performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.160 - Residential premises—Adherence to storage, handling and disposal requirements. 
A.  General Requirement. No owner or occupant of a residential premises shall engage in conduct that constitutes a violation of the prohibitions set forth under this chapter. 
B.  Retention of Franchisee. Except as otherwise authorized under this chapter, each owner of a nonvacant residential premises shall be required to retain the services of a franchisee for the provision of: 
1.  Solid waste handling services; and/or 
2.  Services for the collection, transportation, storage, transfer and/or processing of recyclable materials where such services are rendered for compensation in a manner that results in a net payment to the person rendering such service. 
Solid waste generated by, or otherwise accumulated upon, a residential premises shall be removed from the premises on a weekly basis at a minimum so as to prevent the unsanitary, unhealthy and/or unsightly accumulation of solid waste or to otherwise prevent the creation of a public nuisance. 
C.  Retention of Franchisee by Tenant. The owner of a nonvacant residential premises may authorize an occupying lessee or licensee to contract directly with a franchisee provided: 
1.  Such authorization is accomplished by way of a binding written agreement between the owner and the lessee or licensee (e.g., as a term of any lease or license agreement); and 
2.  The franchisee retained by the lessee or licensee is one duly authorized under the terms of its franchise agreement to serve the residential premises in question. 
D.  Primary Responsibility of Owner. No delegation of responsibility authorized under subsection C of this section shall operate to relieve the owner of a nonvacant residential premises of the primary responsibility to maintain the owner's residential premises in compliance with this chapter and adhere to all of the prohibitions and requirements set forth herein including but not limited to the requirement to retain a franchisee. The owner or occupying lessee or licensee of the residential premises, whichever the case may be, shall maintain any account with a franchisee in good standing and shall not allow such account to become delinquent. 
E.  Residential Delinquencies. No agreement between a residential premises customer and a residential premises franchisee may impose delinquent billing provisions inconsistent with those set forth under this section. A service bill lawfully issued by a residential premise franchisee shall be considered past due if not paid by a residential premises customer within forty (40) calendar days from the date payment is due or such longer grace period as may be authorized by written agreement between the customer and the residential premises franchisee. If a service bill becomes past due, the residential premises franchisee shall be required to issue notice to the residential premises customer that the service bill is delinquent. If the service bill is not paid in full within seventy-five (75) calendar days from the date the service bill is deemed past due, the residential premises franchisee shall issue a second notice of delinquency; this second notice of delinquency shall be sent to the residential premises customer and to the owner of the residential premises, if different from the residential premises customer. Each delinquency notice shall include the following information at a minimum: 
1.  A statement advising the customer that the service bill is past due; 
2.  Information as to the service period to which the past due sums relate; and 
3.  Information as to where the customer remit any and all past due sums; 
4.  Information as to the proper procedures for disputing any sums set forth in a service bill; and 
5.  Notice in bold print and capital letters that the matter will be submitted to the city for collection pursuant to the tax lien procedures established under this section, if the bill is not paid within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date a second notice of delinquency is dated. 
No later than the close of business on May 1st of each calendar year, a residential premises franchisee may submit to the city a schedule of all unpaid delinquent billings from May 1st of the preceding year to the present accompanied by the corresponding parcel number for the residential premises in question, as established or otherwise utilized by the Los Angeles County Assessor. The schedule shall also state the amount due for each account for inclusion of said amount upon the property tax roll for collection by the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. No delinquent billing shall be eligible for submission to the city on or before the twenty-first day following the issuance of the franchisee's second billing notice. No delinquent billing shall remain eligible for submission to the city after one year from the date the delinquent billing first becomes eligible for submission to the city. 
F.  Right of Customers to Dispute Bill. Nothing in subsections D and E, above, shall be interpreted to prevent a residential premises customer or the owner of a residential premises from pursuing or availing himself or herself of all legal means for disputing any charges or fees billed by a residential premises franchisee. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.170 - Commercial and multifamily premises—Adherence to storage, handling and disposal requirements. 
A.  General Requirement. No owner or occupant of a commercial premises or a multifamily premises shall engage in conduct that constitutes a violation of the prohibitions set forth under this chapter. 
B.  Retention of Franchisee. Except as otherwise authorized under this chapter, each owner of a nonvacant commercial premises or a nonvacant multifamily premises shall be required to retain the services of a franchisee for the provision of: 
1.  Solid waste handling services; and/or 
2.  Services for the collection, transportation, storage, transfer and/or processing of recyclable materials where such services are rendered in exchange for compensation in a manner that results in a net payment to the person rendering such services. 
Solid waste generated by, or otherwise accumulated upon, a commercial premises or multifamily premises shall be removed from the premises on a weekly basis at a minimum so as to prevent the unsanitary, unhealthy and/or unsightly accumulation of solid waste; or to otherwise prevent the creation of a public nuisance. 
C.  Retention of Franchisee by Tenant. The owner of commercial premises occupied by a single lessee or a single licensee may authorize the lessee or licensee to contract directly with a franchisee provided: 
1.  Such authorization is accomplished by way of a binding written agreement between the owner and the lessee or licensee (e.g., as a term of any lease or license agreement); and 
2.  The franchisee retained by the lessee or licensee is one duly authorized under the terms of its franchise agreement to serve the commercial premises in question. The owner of a multifamily premises may not delegate responsibility for retaining a franchisee to the occupants of a multifamily premises. 
D.  Primary Responsibility of Owner. No delegation of responsibility authorized under subsection C of this section shall operate to relieve the owner of a commercial premises of the primary responsibility to maintain the owner's commercial premises in compliance with this chapter and adhere to all of the prohibitions and requirements set forth herein including but not limited to the requirement to retain a franchisee. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.180 - Temporary projects—Solid waste handling. 
A.  Retention of Temporary Services Franchisee. Except as otherwise authorized under this chapter, the owner of a premises or other real property parcel or the owner's duly authorized agents, employees, contractors shall be required to retain a franchisee duly authorized to provide temporary services in connection with any of the following: 
1.  Any project, activity or undertaking involving construction, demolition, additions, alterations, remodeling, encroachments, tenant improvements or grading when such projects, activities or undertakings require a building, demolition, encroachment and/or grading permit; 
2.  Any renovation and repair projects performed at all varieties of premises (including but not limited to roof tear-offs); 
3.  Any premises cleanouts (including but not limited to apartment cleanouts); 
4.  Any warehouse cleanups; 
5.  Nuisance and/or weed abatement cleanups; or 
6.  Any street/road maintenance cleanups. 
B.  Primary Responsibility of Owner. No delegation of responsibility authorized under subsection A of this section shall operate to relieve the owner of a premises or other real property parcel from the primary responsibility to retain a temporary services franchisee in connection with any of the types of projects, activities or undertakings enumerated under subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.190 - Transfer or processing stations and solid waste recovery facilities. 
No person shall operate a transfer station, processing station, landfill, material recovery facility or any other facility covered under the provisions of the Public Resources Code Sections 40100 through 44107, 44150 and 44152, or any other applicable sections of the Public Resources Code relative to such operations, including those sections specified in Division 31 commencing with Section 50000, as any of aforementioned sections may be amended from time to time, from or at any location within the city, unless such person is authorized to do so by the granting of a franchise by the City Council pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.200 - Violation—Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in a city or county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both. Each separate day, or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.210 - Source reduction and recycling element. 
The Deputy City Manager for Community Development shall prepare a source reduction and recycling element, inclusive of a household hazardous waste element (collectively, an "SRRE"). The SRRE shall be submitted to the City Council for approval in accordance with AB 939. Thereafter, the Deputy City Manager for Community Development shall submit periodic written reports to the City Council detailing the city's implementation of any and all programs set forth under the SRRE. An initial report shall be submitted to the City Council no later than December 1, 1992 and thereafter the Deputy City Manager for Community Development shall submit additional reports in accordance with a schedule of SRRE program implementation and assessment reports as adopted by City Council resolution. A copy of the SRRE shall be maintained for inspection and copying as a public record in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.220 - Administrative rulings. 
A.  The City Manager may issue and disseminate administrative rulings to customers, franchisees and any other person providing solid waste handling services; or providing services for the collection, transportation, storage, transfer or processing of recyclable materials: 
1.  Indicating whether or not such services may lawfully be rendered to a particular premises or customer in accordance with this chapter or any franchise awarded pursuant to Chapter 18.12 (Solid Waste Handling Franchises) of the El Monte Municipal Code; or 
2.  Any other dispute or disagreement between a franchisee and a customer concerning the manner in which service is to be provided, or may be provided, pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 18.12 or an applicable franchise agreement. 
B.  Such administrative rulings are intended to resolve any disagreement or dispute as between customers, franchisees and/or any other person operating within the city. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.260 - Projects subject to C&D diversion requirements. 
A.  Covered C&D Projects. Any project, activity or undertaking involving construction, demolition, additions, alterations, remodeling, encroachments, tenant improvements or grading within the city shall be considered a "covered project" for purposes of this chapter when such project, activity or undertaking requires a demolition permit, building permit, encroachment permit and/or grading permit. 
B.  Exceptions. Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, the following projects, activities or undertakings shall not be considered covered projects within the meaning of this chapter. 
1.  Residential additions and alterations which do not increase the building's conditioned area, volume, or size. 
2.  Work which only requires a plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit. 
3.  A seismic tie-down project. 
4.  A roofing project which does not include tearing-off of an existing roof. 
5.  The installation of new fencing, but not replacement of existing fencing. 
6.  The installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures and covers when no foundation or other structural building modifications are required. 
7.  The installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as signs or antennas which do not require structural building modifications. 
8.  City-sponsored projects that have been specifically exempted by the city. City-sponsored projects include, but are not limited to, city funded street improvements and construction or improvement of city-owned property. 
9.  Emergency demolition which is necessary to protect the public health and safety from an unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life or health. 
10.  Projects, as determined by the Public Works Director or his or her designee in his or her sole and absolute discretion and judgement, as not generating construction or demolition debris, including but not limited to, projects generating debris that cannot be recycled or for which there is no outlet for the material generated. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2908, § 1, 1-24-2017)  
8.20.261 - C&D diversion requirements. 
A.  Sixty-five (65) percent waste diversion, or the State-mandated construction and demolition diversion percentage as set forth and established in the current edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, whichever is greater, for covered projects. Each covered project applicant shall cause at least sixty-five (65) percent, or the State-mandated construction and demolition diversion percentage, whichever is greater, by weight of C&D materials generated by the covered project to be diverted from landfilling or other form of disposal. 
B.  Calculating Compliance. As a means of confirming compliance with subsection A of this section, the diversion of C&D materials shall be calculated by dividing (1) the total weight of C&D materials generated by but diverted from a covered project; by (2) the total weight of all wastes generated by the covered project. The total weight of all wastes generated by a covered project equals the sum of: (1) all C&D materials generated by but diverted from the covered project; plus (2) the weight of all other waste generated by the covered project. The calculations used to ascertain compliance with the diversion requirements of this section must be based upon the data documented by and derived from weight receipts and recycling receipts issued by any and all facilities that receive an applicant's C&D materials and/or nondiverted wastes. The City Council, by resolution, may also require such additional documentation as may be required to precisely and reliably verify compliance provided the city's request for such additional documentation does not conflict with approved guidelines or protocols of the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery. 
C.  Performance Security. 
1.  Any person who applies for a demolition, building, encroachment and/or grading permit in connection with a covered project shall submit, along with an application for the same, a performance security in an amount time to time, amended, by way of a City Council resolution. For purposes of this chapter, "performance security" means a noninterest-bearing deposit in cash; check; money order; or credit card acceptable to the city. Performance security, in the sole discretion of the Chief Building Official, may also include a corporate surety bond or instrument of credit including a letter of credit as approved by the Chief Building Official on a case-by-case basis in his or her reasonable discretion. 
2.  If the Chief Building Official determines the applicant has complied with the diversion mandates of this section, he or she shall cause the performance security to be released to the applicant within thirty (30) days from the date the Chief Building Official issues written notice of compliance. The performance security shall also be released if the Chief Building Official determines that the performance security was erroneously paid or collected; or that permit(s) applied for in connection with the covered project have been expressly withdrawn in writing before any work authorized under any permit(s) has commenced; in either event, the performance security shall be refunded within thirty (30) days from the date the Chief Building Official is reasonably satisfied that either circumstance applies. 
3.  If the Chief Building Official determines the applicant has failed to comply with the diversion mandates of this section, the applicant shall forfeit that percentage of the total deposit equivalent the percentage by which the applicant has failed to meet the mandated diversion requirements (example: if fifty two percent (52%) diversion is reached as compared to the sixty-five (65%) diversion requirement, then eighty (80%) of the security deposit may be returned to the applicant). The applicant's failure to meet the diversion requirements of this section notwithstanding, the amount of a partial refund afforded an applicant may be increased if the work performed pursuant to a city-issued permit(s) results in the covered project obtaining certification under the "Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" ("LEED") green building rating system of the United States Green Building Council. The amount of the refund credit shall be in accordance with a credit schedule established, and from time to time amended, by City Council resolution. The amount of the credit received shall correlate with the level of certification obtained and such other criteria as may be established by City Council resolution. The foregoing notwithstanding, no such credit shall be made available until such time as the credit schedule and related criteria are established and approved by the City Council. 
4.  All forfeited performance security sums shall be placed in a designated fund for the purpose of: 
a.  Recovering costs associated with the administration and enforcement of this chapter (excluding costs recovered through the administrative fee set forth in subsection D of this section, below); 
b.  Furthering the recycling programs and diversion goals of the city; and 
c.  The development and improvement of infrastructure that will further the diversion objectives of this chapter. 
Such funds may not be granted, loaned or otherwise deposited into the city's general fund and must be used solely for the purposes enumerated above. 
D.  Administrative Fee. In addition to the performance security, the applicant shall also pay a nonrefundable administrative fee in an amount equivalent to one percent of the covered project's value. The foregoing notwithstanding, the aforementioned administrative fee may not exceed the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2908, § 2, 1-24-2017)  
8.20.262 - C&D collection options. 
A.  Collection Options. Permittees must complete a bin rental form and comply with collection and hauling requirements set forth in the bin rental form. The city reserves the right to amend the bin rental form requirements at any time. 
B.  Nonfee Recycling Pickup/Sale or Donation of Recyclable Materials. 
1.  Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, an applicant may allow the third party collection of source separated recyclable materials; provided such service is rendered free of charge or is otherwise rendered in a manner that results in a net payment to the applicant, not the person rendering the service. 
2.  Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, an applicant may donate or sell source separated recyclable materials to a third party. 
C.  Except as otherwise permitted under this subsection B, the processing of solid waste shall be conducted at a duly licensed and/or permitted processing facility approved by the city in writing. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2908, § 3, 1-24-2017)  
8.20.263 - Mandatory C&D reporting requirements. 
A.  Preparation and Submission of Diversion Plan. Along with any application for a demolition, building, encroachment and/or grading permit, the applicant for a covered project shall also prepare and submit a diversion plan which: 
1.  Identifies and describes the nature and purpose of the covered project and its estimated completion period; 
2.  Identifies the types of improvements to be made in the furtherance of the covered project; 
3.  Identifies the types of on-site work activities to be performed in the furtherance of the covered project; 
4.  Identifies all materials (including C&D materials) targeted for diversion; and 
5.  Acknowledges and declares that no items of Universal Waste from the covered project will be disposed of in either household trash or landfills. 
The diversion plan shall be reviewed by the Chief Building Official. The Chief Building Official may approve the diversion plan as submitted; approve the submitted diversion plan subject to amendments, modifications and other conditions; or reject the diversion plan as submitted. The applicant shall comply with the terms of the diversion plan approved by the Chief Building Official. 
B.  Final Diversion Report. Within sixty (60) days from the date of completion of any covered project as evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall submit a final diversion report (hereinafter, the "final report") to the Chief Building Official, which report shall assist the Chief Building Official in determining whether the diversion requirements of Section 8.20.261 have been met with respect to the covered project. The final report, at a minimum, shall include the following: 
1.  A detailed summary of efforts made to meet the diversion requirement set forth in a form approved by the city; 
2.  A copy of the hauling agreement with the temporary services franchisee authorized to provide temporary services within the geographic area in which the covered project is located; 
3.  All invoices received from the temporary services franchisee serving the covered project if a temporary services franchise is used to collect solid waste (including C&D materials) generated by the covered project; 
4.  If the applicant engages in self-hauling, all weight tickets and receipts from the facilities that received C&D materials generated by the covered project showing the actual weight of material accepted at the facility and the amount of the material that was diverted and disposed of. The weight report must be from scales in compliance with the state and county regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For solid waste (including C&D materials) for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, the material type and a volumetric measurement shall be reported; 
5.  If the covered project contains contamination by hazardous contaminants, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, medical waste or radioactive waste, the applicant shall be required to provide documentation demonstrating and evidencing the pre-existence and/or prior occurrence of such contaminants through no fault of the applicant. The applicant shall also provide receipts, or other like documentation from the facility that received the contaminants as well as the actual weight of contaminants accepted; and 
6.  Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to describing its efforts to comply with this chapter. 
C.  Revisions to Estimated Completion Date for Covered Projects. If the applicant for a covered project with an initial estimated completion period of less than sixty (60) days later determines that completion of the covered project will likely require sixty (60) days or more, the applicant shall communicate such determination in writing to the Chief Building Official along with a revised estimated completion period and an explanation as to the reason why the initial estimated completion period must be revised. If this determination is made prior to the mid-point of the revised estimated completion period, an interim progress report shall be due within five (5) calendar days of the mid-point of the revised estimated completion period. If the determination is made after the mid-point of the revised estimated completion period, an interim progress report shall be due within five (5) calendar days of the date upon which the revised estimated completion period is submitted to the Chief Building Official or such extended period of time as may be authorized by the Chief Building Official in his or her sole discretion. The Chief Building Official may also waive the requirement for an interim progress report altogether, if the revised estimated completion period extends the initial estimated completion period by a period of time determined to be de minimis in the sole discretion of the Chief Building Official. The failure to notify the Chief Building Official of a revised estimated completion period shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2908, § 4, 1-24-2017)  
8.20.264 - C&D diversion compliance. 
A.  Determination of Compliance. The Chief Building Official shall have final discretion in determining compliance with the diversion mandate set forth under Section 8.20.261, above. 
B.  Adequacy of Final Report. If the applicant's final report demonstrates that solid waste, including C&D materials, generated by the covered project were not collected by a temporary services franchisee, the Chief Building Official shall make a preliminary determination as to whether the applicant's final report provides information sufficient for the Chief Building Official to make a determination as to whether or not the diversion mandates of Section 8.20.261 have been met. Within thirty (30) days from the date the applicant's final report is submitted to the Chief Building Official, the Chief Building Official shall notify the applicant of whether the report is complete and/or sufficient. If the Chief Building Official determines the applicant's final report is incomplete or lacks sufficient information to determine compliance or noncompliance, the Chief Building Official shall notify the applicant of the reasons for the report's inadequacy in writing. Thereafter, the applicant shall be granted ten (10) business days to respond with information identified to make its final report adequate. Failure to respond with adequate information within ten (10) business days shall be considered a failure to comply. The Chief Building Official shall notify the applicant in writing of the failure to comply. 
D.  Notification of Failure to Meet Diversion Requirements. If the Chief Building Official determines the applicant has failed to meet the diversion requirements of Section 8.20.261, the Chief Building Official shall notify the applicant of its failure to comply in writing. Except as otherwise provided under subsection F of this section, below, the applicant's failure to meet the diversion mandate of Section 8.20.261 shall result in the forfeiture of a percentage of the performance security calculated in the manner set forth under subsection C of Section 8.20.261, above. 
E.  Reduction/Waiver of Diversion Mandate. Within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the Chief Building Official's determination that an applicant failed to meet the diversion mandate of Section 8.20.261, above, but prior to the actual forfeiture of all or any portion of the performance security, the applicant may submit a written request to the Chief Building Official requesting the reduction or waiver of the diversion mandate. Upon the timely submission of such request, the Chief Building Official may reduce or waive the diversion mandate of Section 8.20.261 if he or she finds by clear and convincing evidence: 
1.  There are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances or conditions associated with the covered project that do not apply generally to other similar projects or undertakings; and 
2.  Such exceptional and extraordinary circumstances or conditions are the direct cause of the applicant's failure to meet the diversion mandates of Section 8.20.261; and 
3.  The applicant has undertaken all reasonable measures necessary to mitigate its failure to meet the diversion mandate of Section 8.20.261, including but not limited to all measures set forth in the diversion plan; and 
4.  A reduction or waiver of the diversion mandate will not violate applicable law or jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare. 
If the Chief Building Official determines a reduction or waiver of the diversion mandate is merited under the circumstances, he or she shall make a written finding stating the reasons for allowing the applicant to fall below the mandated diversion requirement without forfeiting any or all of the performance security. In rendering its decision, the Chief Building Official may request such additional information as he or she deems necessary to warrant a reduction or waiver of the diversion mandate. 
F.  Failure to Submit Final Report. If an applicant fails to file a final report within the sixty (60) day time frame set forth under subsection B of Section 8.20.262, above, the applicant shall be considered to have failed to comply with the diversion requirements of Section 8.20.261 and the entire performance security shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.265 - False information. 
The submission of false information to the city by any person in connection with a building, demolition, encroachment or grading permit application, diversion plan, interim progress report, final report, appeal or any other circumstances in which information is provided to the city shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.266 - Enforcement. 
In addition to the forfeiture of the performance security under Section 8.20.261 for any violation of the procedures set forth under Sections 8.20.260 through 8.20.265, the city shall have discretion to take any or all of the following actions: 
1.  Revoke or suspend the building, demolition, grading or encroachment permit of the violator; 
2.  Bring a civil action for restitution and/or damages; 
3.  Seek injunctive relief; and/or 
4.  Refer the violation for prosecution as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.267 - Appeal. 
The applicant may file an administrative appeal with the City Manager on any ruling of the Chief Building Official makes pursuant to the procedures set forth under Sections 8.20.260 through 8.20.26.266. Notice of appeal from the ruling of the Chief Building Official must be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the Chief Building Official's final determination or decision on a matter. The decision of the City Manager or his or her designee relative to any matter within the jurisdiction of the Chief Building Official shall be final and shall not be further appealed to the City Council or to any other city body or official. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.268 - Trash bin encroachment permits. 
A.  No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any bin of any variety on any public street, sidewalk, parkway, alley, street shoulder or any other portion of the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this section. For purposes of this section, the aforementioned permit shall hereinafter be referred to as "trash bin encroachment permits." 
B.  Applications for a trash bin encroachment permit shall be submitted to the Environmental Services Division. Trash bin encroachment permits may only be issued in connection with: 
1.  Any covered project as defined under Section 8.20.260 of this chapter; 
2.  Renovation and repair projects performed at all varieties of premises (including but not limited to roof tear-offs); 
3.  Premises cleanouts (including but not limited to apartment cleanouts); 
4.  Warehouse cleanups; 
5.  Nuisance and/or weed abatement cleanups; and 
6.  Street/road maintenance cleanups. 
C.  As a standard condition to the issuance of a trash bin encroachment permit, any bin subject to such a permit shall be reflectorized and shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the bin owner/provider. In the event that any reasonably foreseeable risk of harm cannot be reasonably eliminated, the Environmental Services Division may deny an application for a trash bin encroachment permit. The Environmental Services Division may revoke any trash bin encroachment permit on the basis of the permittee's failure to comply with any conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007)  
8.20.270 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth under this section as follows: 
"AB 939" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq.), and its implementing regulations as both presently exist or as they may be amended, modified or updated from time to time. 
"Bin" or "trash bin" means a metal container, including but not limited to dumpsters, compactors, roll-off bins, roll-off boxes and the like. All bins/trash bins shall be installed with safety features, including but not necessarily limited to, reflectors and such other safety features as may be required under the terms of a franchise, franchise agreement or this chapter. 
"C&D materials" means solid waste, such as building materials, packing and inert debris generated by "covered projects." Common C&D materials include but are not limited to: lumber, metals, pipe, wire, sheet metal, asphalt, concrete, stone, brick, slate, masonry, drywall, carpet, carpet padding and foam, packing materials, cardboard, paper, construction materials, doors, windows, fixtures, plastics, appliances, ceiling or floor tiles, green waste or landscape debris related to land development such as soil, brush, trees, rock, branches or stumps. 
"Cart" means a plastic or otherwise nonmetallic container with a hinged lid and wheels which may be serviced by an automated or semi-automated process, as opposed to a manual process of lifting and dumping. 
"Chief Building Official" means the Chief Building Official of the El Monte Building Division or designee. 
"City" or "city of El Monte" means the city of El Monte, a municipal corporation and general law city, and all the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the city of El Monte as presently existing or as such boundaries may be modified during the term of the agreement codified in this chapter. 
"City Council" means the El Monte City Council, inclusive of the Mayor of the city of El Monte, within the meaning of Chapter 2.04 (City Council) and Chapter 2.08 (Mayor) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the city of El Monte within the meaning of Chapter 2.12 of the El Monte Municipal Code or the City Manager's designee. 
"Collect," "collection" or "collected" means to take physical possession of, transport and remove solid waste, recyclable materials and/or other like materials within the territorial boundaries of the city of El Monte. 
"Collection vehicle" means any legally authorized and legally compliant motorized vehicle designed for the collection of solid waste, recyclable materials or other discarded items, substances or materials. 
"Commercial premises" means any building, structure, lot or real property parcel upon which commercial, industrial, manufacturing or other like for-profit or nonprofit business activities are conducted and lawfully permitted, including but not limited to retail sales, office uses, services, mechanical repair services, entertainment services, restaurant services, hotel/motel/lodging services, medical facilities, wholesale operations, heavy manufacturing operations, light manufacturing operations, storage, warehousing, and industrial operations, but excluding residential premises upon which business activities are conducted when such activities are permitted under applicable zoning regulations and are not the primary use of the property. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this definition, a premises lawfully used for the following purposes shall be deemed to commercial premises for purposes of this chapter: adult residential facilities; assisted living facilities; convalescent homes; dormitories; extended stay motels; group residential facilities; group care facilities; hotels; motels; any lot, real property parcel or portion thereof lawfully used for the location of residential mobilehomes (e.g., any residential mobilehome park); and any residential portion of a mixed use development as the term "mixed use development" is defined under Section 17.04.020 of Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Conditioned area" means the total floor area of any dwelling, excluding the floor area that is not fully enclosed and outside laundries, outside storage rooms, garages, and carparks. 
"Container" means any and all types of receptacles designed, used and intended for the temporary deposit, accumulation and containment of solid waste, recyclable materials and other discarded items or materials. As used in this chapter, the term "container" is inclusive of carts, bins, and receptacles provided by customers such as plastic/metallic household trash cans. All containers provided to a customer by a franchisee shall identify the name, business address and telephone number of the franchisee. 
"Customer" means any person receiving solid waste handling services from a franchisee. 
"Disposal" or "disposed" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40192 of the California Public Resources Code. 
"Diversion" and "divert" mean and refer to the reduction or elimination of the amount of solid waste destined for solid waste disposal at solid waste landfills or transformation facilities in accordance with applicable federal, state or local laws and requirements; such activities include source reduction, recycling and composting. The term "diversion" as used in this chapter is also inclusive of the definition for "diversion" set forth under Section 40124 of the California Public Resources Code. 
"Dumpster" means a bin equipped with wheels and designed to be mechanically lifted by and emptied into or carted away by a collection vehicle. 
"Franchise," as an unmodified term, means a franchise approved and awarded in accordance with Chapter 18.12 (Solid Waste Handling Franchises) of the El Monte Municipal Code which authorizes a solid waste enterprise to perform of solid waste handling services and services for the collection, transportation, storage, transfer or processing of recyclable materials where such services are rendered for compensation in a manner the results in a net payment to the person rendering the services. 
"Franchise agreement" means any City Council approved agreement evidencing, memorializing, formalizing and detailing the scope, terms, conditions and requirements of a franchise awarded a solid waste enterprise in accordance with Chapter 18.12 (Solid Waste Handling Franchises) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Franchisee" means any solid waste enterprise awarded a franchise in accordance with Chapter 18.12 (Solid Waste Handling Franchises) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Green waste" means all tree and plant trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, branches, brush and similar materials; provided such materials are separated from and uncontaminated by other solid waste, hazardous waste, hazardous substances, hazardous contaminants, radioactive waste, or medical waste. For purposes of this definition, "green waste" also includes discarded holiday trees. 
"Hazardous contaminant" means: 
1.  Any substance, material or waste which falls within the definition of, or which otherwise qualifies as, a "hazardous material," "hazardous substance," "hazardous waste," "acutely hazardous waste," "extremely hazardous waste," "toxic waste," "pollutant" and/or "toxic substance" within the meaning of any or all of the following: 
a.  The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq., 
b.  The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq., 
c.  The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act ("HTMA"), 49 U.S.C. Section 5101 et seq., 
d.  The Clean Water Act ("CWA"), 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., 
e.  The Clean Air Act ("CAA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 7401 et seq., 
f.  Section 40141 of the California Public Resources Code, 
g.  Sections 25110.02, 25115 through 25117, 25281, 25316, 25501 and/or 25501.1 of the California Health and Safety Code; Section 13050 of the California Water Code, and 
h.  Any amendments, rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to such enumerated statutes and statutory schemes; 
2.  Any chemical which the Governor of the state of California has identified as a chemical known to the state of California to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity in accordance with Section 25249.8 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
3.  Any crude oil or refined or unrefined petroleum product or any fraction or derivative thereof; or 
4.  Any asbestos or asbestos-containing material. 
"Hazardous substance" means any of the following: 
1.  Any substances defined, regulated or listed (directly or by reference) as a hazardous substance, hazardous material, hazardous waste, toxic waste, pollutant or toxic substance or similarly identified as hazardous to human health or the environment, in or pursuant to: 
a.  The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., (CERCLA), 
b.  The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49 U.S.C. Section 1802, et seq., 
c.  The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq., 
d.  The Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., 
e.  California Health and Safety Code Sections 25115 through 25117, 25249.8, 25281 and 25316, 
f.  The Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 7901 et seq., and 
g.  California Water Code Section 13050; 
2.  Any amendments, rules or regulations promulgated to such enumerated statutes or acts currently existing or hereafter enacted; and 
3.  Any other hazardous or toxic substance, material, chemical, waste or pollutant identified as hazardous or toxic or regulated under any other applicable federal, state or local environmental law currently existing or hereinafter enacted, including, without limitation, asbestos, polychlorinated biphenyl's (PCBs), petroleum, methane gas, natural gas and synthetic fuel products and byproducts. 
"Hazardous waste" means all substances defined as "hazardous waste," "acutely hazardous waste" or "extremely hazardous waste" under California Health and Safety Code Sections 25117, 25110.02 and 25115, or in any amendments to or recodifications of such statutes, or identified and listed as hazardous waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant to the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.), all amendments thereto, and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. The term "hazardous waste" will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing meaning where a conflict exists in the definitions employed by two (2) or more governmental entities having concurrent or overlapping jurisdiction over hazardous waste. 
"Household hazardous wastes" or "HHW" are those wastes resulting from products purchased by the general public for household use which, because of their quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may pose a substantial known or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, disposed, or otherwise managed. 
"Local enforcement agency" shall have the same meaning as the meaning given to the term "enforcement agency" under Section 40130 of the California Public Resources Code. 
"Lot" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 17.04.020 of the El Monte Municipal Code as the same presently exists or as it may be modified or amended from time to time. 
"Materials recovery facility" or "MRF" means a permitted solid waste facility where solid wastes or recyclable materials are sorted or separated, by hand or by use of machinery, for the purposes of recycling or composting. 
"Medical waste" means waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act (Part 14 (commencing with Section 117600) of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code). 
"Multifamily premises" means: 
1.  Any single building or structure containing four (4) or more residential dwelling units; or 
2.  Any building, structure, lot or real property parcel containing two (2) or more residential dwelling units which the City Manager determines must receive solid waste handling services through the use of a shared bin(s) as such units may not reasonably receive individualized solid waste handling services through the use of carts or resident provided containers. 
The foregoing notwithstanding, residential dwelling units which are part of a "planned development" as the term is defined under Section 1351 of the California Civil Code shall not be considered multifamily premises but instead shall be considered residential premises. For purposes of illustration, "multifamily premises" include but are not necessarily limited to any apartment building or apartment structure containing four (4) or more residential units; or any single, exclusively residential high-rise/mid-rise building or structure. For purposes of this chapter, "multifamily premises" do not include "mixed used developments" as defined under Section 17.04.020 of the El Monte Municipal Code or any residential portion of a "mixed used development." 
"Permitted solid waste facility" means a solid waste facility for which there exists a solid waste facilities permit issued by the local enforcement agency and also approved by the California Integrated Waste Management Board California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery. 
"Person" means any individual, natural person, firm, association, organization, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, business trust, living trust, joint venture, the federal government of the United States, the state of California, the county of Los Angeles, a municipal corporation, or special purposes districts. The definition for "person" is also inclusive of the definition for "person" set forth under Section 40170 of the California Public Resources Code. The term "person" will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing meaning where a conflict exists in the definitions partially set forth under this definition and the definition set forth under Section 40170 of the California Public Resources Code. 
"Premises," as an unmodified term, means any building, structure, lot, real property parcel or portion thereof located within the territorial boundaries of the city of El Monte. The unmodified term "premises" is inclusive of all residential premises, multifamily premises and commercial premises as the same are defined under this chapter. 
"Processing" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40172 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Processing station" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40200 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Radioactive waste" means waste regulated pursuant to the Radiation Control Law (Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Recycle," "recycled" and "recycling" as unmodified terms, shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40180 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Recyclable materials" means any material, substance or item which has the potential to be recycled, including but not limited to any such materials, substances or items which may be contained within, or commingled with, solid waste and/or other materials, substances or items that are not capable of being recycled. 
"Recycling facility" means a facility designed and operated for the purpose of collecting and/or processing recyclable materials which is certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the Container Recycling and Litter Act of 1986. 
"Residential premises" means: 
1.  Any single building, structure, lot or real property parcel containing three (3) or fewer residential dwelling units, except to the extent the City Manager determines the residential dwelling units within such dwellings, buildings or structures must receive solid waste handling services through the use of a shared bin(s) as such units may not reasonably receive individualized solid waste handling services through the use of carts or resident-provided containers; or 
2.  Each residential dwelling unit which is part of a "planned development" as the term is defined under Section 1351 of the California Civil Code; or 
3.  Any single-family residential dwelling unit attached to one or more single-family residential dwelling units by a common vertical wall(s), with each dwelling unit located on a separate lot; or 
4.  Any second unit/granny flat. 
A residential premises which either has been or is unlawfully used or improved with more than three (3) residential dwelling units shall not by virtue of this definition or such unlawful improvement become a commercial premises or a multifamily premises but shall remain residential premises. 
"Reuse" means the recovery or reapplication of a material for uses similar or identical to its originally intended application, without manufacturing or preparation processes that significantly alter the material. 
"Roll-off bin" and "roll-off box" means a bin (including compactors) constructed to roll and be conveyed by a roll-off collection vehicle. 
"Scavenge" or "scavenging" means and refers to the unauthorized act of removing recyclable materials or any other commodity designated by the city to have recyclable properties or value by any person other than those expressly authorized under this chapter. 
"Self-hauling" or "self-haul" means and refers to the hauling of green waste and solid waste (including recyclable materials and C&D materials) to a landfill, recycling facility, permitted solid waste facility or for reuse provided such hauling is undertaken through the use of the self-hauler's own equipment and employees. "Self-hauling" does not include the contracting or subcontracting of hauling services with any third party, including, but not limited to, any solid waste enterprise that is not franchised to perform any variety of solid waste handling services within the city of El Monte. 
"Solid waste" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40191 of the California Public Resources Code, except to the extent that such definition is inclusive of substances or wastes which fall within the definition of "hazardous substances," "hazardous waste," or "hazardous contaminants" as defined under this chapter. Furthermore, in accordance with Section 40191 of the California Public Resources Code, "treated medical waste" (as opposed to medical waste that is not treated) shall be considered "solid waste." 
"Solid waste disposal" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40192 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Solid waste enterprise" shall have the meaning set forth under Section 40193 of the California Public Resources Code, its implementing regulations as both may be amended from time to time. 
"Solid waste facility" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40194 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Solid waste handling" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40195 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Source reduction" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40196 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Source reduction and recycling element" or "SRRE" means the source reduction and recycling element required pursuant to Section 41000 and 41300 of the California Public Resources Code. 
"Source-separated recyclable materials" means recyclable materials that have been segregated from nonrecyclable components of solid waste by the solid waste generator for purposes of recycling. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Temporary services" means solid waste handling services provided to a customer on an intermittent, nonpermanent, as-needed basis for specific projects, activities or undertakings that are of a temporary nature (i.e., that are finite in duration). In addition, such temporary services shall necessarily mean solid waste services performed only for that period of time necessary for the recipient of such services to complete the project, activity or undertaking for which the temporary services have been retained. For purposes of illustration, temporary services include, but are not necessarily limited to: 
1.  Any project, activity or undertaking involving construction, demolition, additions, alterations, remodeling, encroachments, tenant improvements or grading when such projects, activities or undertakings require a building, demolition, encroachment and/or grading permit; 
2.  Any renovation and repair projects performed at all varieties of premises (including but not limited to roof tear-offs); 
3.  Any premises cleanouts (including but not limited to apartment cleanouts); 
4.  Any warehouse cleanups; 
5.  Nuisance and/or weed abatement cleanups; or 
6.  Any street/road maintenance cleanups. 
"Transfer station" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 40200 of the California Public Resources Code as the same presently exists or as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Transformation facility" means a facility whose principal function is to convert, combust, or otherwise process solid waste by incineration, pyrolysis, destructive distillation, or gasification, or to chemically or biologically process solid wastes, for the purpose of volume reduction, synthetic fuel production, or energy recovery. The foregoing notwithstanding, the term "transformation facility" does not include any permitted solid waste facility dedicated solely and exclusively to the production of "compost" as the term "compost" is defined under Section 40116 of the California Public Resources Code. 
"Universal Waste" means and includes primarily consumer products containing mercury, lead, cadmium and other substances which are hazardous to human health and the environment. These items cannot be discarded in household trash nor disposed of in landfills. Examples of universal waste are batteries, fluorescent tubes, and many electronic devices. 
"Waste generator" means any person whose actions, activities, undertakings or processes generate or otherwise produce solid waste or whose actions, activities, undertakings or processes cause solid waste to become subject to regulation. 
(Ord. 2701 § 3 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2908, § 5, 1-24-2017)  
Chapter 8.24 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
Sections: 
 
8.24.010 - Liability for cleanup costs. 
Any person or business causing an unauthorized release of any hazardous material which requires the city to expend public funds for the cleanup or removal of such hazardous material shall be civilly liable to the city for all costs incurred by the city for such cleanup and removal. The city shall provide such person who may be civilly liable to the city hereunder with a written account and invoice of the costs incurred by the city and such person or business shall pay such amount to the City Fire Marshal within thirty (30) days following transmittal of such invoice. In the event that an action may thereafter be initiated by the city to collect any sum which is owed to the city hereunder, the judgment in such action may include reasonable attorneys' fees of the city incurred in connection with such collection. There is established a "City of El Monte Hazardous Materials Civil Liability Cleanup and Reimbursement Fund" and all sums which may hereafter be collected by the City Fire Marshal under this section shall be deposited into such fund. The balance of said fund shall be used and applied by the City Fire Chief for the purchase of specialized equipment, including data processing equipment, which will aid the City Fire Department in ensuring the safety of the public from the unauthorized disposal or storage of hazardous materials, or from fires which may involve such materials. 
(Prior code § 3921)  
Chapter 8.28 - INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
Sections: 
 
8.28.010 - California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989. 
The state has adopted the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Stats. 1989, Chapter 1095, as amended) which is also known as "AB 939." The State Legislature has declared that the responsibility for solid waste management is a shared responsibility between state and local governments and the state has directed the city to prepare and implement a local integrated waste management plan in accordance with AB 939. 
(Prior code § 5250)  
8.28.020 - City source reduction and recycling element. 
The Deputy City Manager for Community Development shall prepare a source reduction and recycling element, inclusive of a household hazardous waste element (collectively, an "SRRE"). The SRRE shall be submitted to the City Council for approval in accordance with AB 939. Thereafter, the Deputy City Manager for Community Development shall submit periodic written reports to the City Council detailing the city's implementation of any and all programs set forth under the SRRE. An initial report shall be submitted to the City Council no later than December 1, 1992 and thereafter the Deputy City Manager for Community Development shall submit additional reports in accordance with a schedule of SRRE program implementation and assessment reports as adopted by City Council resolution. A copy of the SRRE shall be maintained for inspection and copying as a public record in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 2701 §§ 3 (part), 7, 2007: amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 5251)  
8.28.030 - AB 939 cost recovery special fund. 
The City Council creates a special fund to be known as the "AB 939 Cost Recovery Special Fund." The Director of Finance is authorized and directed to establish appropriate accounting procedures and to deposit all funds as may be received or collected by the city in accordance with AB 939 or the city SRRE, including grants or state subvention revenues, or local regulatory program fees or charges as authorized in Section 8.28.040, into the AB 939 cost recovery special fund. The amounts on deposit in the AB 939 cost recovery special fund, together with any accrued interest thereon, shall be used and applied to pay for costs incurred by the city as associated with the preparation, adoption and implementation of the city SRRE. The city may from time to time loan or advance such funds as available to the AB 939 cost recovery special fund, as may be necessary or appropriate. Such loans or advances or funds from the city may incur interest payable to the city from sums deposited to the AB 939 cost recovery special fund at such a rate as specified by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 5252)  
8.28.040 - AB 939 fee of the city. 
The City Council may adopt regulatory program fees as authorized under AB 939 to provide a source of funds to pay for the preparation, adoption and implementation of the city SRRE. Such AB 939 fees, charges and methods of apportionment and collection shall be determined, fixed, established and revised from time to time by resolution of the City Council, following a public hearing thereon. Public hearings regarding such AB 939 fees shall be conducted in the manner as authorized under Government Code Section 66016. 
(Prior code § 5253)  
8.28.050 - Failure of hauler to pay AB 939 fee is a misdemeanor. 
The term "hauler" as used herein means any waste hauler, solid waste hauler, or trash hauler or the like and shall include any individual or entity engaged in a business, subject to the payment of a business license tax under the provision of Title 5 of the El Monte Municipal Code, where such hauler collects, transports, stores, transfers, or processes solid waste in the city. The term "solid waste" shall have the same meaning as found under Public Resources Code Section 40191. It is unlawful for any hauler who is engaged in the business of collecting, transporting, storing, transferring, or processing solid waste in the city to fail to file any report or pay any fee to the city as may be authorized under Section 8.28.040 within sixty (60) days following written demand therefor. The city may enforce this section as a misdemeanor in accordance with El Monte Municipal Code Section 1.24.010. 
(Prior code § 5254)  
Chapter 8.32 - MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAMS 
Sections: 
 
8.32.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
"City" means the city of El Monte. 
"Fee administrator" means the Finance Director of the city or his or her designee. 
"Mobile source air pollution reduction programs" means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles, which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 2322 § 1, 1991)  
8.32.020 - Administration of vehicle registration fee. 
A.  Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees distributed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the Fee Administrator. 
B.  Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The Fee Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds. 
C.  Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the Fee Administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection B of this section. All interest earned by said trust fund account shall be credited only to that account. 
D.  Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 8.32.010. Such revenues shall be expended within one (1) year of the completion of the programs. 
E.  Audit. The city will permit an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from SCAQMD, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 44223. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 44244.1, the city may present information related to its expenditure of the fee revenues received. 
(Ord. 2322 § 2, 1991)  
8.32.030 - Chapter provisions exempt from further compliance with CEQA. 
The City Council finds and determines that the environmental regulatory program as shall be implemented in accordance with this chapter and the AQMP is categorically exempt from further compliance or review under the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended, in accordance with Section 15308 of the State CEQA Guidelines. 
(Ord. 2322 § 4, 1991)  
Chapter 8.36 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
8.36.010 - Declaration of policy. 
It is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. It is recognized that at certain levels noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry and in the public interest shall be controlled or eliminated. 
(Prior code § 5910)  
8.36.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"A-weighted sound pressure level" means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound meter using the A-weighting network. The standard notation is dBA. 
"Ambient noise level" means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
"Decibel" means a unit of level for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to the logarithm of the ratio of the sound pressure of a standard sound (.0002 microbars). The standard notation is dB. 
"Fixed noise source" means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
"Hertz" means the complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs during a period. 
"Impact noise" means the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest. 
"Impulsive noise" means and includes any noise which is composed of momentary noises that are repeated at sufficiently slow rates, such that a sound level meter set at "slow" meter characteristics will show changes in sound pressure level greater than ten (10) dBA. 
"Mobile noise source" means any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
"Noise disturbance" means any sound or noise which endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals or which annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities or which is of such a noise level or volume as would annoy or disturb reasonable persons of normal sensitivities or which endangers or injures personal or real property, or which violates the ambient noise standards set forth in Section of this chapter. 
"Sound level meter" means a measurement instrument containing a microphone or amplifier, an output meter and "A" frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which satisfies the pertinent requirements, in American Specifications for Type 2 Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof. 
"Steady noise" means noise for which the sound pressure level remains essentially constant during the period of observation. It does not vary more than six (6) dBA when measured with the "slow" meter response of a sound level meter. 
(Prior code §§ 5920—5920.11)  
8.36.030 - Sound level measurements. 
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network and slow response as defined in Section 8.36.020. 
(Prior code § 5930)  
8.36.040 - Ambient noise standards. 
A.  The following ambient noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all property within their assigned zoning districts and said standards shall constitute the permissible noise level: 
Zone 	Day 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	Night 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Single-family 	50 dBA 	45 dBA 
Multifamily 	55 dBA 	50 dBA 
Commercial 	65 dBA 	60 dBA 
Industrial 	70 dBA 	70 dBA 
 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels for a cumulation period of fifteen (15) minutes in any hour. 
C.  At the boundary line between a residential zone and a commercial and/or manufacturing zone, the noise level of the residential zone shall be used. 
D.  If a residential use is located within a commercial or industrial zone, the ambient noise level shall not exceed fifty (50) dBA between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. 
E.  Corrections to Noise Limits. The numerical limits given in subsection A of this section shall be adjusted by the following corrections, where appropriate: 
Noise Condition 	Correction in dBA 
1. Impulsive sounds, pure tone or sounds with a cyclically varying amplitude (The following corrections apply to day only) 	-5 
2. Noise occurring for a cumulation period of more than 5 but less than 15 minutes in any hour. 	+5 
3. Noise occurring more than 1 but less than 5 minutes in any hour. 	+10 
4. Noise occurring less than 1 minute in any hour. 	+15 
 
(Prior code §§ 5940—5940.4)  
8.36.050 - Special noise sources. 
A.  Radios, Television Sets, and Similar Devices. Any noise level from the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound at any hour of the day, which exceeds the noise limit at the property line of any receiving property shall be a violation of the provisions of Section 8.36.040(A). 
B.  Machinery, Fans and Other Mechanical Devices. Any noise level from the use or operation of any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air conditioning apparatus, refrigerating equipment, motor vehicle, or other mechanical or electrical device, or in repairing or rebuilding any motor vehicle which exceeds the noise limits at any property line, of any receiving property shall be a violation of the provisions of Section 8.36.040(A). 
C.  Construction of Building. 
1.  Except as otherwise permitted under subsections (C)(2) or (G) of this section, it is unlawful for any person within the city to operate power construction tools or equipment in the performance of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, or projects in or adjacent to a residential area, except between the hours of six a.m. and seven p.m. Monday through Friday or between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
2.  Upon a written showing of good cause by a project applicant and the applicant's construction contractor or subcontractor, the Chief Building Official may conditionally relax the hourly restrictions of this subsection on a case-by-case basis, provided such authorization is made in writing. The Chief Building Official is authorized to impose such reasonable conditions as may be deemed necessary and/or desirable to mitigate any noise or other adverse impacts generated by the construction undertaking during specially authorized work hours. The conduct of operations in a manner inconsistent with or beyond the scope of any written authorization granted by the Chief Building Official shall be unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this section. The Chief Building Official shall establish reasonable criteria for the grant of special work hours requests which balances the desire of residents for peace and quiet during evening and early morning hours with the efficiencies derived from authorizing special work hours requests. In accordance with the Chief Building Official's established criteria, each individual request shall be evaluated on its individual merits and on the specific circumstances and characteristics of the project or undertaking. No one grant request shall serve as binding president for any subsequent request. 
3.  By City Council resolution, the city may also impose such reasonable fees as may be necessary to review, process and enforce requests for special operating hours. 
D.  Amplified Sound. The use of loudspeakers or sound amplifying equipment in the city which exceeds the noise limits at any property line of a receiving property shall be a violation of Section 8.36.040(A). 
E.  Loading/Unloading. In residential zones, the opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, or similar objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance is not permitted between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. 
F.  Interior Noise in a Condominium, Two-Family or Multifamily Residential Unit. Notwithstanding other sections of this chapter, it is unlawful for any persons to create, maintain or cause to be created or maintained any noise within the interior of any condominium, two (2) family or multifamily residential unit which exceeds the noise limits indicated in Section 8.36.040(A). 
G.  Exemptions. 
1.  Lawfully conducted parades or assemblies; 
2.  Emergency work; 
3.  All operations and activities the control of which is by law exclusively vested in another agency of government; 
4.  Bells or chimes while being used in conjunction with religious or patriotic services; 
5.  The provisions of this regulation shall not preclude the construction, operation, maintenance, and repairs of equipment, apparatus, or facilities of park and recreation departments, public work projects, or essential public services and facilities, including those of public utilities subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
H.  Residential Proximity to Freeway. The permissible noise level standards as applied to residential properties within one hundred fifty (150) feet of freeway location shall be sixty-two (62) dBA between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m. and fifty-eighty (58) dBA between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. 
(Ord. 2728 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2470 § 1 (part), 1997: Ord. 2469 § 1 (part), 1997; prior code §§ 5950—5950.9)  
8.36.060 - Noise level measurement. 
A.  The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected residential property. Affected residential property shall be the address from which the complaint was received. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected residential units. 
B.  The standards which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists, may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The level of the noise; 
2.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
3.  The nature of the area within which the noise emanates; 
4.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
5.  The time of day or night: 
6.  The duration of the noise; 
7.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(Prior code §§ 5960—5960.2.7)  
8.36.070 - Nonconforming uses. 
Commercial or manufacturing uses abutting residential zones that exceed noise level standards shall be considered nonconforming uses. If the noise cannot be mitigated, the regulations specified in Chapter 17.06 of this code shall govern nonconforming uses in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5980)  
8.36.080 - Noise disturbance prohibited. 
No person shall create, conduct, maintain or cause a noise disturbance. No person shall host or conduct a private or public dance, party, gathering or event in a residential neighborhood or in another neighborhood inhabited for residential use where the sound or noise emanating therefrom constitutes a noise disturbance. The source or instrumentalities of a noise disturbance may be sized in conjunction with the abatement of a noise disturbance pursuant to Section 8.36.090 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5991)  
8.36.090 - Abatement of noise disturbance. 
Any peace officer of the El Monte Police Department and any person empowered and authorized by Chapter 1.16 of this code to make arrests for violations of provisions of this code is empowered and authorized to summarily abate a noise disturbance pursuant to the authority of Chapter 8.44 of this title. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 5992)  
8.36.100 - Costs for abatement of a noise disturbance assembly. 
A.  A noise disturbance assembly, as described below, is declared to be a public nuisance. In certain instances, the city may hold responsible persons civilly liable in accordance with this section, for costs incurred by the city in responding to a noise disturbance assembly. When a large party or gathering occurs on a private premises and a police officer determines that such a party or gathering poses a noise disturbance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivities under this chapter (the "noise disturbance assembly"), or that the noise disturbance assembly is for any other reason a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person(s) in apparent charge or control of the premises and/or the person(s) apparently responsible for the noise disturbance assembly (or if any of those persons may be a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor) shall be held civilly liable jointly and severally, for the costs of the city associated with providing police personnel and other emergency services to respond to the noise disturbance assembly. Except as provided below, no person shall be held civilly liable for such costs unless a police officer of the El Monte Police Department has first provided a written or verbal warning to abate the noise disturbance assembly to a person apparently in charge or otherwise apparently responsible for such a public nuisance. Proof that such a warning has been given to a person in apparent charge or responsible for such a public nuisance shall be conclusively evidenced by a copy of a written notice of noise disturbance assembly as delivered by a police officer in a form as shall be approved by the City Administrator, and the Chief of Police. The form of such a notice shall provide for the time and date of the initial response of emergency public safety services to the scene of the noise disturbance assembly by the city, and also identified the police officer who delivered the notice. The notice may contain such other information as referenced in this chapter and this section as the City Administrator and the Police Chief may deem appropriate. 
B.  No such verbal or written notice shall be required to be given by a Police Officer as a prerequisite to the city initiating any civil liability collection proceeding under this section in instances in which the duty watch commander of the El Monte Police Department has first determined that the initial response to a call for emergency public safety services relating to a noise disturbance assembly may pose a significant risk to the safety of the peace officers and other emergency service personnel responding or dispatched to such a call or that other grounds exist for waiving or dispensing with the requirement of such a notice. Such a determination of the duty watch commander that the waiver of notice is appropriate in a particular instance shall be evidenced by a written memorandum of the duty watch commander which contains a description of the facts and circumstances which support such a finding. 
C.  The cost for abatement of a noise disturbance assembly which may be recovered by the city pursuant to this section shall not exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a single incident. The costs for abatement of a noise disturbance assembly shall include the cost of providing police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of the public nuisance as well as the salaries of the public personnel responding to the public nuisance. The cost for abatement as authorized under this section constitutes a debt of the person(s) responsible for the public nuisance and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. The city shall also separately assess the cost of its attorney's fees and court costs, including witness fees of peace officers and other emergency public safety services personnel, which may be associated with the collection of such abatement costs in any court proceeding. 
D.  The civil remedy as provided to the city by this section shall be cumulative to any other civil or criminal proceeding which the city may initiate against any person who may be responsible for a noise disturbance assembly, or otherwise involved with such a public nuisance or abatement. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 5993)  
8.36.110 - Manner of enforcement—Violation and penalty. 
A.  The City Administrative Officer or his or her duly authorized designee is directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. No persons shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with enforcement of this chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his or her duty. 
B.  Violations—Misdemeanors. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
C.  Violations—Additional Remedies—Injunctions. As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which operation or maintenance causes or creates noise levels exceeding the noise levels or vibrations as specified in this chapter shall be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement, pursuant to Chapter 8.44 of this title. 
D.  Violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor violations of this code. No complaint shall be issued in the event the cause of violation is abated. In the event the alleged violator cannot be located in order to serve the notice of intention to prosecute, the notice as required herein shall be deemed to be given upon mailing such notice by registered or certified mail to the alleged violator at his or her last known address or at the place where the violation occurred. 
(Prior code §§ 5970—5970.4)  
Chapter 8.40 - PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS 
Sections: 
 
8.40.010 - Pools to be fenced. 
Every person who owns or possesses land within the city which has been improved with a swimming pool shall construct, install and thereafter maintain a fence, enclosure or other solid structure surrounding such swimming pool which is not less than five (5) feet in height and having no opening therein (other than the self-closing doors or gates as hereinafter provided) larger than four (4) inches square. 
(Prior code § 3600)  
8.40.020 - Gates and doors. 
A.  All gates or doors opening through the solid enclosure required by Section 8.40.010 shall, at all times, be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times when such gate or door is not in actual use. 
B.  Exception. Any door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the solid enclosure, required by Section 8.40.010, need not be equipped as required by subsection A of this section. 
(Prior code §§ 3601, 3602)  
8.40.030 - Plans. 
All plans hereafter submitted to the city for swimming pools to be constructed shall show on their face compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3603)  
8.40.040 - Public pools excepted. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to public swimming pools for which a charge or admission price is required to be paid for admittance thereto or use thereof. 
(Prior code § 3604.1)  
Chapter 8.44 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
8.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  In order to further the stated goals of the city and to protect its citizens and their property from conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public, the City Council has determined that this chapter pertaining to nuisance abatement is necessary to effectively abate or prevent the development of such conditions in the city. 
B.  It is the intention of the City Council, in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, to set forth guidelines for determining what conditions constitute a public nuisance; to establish a method for giving notice of the conditions and an opportunity to correct; and finally in the event the public nuisance is not abated or corrected, to provide a procedure for a hearing and determination of the facts and manner in which the conditions shall be corrected or removed. 
C.  It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a just, equitable, and practical method, in addition to any other remedy available at law or equity, whereby lands or buildings which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, cluttered with weeds and/or debris, abandoned vehicles, machinery or equipment, or are a menace, or hazard to life, limb, safety, health, morals, property values, aesthetic standards, or the general welfare of the city, may be required to be repaired, renovated, vacated, demolished, made safe, or cleaned up by removal of offensive conditions. 
D.  In addition to the abatement procedures provided herein, this chapter declares certain conditions to be public nuisances and that maintenance of such conditions shall be a misdemeanor. 
E.  This chapter is not intended to enforce Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions (CC&R's) on property, nor to supersede them. This chapter will be enforced uniformly within the city regardless of CC&R's. Therefore, this chapter does not abrogate the right of any homeowner's association or private citizen to take action, legal or as otherwise provided in the CC&R's, to force compliance with the CC&R's applicable to their tract or association even though the CC&R provisions may be the same, more restrictive, or may not be covered by this chapter. (Added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.100)  
8.44.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and the definitions set forth as follows shall apply to the provisions of this chapter unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is necessarily intended. 
"Hearing Officer" means that person as defined in Section 1.18.020. 
"Inoperative vehicle" means a vehicle that cannot or may not be operated for mechanical or statutory reasons, including, but not limited to, flat tires, engine failure, electrical malfunction, or nondisplay of current license plates, tabs or stickers as required by Article IX of Chapter 1 of Division 3 of the California Vehicle Code. An inoperative vehicle also includes, but is not limited to, a vehicle which cannot be legally driven on any public street or other area due to lack of front headlights and rear brake lights, windshield, wipers, front and rear bumper(s), or any other equipment required by the California Vehicle Code, any vehicle defined as a "nonrepairable vehicle" or "total loss salvage vehicle" by the California Vehicle Code, and any vehicle registered with the state as a "nonoperated vehicle" when a "certificate of nonoperation" has been filed with the Department of Motor Vehicles under Article V of Chapter 1 of Division 3 of the California Vehicle Code. 
"Junk" means and includes in addition to junk as defined by Section 746 of the Streets and Highways Code, any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon, cement, cotton, dirt, fiber, glass, metal, paper, plaster, plaster of paris, plastic, rubber, terra cotta, wool, wood or other substance, including, but not being limited to, used, discarded or obsolete batteries, rope, rugs, trash, vegetation, vehicles or waste, or any accumulation of objects of any kind, of such size, quantity or nature that the same cannot be lawfully used within a reasonable time upon the property upon which the same is located. 
"Junkyard" means and includes any building, equipment, land, lot, place, premises or structures where, at upon which, to which or from which is abandoned, baled, bartered, bought, brought, bundled, disassembled, disposed of, exchanged, handled, packed, processed, shipped, sold, stored or transported any junk as defined by Section 746 of the Streets and Highways Code, or any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon, cement, cotton, dirt, fiber, glass, metal, paper, plaster, plaster of paris, plastic, rubber, terra cotta, wool, wood or other substance, including, but not being limited to, used, discarded or obsolete batteries, clothing debris, equipment, floor coverings, garbage, logs, lumber, rags, rope, rugs, trash, vegetation, vehicles or waste. 
Exception: "Junkyard" does not include any business engaged in the buying or selling of new or used furniture or useable household equipment conducted within a zone permitting such business and conducted in accordance with all regulations applicable to such business, nor to the business of buying and selling used automobiles in operable condition when conducted within a zone permitting such business and conducted in accordance with all regulations applicable thereto, nor to the storage or use of used or salvaged materials in connection with a manufacturing operation conducted in accordance with all regulations applicable thereto. 
"Premises" means and includes whenever applicable or appropriate any building, equipment, land, lot, place or structure. 
"Solid waste" means as defined in Section 8.20.270 of this code. 
"Yard area" means any open space between a lot line and the nearest building. 
(Ord. 2605 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2602 § 1 (part), 2004: added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.200—8.52.207) 
(Ord. No. 2790, 3-20-2012)  
8.44.030 - Public nuisances designated. 
It is unlawful and it is declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial, business park, office, educational, religious, vacant, or other premises within the city, to maintain such premises in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
A.  A violation of any city or county ordinance, rule, regulation and/or code adopted by reference by this code, or any violation of a state or federal law or regulation. 
B.  Any land, the topography, geology, or configuration of which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavations, fill, or other alteration, interferes with the established drainage pattern over the property or from adjoining or other properties which does or may result in erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare or to neighboring properties. 
C.  Any building or structure which is partially destroyed, damaged, abandoned, boarded up, dilapidated, or permitted to remain in a state of partial construction. 
D.  The failure to secure and maintain against public access through any doorways, windows, and other openings into vacant or abandoned buildings or structures, and the failure to provide fencing to secure and prevent access to any vacant or abandoned building, structure or lot. 
E.  Painted buildings and walls, retaining walls, fences or structures that require repainting, or buildings, walls, fences, or structures upon which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation. 
F.  Any premises, building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or walkway which is painted in a garish manner, or in bright, fluorescent, or luminescent colors, which is out of harmony or conformity with the standards of adjacent properties. 
G.  Any building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, window, vehicle, or walkway upon which any graffiti, including paint, ink, chalk, dye, etchings, or other similar marking substances, is allowed to remain for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. 
H.  Any wall, fence, gate, or hedge that is damaged, broken, dilapidated or a hazard or is maintained in violation of this code. 
I.  Any wall, fence, gate, or hedge that is covered by or constructed of, whether totally or partially: 
1.  Bamboo or other similar reed material, whether natural or artificial; 
2.  Tarpaulin materials, whether natural or man-made; 
3.  Plastic materials; 
J.  Broken windows, missing windows, windows boarded up in an occupied structure for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days, missing or damaged window screens where required in structures used for residential purposes. 
K.  Any overgrown, unmaintained, under-maintained, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous tree, weeds, grass, vegetation, or debris, which: 
1.  May harbor rats, vermin, excessive amounts of insects, or other disease carriers; 
2.  Is maintained so as to cause an obstruction to the vision of motorists or a hazardous condition to pedestrians or vehicle traffic; 
3.  Constitutes an unsightly appearance; 
4.  Creates a danger or attractive nuisance to the public; 
5.  Causes detriment to neighboring properties or property values; 
6.  Constitutes a fire hazard; 
L.  Building exteriors, roofs, landscaping, grounds, walls, retaining and crib walls, fences, driveways, parking lots, easements, planters, sidewalks, or walkways, which are maintained in such condition so as to become defective, unsightly, cracked or no longer viable. 
M.  The accumulation of dirt, litter, trash, junk, feces, or debris in doorways, adjoining sidewalks, walkways, courtyards, patios, parking lots, planters, yard areas, landscaped or other areas. 
N.  Any premises upon which there is or is permitted to be: 
1.  Lumber, building materials, rubble, broken asphalt or concrete, containers, or other similar materials, except where construction is occurring under a valid permit; 
2.  Junk, solid waste, vegetation, salvage materials, scrap metals, hazardous waste, broken or neglected machinery, dirt or fill material deposited or stored contrary to any law, automobile parts, except within a commercial business lawfully engaged in retail sales; 
3.  Rocks, except in their natural state and location; 
4.  Sinks, fixtures or equipment, appliances or furniture, except lawn furniture in residential yards and new or used furniture lawfully stored or displayed in connection with a valid business engaged in the sale or purchase of the same; 
5.  Inoperative vehicles, except where permitted by the zoning code; and such conditions are causing damage or detriment to any neighboring property or are lowering the property values of any neighboring property or are visible from a public right-of-way, alley, or any neighboring property, or constitute a fire hazard; 
O.  Deteriorated driveways, walkways, and parking lots, including those containing pot holes, or cracks. 
P.  Abandoned, broken, unused, neglected or unprotected equipment and machinery, ponds, reservoirs and pools, whether or not the same contains any water or liquid, excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, foundations, or other holes, abandoned refrigerators or other appliances, abandoned motor vehicles, any unsound structure, skateboard ramps, or accumulated lumber, solid waste, junk, or vegetation, which may reasonably attract children to such abandoned or neglected conditions. 
Q.  1.  Construction equipment, buses, tow trucks, taxicabs and vehicles-for-hire, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, grading equipment, tractors, tractor trailers, truck trailers, or any commercial vehicle over twenty-five (25) feet long or eight (8) feet in height or eighty (80) inches wide, supplies, materials, or machinery of any type or description, parked or stored upon any street or property within a residential zone, except where permitted by this code or state law; 
2.  "Commercial vehicle," for the purposes of this section, means any motorized or non-motorized vehicle used or maintained to transport property or goods for profit, or persons for hire or compensation; 
R.  Temporary service bins, dumpsters, or storage containers, or construction debris storage bins stored on a public street or on private property, except where permitted by this code. 
S.  Any garbage can, solid waste container, solid waste, packing box or junk placed or maintained so as to be visible from neighboring properties or the public right-of-way, except for those times scheduled for collection, in accordance with this code. 
T.  Any property with accumulations of grease, oil, or other hazardous material on paved or unpaved surfaces, driveways, buildings, walls, or fences, or from which any such material flows or seeps on to any public street or other public or private property, or which is likely to seep or migrate into the underground water table. 
U.  Any front yard, street side yard, parkway, or landscaped setback area, which lacks turf, other planted material, decorative rock, bark, or planted ground cover or covering, so as to cause excessive dust, or which constitutes an unsightly appearance, or which has allowed the accumulation of debris. 
V.  Any condition of vegetation overgrowth, which encroaches into, over, or upon any public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or property or any impediment to public travel. 
W.  Animals, livestock, poultry, insects, or bees kept, bred, or maintained for any purpose and in violation of this code or any other code adopted by this city. 
X.  Any habitation which is overcrowded with persons or animals, as defined by state law, or local ordinance, or the Uniform Housing Code, as adopted by the city, or which lacks adequate light, ventilation, sanitation, or plumbing facilities, or which constitutes a fire hazard. 
Y.  Any premises, building or structure which has been constructed or which now exists or is maintained or occupied in violation of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code or National Electrical Code as adopted by this code, or any other law or ordinance of this state or city. 
Z.  1.  Except where construction is occurring under a valid permit, the dumping or deposit of any solid waste or junk in or upon any public or private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public park or any public property other than property designated or set aside for that purpose by the governing board or body having charge of that property; 
2.  Except where construction is occurring under a valid permit, any placing, depositing, or dumping of any rocks or dirt in or upon any private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any private property, without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public work or other public property, without the consent of the state or local agency having jurisdiction over the highway, road, or property; 
AA.  Any other condition declared by any federal, state, county, or city statute, code, ordinance, or regulation to be a public nuisance. 
BB.  The parking of vehicles on private property in violation of the applicable zoning regulations for the property on which such vehicles are parked. 
CC.  Any trailer, camper, boat, dumpster, storage bin or container, or other mobile equipment stored for an unreasonable period of time in any yard area. 
DD.  Storage on top of rooftops or carports. 
EE.  1.  Repair and/or dismantling of any vehicle or boat on a residentially zoned or residentially used property where such activity can be seen from the public right-of-way, except where such repair and/or dismantling is completed and any evidence of repair, including tools, equipment, motor oils and other fluids, rags, spills, parts, and debris is removed within one day after the repair or dismantling was begun. All major vehicle repairs must be conducted within an enclosed garage. No repair or dismantling of a vehicle or boat on a residentially zoned or residentially used property shall be done except on a vehicle or boat that is owned or leased by, and registered to, a person that permanently resides at the premises at which the repair or dismantling is occurring, except for emergency repairs necessary to repair a vehicle or boat to an operable condition that can be completed in less than one hour. No vehicle repair may be conducted in a customer parking lot serving an auto part or other store; 
2.  "Minor repair," for the purposes of this section, means those repairs that can be started and completed in less than four (4) consecutive hours, and are not defined as "major repairs"; 
3.  "Major repair," for the purposes of this section, means those repairs that cannot be started and completed in less than four (4) consecutive hours, or any body and fender work, or any painting or primer work; 
FF.  Any building, use or structure wherein one or more persons engage, or have engaged, in two (2) or more acts which are prohibited pursuant to the laws of the state, the provisions of this code or any other penal ordinance of this city, including, but not limited to, the following acts: 
1.  Unlawful possession or use of controlled substances; 
2.  Prostitution; 
3.  Gambling; 
4.  Solicitation for any unlawful conduct; 
GG.  Any clothes line in a front or side yard area, any clothing or similar materials hanging or left outside on a fence, gate, patio, balcony, bush, hedge, tree, or any other place outdoors so that they are visible from the public right-of-way or any neighboring property. 
HH.  Any premises upon which a tarpaulin, whether natural or manmade, is visible from the public right-of-way or any neighboring property, except during emergency weather conditions as determined by the Code Enforcement Supervisor. 
II.  (Reserved). 
JJ.  The maintenance of property in such an unsightly or defective condition or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes appreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or is materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements. 
KK.  The maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such adjacent properties. 
LL.  Any premises upon which a defective, broken, dilapidated, garish or unsightly mailbox is visible. 
MM.  1.  Any premises on a residentially zoned or residentially used property that has "holiday lights" or "holiday decorations" displayed, put up, or installed on the exterior of a building or structure, wall, window, door, fence, yard area, planter, tree, hedge, bush, antenna, or other similar place visible from the public right-of-way or any neighboring property either forty-five (45) calendar days before or thirty (30) calendar days after the holiday for which the "holiday lights" or "holiday decorations" were put up, installed, or displayed to celebrate; 
2.  "Holiday lights" and "holiday decorations," for the purposes of this section, mean any temporary set of lights or decorations commonly put up, installed, or displayed on the exterior of a building or structure, wall, window, door, fence, yard area, planter, tree, hedge, bush, antenna, or other similar place visible from the public right-of-way or any neighboring property for the celebration of a holiday. "Holiday" means any city, state, or federal holiday, and Halloween (October 31); 
NN.  Any structure in a state of substantial deterioration, including, but not limited to, peeling paint on a facade, broken windows, roof in disrepair, damaged porch, broken steps or other deterioration or disrepair, that is visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring properties. 
OO.  Any condition or activity which adversely affects the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working on the premises or in the surrounding area. 
PP.  Any condition or activity which jeopardizes or endangers the public health or safety of persons residing or working on the premises or in the surrounding area. 
QQ.  "Repeated nuisance activities" defined as activities occurring on at least two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) consecutive month period, and including, but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sales of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, loitering, excessive littering, illegal parking, loud noises particularly in late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests related to such activities. 
(Ord. 2605 § 1 (part), 2004: Ord. 2602 § 1 (part), 2004: added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.300—8.52.334)  
8.44.040 - Abatement procedure. 
A.  Method. All or any part of any premises found, as provided herein, to constitute a public nuisance shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, improvement, relocation, vacation, demolition or removal, or any combination thereof, pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. The procedures set forth in this section shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing any other provision of this code or from abating any public nuisance in any other manner provided by law. 
B.  Inspection. Upon being granted permission by the occupant or owner, or after having obtained an appropriate warrant upon the occupant's or owner's refusal to consent to an inspection, the Code Enforcement Supervisor or his or her authorized agent shall cause any premises, building or structure to be inspected for the purpose of determining whether or not it is a public nuisance within the meaning of Section 8.52.030 of this chapter in any of the following events: 
1.  Whenever the Code Enforcement Supervisor in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine such inspection is necessary; or 
2.  Whenever any person files with the Code Enforcement Supervisor a verified complaint wherefrom there is in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Supervisor probable cause to believe that the premises, building or structure is a public nuisance; or 
3.  Whenever the Health Officer of the county or any officer or employee of the city transmits to the Code Enforcement Supervisor a written report from the facts of which there is in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Supervisor probable cause to believe that the premises, building or structure is a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. 
C.  Report of Code Enforcement Officer. Upon the completion of the inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer making the inspection shall file with the Code Enforcement Supervisor a written report setting forth the facts as to the condition of the premises, building or structure and the work needed to be done thereon, all in such form as the Code Enforcement Supervisor may direct. 
D.  Code Enforcement Supervisor to Act on Report. If the Code Enforcement Supervisor shall determine from the report of the Code Enforcement Officer that there is probable cause to believe that the premises, building or structure is a public nuisance, the matter shall be set for a hearing and notice of such hearing shall be given by the Code Enforcement Supervisor as hereinafter provided. In the event the Code Enforcement Supervisor finds that there exists an emergency requiring immediate correction to protect the safety or well-being of the occupants of any such premises, building or structure or to protect the safety of persons or structures on adjacent property, the Code Enforcement Supervisor's authorized agent may, pending action by the Hearing Officer, abate the hazard or order the owner or person in charge of the premises, building or structure to take such remedial or corrective action as may be necessary to eliminate the hazard and may, in addition, if the circumstances require, order that the premises, building or structure and any adjacent premises, building or structure endangered hereby, be vacated forthwith. Each such vacated premises, building or structure shall be secured against egress and ingress and shall not be re-occupied until the hazard necessitating its vacation has been eliminated. The Code Enforcement Supervisor or his or her authorized agent shall post thereon two (2) placards stating: 
"DO NOT ENTER" 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy these premises or to remove or deface this Notice. 
_____
(Signature) 
CODE ENFORCEMENT SUPERVISOR 
CITY OF EL MONTE 
TELEPHONE: (626) 580-2080 
DATED:___________ 
No person shall remove or deface any such placards after they have been posted without the permission of the Code Enforcement Supervisor. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.400—8.52.404)  
8.44.050 - Abatement procedure—Notice of hearing. 
A.  Notice of the hearing shall be given in a form prescribed by the Neighborhood Services Supervisor and approved by the City Attorney. It shall set forth the street address and a legal description sufficient to establish the identification and location of the premises, building or structure. It shall contain a brief statement of the conditions mentioned in the report of the Neighborhood Services Officer which show probable cause to believe that the premises, building or structure is a public nuisance. It shall state the date, hour and place of the hearing and shall order all interested parties who desire to be heard in the matter to appear before the Hearing Officer to show cause why the public nuisance should not be ordered rehabilitated, repaired, improved, relocated, vacated, demolished or removed. 
B.  Posting. Two (2) copies of the notice of hearing shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises, building or structure involved at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing. 
C.  Service. One copy of the notice of hearing shall be served upon the following: The person in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved; the record owner; the holder of any mortgage, trust deed, or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; the record holder of any other estate or interest in or to the premises, building or structure. 
D.  The notice of hearing shall be served upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by certified mail at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Service by mail shall be effective on the date of mailing if mailed, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address of the person as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the Neighborhood Services Supervisor, then the notice shall be addressed to such person at the address of the premises, building or structure involved in the proceedings. The failure of an owner or other person to receive notice duly mailed shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
E.  Declaration. The Neighborhood Services Supervisor upon giving notice as provided shall file a declaration thereof under penalty of perjury with the Hearing Officer, certifying to the time and manner in which notice was given. He or she shall also file therewith any receipt card which may have been returned to him or her in acknowledgment of the receipt of such notice by certified mail. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.405—8.52.409) 
(Ord. No. 2790, 3-20-2012)  
8.44.060 - Abatement procedure—Hearing. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the Hearing Officer to hold a hearing upon the report of the Code Enforcement Officer, and to hear and consider any evidence offered by the owner, occupant or person in charge and control, mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust, lessee, or any other person having any estate or interest in said premises, building or structure, pertaining to the matter set forth in the report. The Hearing Officer shall make written findings of fact as to whether or not the premises, building or structure in question is a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. The Hearing Officer shall issue an appropriate order. 
B.  The Hearing Officer may request reports of other departments whenever in the course of any proceedings taken hereunder the Hearing Officer may have cause to require additional evidence as to whether or not any premises, building or structure is a fire or life hazard or is detrimental to the health of the persons living therein or thereon in comparison with other premises or buildings or structures constructed in accordance with the minimum requirements of the Building Code. The Hearing Officer may request that the same be inspected by any officer of the city who may provide information pertinent to the proceedings. The officer to whom such request is directed shall cause the premises, building or structure to be inspected with particular reference to the characteristics inquired about, and a report thereof in writing shall be transmitted to the Hearing Officer within five (5) days of the receipt of the request for such report. The report shall be considered along with other evidence at the hearing. 
(Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.410, 8.52.411)  
8.44.070 - Abatement procedure—Order by Hearing Officer. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall render his or her decision, either closing the proceedings or ordering that the premises, building or structure be rehabilitated, repaired, improved, relocated, vacated, demolished or removed. In the absence of any appeal to the City Council, the action of the Hearing Officer shall be final and conclusive on the date of service of the order. 
B.  Contents of the Order. The order shall set forth the street address of the premises, building or structure and a legal description of the premises sufficient for identification. It shall contain a statement of the particulars which render the premises, building or structure a public nuisance and a statement of the things ordered to be done. The Hearing Officer shall specify the time within which the work must be commenced, which shall be not less than ten (10) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the issuance of the order, and the Hearing Officer shall further specify a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed. The time for completion may be extended for cause by the Hearing Officer. This extension shall only be granted in writing upon application of an interested party. 
C.  Posting and Service of the Order of the Hearing Officer. A copy of an order of the Hearing Officer shall be posted and served in the manner prescribed for the posting and service of the notice of hearing by the Hearing Officer. 
D.  Appeal of an Order of the Hearing Officer. Any interested person may appeal an order of the Hearing Officer to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal with respect to such order within nine (9) calendar days after completion of service of such order of the Hearing Officer. The written notice of appeal shall be submitted on a form provided to the applicant by the City Clerk and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the person filing the appeal and the name, address and telephone number of the owner(s) of the property and each and every tenant who may occupy such property; 
2.  A description of the property and a brief description of the contents of the order of the Hearing Officer for which the appeal is filed; 
3.  A brief description regarding the applicant's reason for seeking an appeal of the order of the Hearing Officer including, if applicable, a brief specification of the contents of the order of the Hearing Officer which the applicant contends are inaccurate, unduly burdensome, or unlawful; 
4.  A brief description of the manner in which the applicant proposes to resolve the property maintenance deficiencies, if any, which exist on the property, including a time schedule for resolving such problems, if applicable; 
5.  Any other relevant information which the applicant may wish to provide to the City Council for its consideration including photographs of the property, maps or other materials; 
6.  A written notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the following declaration attested by the applicant: 
 I declare under penalty of perjury that the factual information contained in the foregoing written Notice of Appeal is true and correct to the best of my knowledge or is based upon information which I believe to be true and correct. I further declare that each and every opinion stated in this Notice of Appeal is stated in good faith. 
7.  A filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to the city shall be submitted to the City Clerk upon the filing of a written notice of appeal. 
E.  Consideration by the City Council of an Appeal from an Order of the Hearing Officer and Public Hearing thereon by the City Council. The City Council shall review each written notice of appeal of an order of the Hearing Officer as may be filed with the City Clerk at the next regular meeting of the City Council for which such item may be considered. The filing of a written notice of appeal shall stay the effect of an order of the Hearing Officer. Upon review of a written notice of appeal, the City Council may by minute order or by resolution deny the appeal, affirm the order of the Hearing Officer and reinstate the effective date thereof, or the City Council may set a date for a public hearing on such appeal for the purpose of receiving additional evidence or testimony which is not included in the record of the proceedings of the Hearing Officer or the written notice of appeal. Notice of such a public hearing shall be transmitted to the person whose name appears on the notice of appeal and to such other persons as may be beneficially interested in the property. Completion of service of such notice of public hearing shall be conclusively evidenced by transmittal thereof by U.S. Mail, first class postage prepaid, to the address of the applicant as specified on the written notice of appeal. The public hearing on the appeal shall be conducted at a regular or adjourned regular meeting of the City Council on a date for which a special meeting has been ordered for consideration of such a matter and the City Council may continue such public hearing from time to time. Upon the close of the public hearing regarding the appeal, the City Council may modify or affirm the order of the Hearing Officer and reinstate or modify the effective date thereof. The decision of the City Council with respect to the disposition of a written notice of appeal or any action ordered following a public hearing thereon shall be final and conclusive. In the event that the order of Hearing Officer may be reversed or modified by the City Council, the City Council may authorize the refund to the applicant of the filing fee which accompanied the written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; Added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.412—8.52.416)  
8.44.080 - Liability of officers or employees of the city. 
A.  No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage incurred or alleged to be incurred as a result of any act required, permitted for authorized to be done or performed in the discharge of his duties pursuant to this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required, permitted or authorized in the discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be deemed an action against the city and shall be defended by the City Attorney. 
B.  The City Attorney shall appear at the request of the Hearing Officer at any hearing before the Hearing Officer with regard to matters pertaining to this chapter, and shall take such legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Duty to Report Violations. The Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director of Community Development, Assistant Director of Community Development, Chief Building Official, and the other department heads of the city shall make reports in writing to the Code Enforcement Supervisor of any premises, building or structure which is believed to be a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter whenever the facts thereof shall come to the attention of such officer in his or her official capacity. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.417—8.52.419)  
8.44.090 - Repairs to be made in accordance with building, fire and health regulations. 
All repairs, alterations and reconstruction shall be made in the manner required by the provisions of the Building, Fire and Health Codes. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or authorize any violation of these codes. (Added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.420)  
8.44.100 - Failure to comply with order—Hearing Officer may sell, repair, improve, relocate, vacate, demolish and remove by resolution. 
A.  Whenever an order to rehabilitate, repair, improve, relocate, vacate, demolish or remove anything which constitutes a public nuisance from any premises, building or structure has not been complied with within the time set from the time that the order becomes final, or within such additional time as may for good cause be granted by extension, the Hearing Officer shall by resolution duly adopted have the power, in addition to any other remedy: 
1.  To cause the building or structure located on the premises to be sold in any manner which the Hearing Officer may determine; provided, however, that any such sale shall be upon the condition that the building or structure be forthwith demolished, the wreckage and debris thereof removed and the lot cleared and cleaned. The Hearing Officer may sell such building singly or otherwise as the Hearing Officer may find desirable in order to ensure that the consideration obtained from any one or any number of such buildings shall be adequate to pay the cost of demolition and of clearing and cleaning the sites. Any proceeds remaining from the sale shall be distributed to the parties or persons lawfully entitled thereto; 
2.  To cause the building or structure located on the premises to be rehabilitated, repaired, improved, relocated, vacated, demolished or removed by such means as the Hearing Officer and the Neighborhood Services Supervisor may deem advisable. All work of rehabilitation, repair, improvement, relocation, demolition or removal shall be accomplished under the supervision of the Neighborhood Services Supervisor; and 
3.  To cause to be removed or relocated from the premises anything which constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. 
B.  The cost of rehabilitation, repair, improvement, relocation, vacation, demolition or removal shall be paid through either funds derived from the city residential rehabilitation loan program and/or the paint/fix-up/energy conservation program or other appropriate programs authorized through the city's entitlement of Title I, community development block grant funds authorized under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 and 1977 and the Comprehensive Employment Training Act (Title VI: Stimulus), or from general funds specifically allocated by the City Council for that purpose and shall be assessed against the property upon which the particular public nuisance is located. 
C.  A resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section may be issued concurrently and in combination with an order issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.44.070 when both concern the same public nuisance, provided that such resolution shall not become effective until after expiration of the time specified in the order for abatement of said public nuisance, including any extensions granted thereto. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.421, 8.52.422) 
(Ord. No. 2790, 3-20-2012)  
8.44.110 - Other provisions of the municipal code unaffected. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to repeal by implication any other provision of the El Monte Municipal Code and the adoption, hereof shall not be deemed to affect or diminish the power or authority of any officer or employee of the city to condemn any building or structure erected or maintained in violation of any other provision of said code. 
(Added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.423)  
8.44.120 - Record of cost for abatement. 
The Neighborhood Services Supervisor shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the cost of abatement and the rehabilitation, repair, improvement, relocation, vacation, demolition or removal of said premises, building or structures, including any salvage value relating thereto; provided that before said report is submitted to said City Council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least five (5) days upon such premises, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by the City Council for confirmation; a copy of said report and notice shall be served upon the owners of said property, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.44.050 and this chapter at least five (5) days prior to submitting the same to the City Council; proof of said posting and service shall be made by affidavit filed with the City Clerk. The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in obtaining title reports, in the preparation and service of notices, preparation of specifications the preparation and award of contracts, all costs of inspecting any work done pursuant to this chapter, the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder, the costs of preparing materials for any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, and a reasonable additional sum to cover the cost of administrative overhead. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.424) 
(Ord. No. 2790, 3-20-2012)  
8.44.130 - Report of abatement—Hearing and proceedings. 
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering said report, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report and recommendation of the Code Enforcement Supervisor, together with any objections or protests. Thereupon the City Council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which by resolution the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the City Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.425)  
8.44.140 - Assessment of costs against property—Lien. 
A.  The total cost for abating such nuisance, as so confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment. 
B.  After such confirmation and recordation, a copy may be delivered to the Tax Collector whereupon it shall be the duty of said Tax Collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes or after such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
C.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in a form substantially as follows: 
(Claim of City of El Monte) 
 Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Chapter 8.44 of the El Monte Municipal Code, the Neighborhood Services Supervisor of the City of El Monte did on or about the _____ day of ________, 120yrrule;, cause the premises hereinafter described to be rehabilitated or the building or structure on the property hereinafter described to be repaired, improved, relocated, vacated, demolished or removed in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the City Council of the City of El Monte did on the _____ day of ________, 120yrrule;, assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair, improvements, relocation, vacation, demolition or removal upon the real property hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof, and the said City of El Monte does hereby claim a lien on such rehabilitation, repair, improvement, relocation, vacation, demolition or removal in the amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of $_____; and the same shall be a lien upon said real property and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
 The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of El Monte, County of Los Angeles, State of California, and particularly described as follows: 
(DESCRIPTION) 
DATED: This _____ day of ________, 20___. 
___________ 
Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
of the City of El Monte 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.426—8.52.428) 
(Ord. No. 2790, 3-20-2012)  
8.44.150 - Preliminary recorded notice of Hearing Officer's proceedings. 
A.  The Neighborhood Services Supervisor may recommend that the Hearing Officer authorize the recordation of a preliminary notice of the Hearing Officer's proceedings affecting a parcel of land with the office of the County Recorder. The owner of the property and interested persons shall be informed in the notice of hearing by the Hearing Officer that the Hearing Officer may consider the recommendation of the Neighborhood Services Supervisor to cause a preliminary notice to be filed for recordation with the office of the County Recorder upon the conclusion of the hearing, if appropriate. The preliminary notice shall be filed for recordation substantially in the form described in this section. 
B.  During the hearing of the Hearing Officer upon the report of the Neighborhood Services Officer, the Hearing Officer shall consider the recommendation of the Neighborhood Services Supervisor to record a preliminary notice. If the Hearing Officer finds that a public nuisance exists on the property and that the reasonably estimated cost to the property owner or responsible party of complying with the order of the Hearing Officer exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or that such work or rehabilitation or compliance shall take more than five (5) days to complete, then in such event the Hearing Officer may approve the recommendation of the Neighborhood Services Supervisor and authorize the recordation of a preliminary notice. The Hearing Officer may authorize the recordation of a preliminary notice in the event that a property owner or other interested person in privity with the property owner may request a continuance of the date set for the hearing upon the report of the Neighborhood Services Officer. 
C.  The preliminary notice shall be filed for recordation substantially in the following form: 
RECORDING REQUESTED BY 
AND WHEN RECORDED MAIL TO 
City of El Monte 
Neighborhood Services Division 
11333 Valley Boulevard 
El Monte, California 91731 
Attn: Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
_____
(Space Above Line Reserved 
For Use By Recorder) 
PRELIMINARY NOTICE OF PROCEEDINGS CITY OF EL MONTE 
HEARING OFFICER AND ZONING REVIEW COMMISSION 
 PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that on _______, 20___, the City of El Monte Hearing Officer has initiated proceedings and approved a Work Order No. _____ regarding the existence of certain conditions upon the real property generally located at 
_____
_____
El Monte, California (the "Property") and as more particularly described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. Such conditions may constitute a public nuisance or be otherwise not in compliance with certain provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code and other applicable law. A copy of Work Order No. ______ may be reviewed at City Hall during regular business hours. 
 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION REGARDING THE PROPERTY AND THIS PRELIMINARY NOTICE, PLEASE CONTACT THE FOLLOWING PERSONS: 
File No. ___ 	[Name of 

Property Owner] 
_____	_____
_____	_____
_____ 	_____
(Title) 	_____
City of El Monte 	_____
Neighborhood Services Division 	_____
11333 Valley Boulevard 	_____
El Monte, California 91731 	_____
(626) 580-2080 	_____
	CITY OF EL MONTE 
Dated: _____   	By: _____ 
	Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
	 City of El Monte 
 
 Exhibit "A"-Legal Description 
D.  A release of a preliminary notice may be recorded upon submission of proof acceptable to the Neighborhood Services Supervisor that the conditions of an order of the Hearing Officer have been satisfied. A release of a preliminary notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
RECORDING REQUESTED BY 
AND WHEN RECORDED MAIL TO: 
City of El Monte 
Neighborhood Services Division 
11333 Valley Boulevard 
El Monte, California 91731 
Attn: Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
_____
(Space Above Line Reserved 
For Use By Recorder) 
RELEASE OF 
PRELIMINARY NOTICE OF PROCEEDING 
City of El Monte 
Hearing Officer and Zoning Review 
Commission 
 PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the terms and conditions of City of El Monte, California Hearing Officer and Zoning Review Commission Work order No. _____ dated _______, have been satisfied. 
 PLEASE TAKE FURTHER NOTICE that the City of El Monte hereby releases, terminates and cancels that certain Preliminary Notice of Proceedings, dated _______, and recorded as Instrument No. _____. 
 Said Instrument No. _____, formerly affected the real property generally located at: 
_____
_____
and more fully described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. 
	CITY OF EL MONTE 
Dated: _____   	By: _____ 
	Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
	 City of El Monte 
 
Exhibit "A" - Legal Description 
E.  In the event that the affected property owner or other person identified in the order of the Hearing Officer fails to submit proof acceptable to the Neighborhood Services Supervisor that the conditions of an order of the Hearing Officer have been satisfied within one hundred forty (140) days of the date following the execution of a preliminary notice of proceedings or in the event that the affected property owner or other person affected by an order of the Hearing Officer has initiated an appeal or other review of such order and has not satisfied the terms of such an order, the Neighborhood Services Supervisor shall cause to be filed for recordation a notice of proceedings in substantially the following form: 
RECORDING REQUESTED BY 
AND WHEN RECORDED MAIL TO: 
City of El Monte 
Neighborhood Services Division 
11333 Valley Boulevard 
El Monte, California 91731 
Attn: Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
_____
(Space Above Line Reserved 
For Use By Recorder) 
NOTICE OF PROCEEDING 
City of El Monte 
Hearing Officer and Zoning Review 
Commission 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT ON ________, 20___, a duly noticed public hearing was held by the City of El Monte Hearing Officer and Zoning Review Commission for the purpose of determining whether a public nuisance as defined in the El Monte Municipal Code and other applicable law exists on the property located at: _____ 
_____
(the "Property") 
as more particularly described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. 
 At said public hearing the Property was found to be a public nuisance for the reasons identified in Work Order No. _____. A copy of said Work Order is on file with the City of El Monte Neighborhood Services Division and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
 As of the date of this Notice of Proceedings one or more provisions of Work Order No. _____ have not been satisfied and interested persons are advised to Contact the following person for further information: 
Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
City of El Monte 
Code Enforcement Division 
11333 Valley Boulevard 
El Monte, California 91731 
(626)580-2080 
 This Notice of Proceeding extends the effectiveness of that certain Preliminary Notice of Proceeding dated _____, and recorded as Instrument No. _____. 
	CITY OF EL MONTE 
Dated: _____   	By: _____ 
	Neighborhood Services Supervisor 
	 City of El Monte 
 
Exhibit "A" - Legal Description 
F.  The Neighborhood Services Supervisor shall concurrently upon the recordation of any document described in this section cause a copy of the document to be transmitted by First Class United States Mail to the persons who own, have a security interest in or who are tenants of the affected property at the address of such persons as may be known to the Neighborhood Services Supervisor based upon reasonable inquiry. 
G.  A notice of proceedings shall be released, terminated and canceled upon the approval of the Neighborhood Services Supervisor and certification from the Finance Director that: (1) either all sums which may be payable to the City of El Monte in connection with costs incurred by the city with respect to the abatement of the public nuisance have been paid; or (2) that other appropriate arrangements have been made for such payment. The form of such a release shall be in recordable form substantially similar to the form described in subsection D of this section. 
H.  The City Council may by resolution establish a schedule of fees and charges to be assessed by the Neighborhood Services Supervisor in connection with the verification of information and preparation of documents in recordable form to release a preliminary notice or other notice of proceedings. Such fees and charges shall be limited to a charge which is reasonably estimated to be not more than the actual cost to the city, including reasonable overhead expenses, or reviewing and processing a request for such a release. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.429) 
(Ord. No. 2790, 3-20-2012)  
8.44.160 - Owner responsibility. 
The owner of any premises within the city has the primary responsibility for keeping said premises free of public nuisances. Tenants and occupants of the premises, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to be the agents of the owner. 
(Added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.430)  
8.44.170 - Alternatives. 
Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the City Council from ordering the City Attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. 
(Added during 1999 recodification as § 8.52.431)  
8.44.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Maintenance of Public Nuisances Prohibited. The owner, the owner's agent, or any other person having charge or control of any premises within the city, who maintains any public nuisance as defined in this code is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of the provisions of this code is committed or permitted to continue. 
B.  Penalties for Disregarding Order. The owner or other person having charge and control over any premises, building or structure determined by the Hearing Officer to be a public nuisance who shall fail to comply with an order of the Hearing Officer after it becomes final shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any order to vacate such premises, building or structure in accordance with such order given as provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who removes or defaces any notice or order posted as required by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Interference Prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the Hearing Officer or with an officer of any department of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any premises, building or structure which has been ordered by the Hearing Officer to be rehabilitated, repaired, improved, relocated, vacated, demolished or removed, or with any person to who such premises, building or structure has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whenever any such representative of the Hearing Officer, officer of the city, purchaser or person having an interest or estate in such premises, building or structure is engaged in rehabilitating, repairing, improving, relocating, vacating, demolishing or removing any thing which constitutes a public nuisance from such premises, building or structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, or authorized or directed pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 2551 § 2 (part), 2002; added during 1999 recodification as §§ 8.52.501—8.52.502)  
Chapter 8.48 - MISCELLANEOUS HEALTH REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.48.010 - Lunch cart near school. 
No person shall maintain or conduct any lunch, meal, or eating cart, wagon or stand, in or upon any public street or other public place within three hundred (300) feet of the nearest property line of any property upon which a public school building is located. 
(Prior code § 5500)  
8.48.020 - Toilets. 
No person shall install, maintain or use any water closet in any premises or in any house or building unless it be flushed with water contained in a tank holding not less than four (4) gallons of water, provided however, that a flush meter valve or other similar apparatus may be used, and provided further that said water closet shall be connected with the sewer system of the city where the sewer connects with the street or alley upon which said premises, house or building abuts and in all other cases to a cesspool, which said cesspool shall be located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
(Prior code § 5501)  
8.48.030 - Other animals—Keeping of. 
No person shall keep at any location within the city any horse, colt, mule, burro, bull, cow, calf, goat or sheep except as expressly permitted pursuant to the city's zoning regulations. (Added during 1999 recodification as prior code § 5502)  
Chapter 8.54 - ABANDONED CARTS—RETRIEVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT 
Sections: 
 
8.54.010 - Properly marked carts—Unauthorized removal or possession. 
A.  Carts Subject to this Section. This section shall apply to all carts that satisfy all of the signage requirements set forth under Section 8.54.040 (Mandatory Cart Signage) of this chapter. 
B.  General Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following with any cart subject to this section: 
1.  Remove the cart from the premises of a business establishment to which it is furnished with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner and/or the business establishment of possession of the cart; 
2.  Be in possession of any cart that has been removed from the premises of a business establishment to which it is furnished with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner and/or the business establishment of possession of the cart; 
3.  Be in possession of any cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated, or altered with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner and/or the business establishment to which it is furnished of possession of the cart; 
4.  Alter, convert, or tamper with a cart, or remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on the cart with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner and/or the business establishment to which it is furnished of possession of the cart; or 
5.  Be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on the premises of a business establishment to which it is furnished with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner and/or the business establishment of possession of the cart. 
Any cart that is owned by, provided to, or otherwise used by a business establishment or its customers in connection with the operations of the business establishment shall be considered to have been "furnished" to the business establishment for purposes of this section. 
C.  Exceptions to General Prohibition. The unlawful acts set forth in subsection A of this section shall not constitute an offense when carried-out by the following persons under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  By a cart owner or the agents or employees of the cart owner acting in the lawful and customary course of their agency or employment; 
2.  By a business establishment that has been furnished with the cart or the agents or employees of the business establishment acting in the lawful and customary course of their agency or employment; or 
3.  By any person given written permission to engage in any of the acts enumerated under subsection A of this section by the cart owner, or the on-duty manager of the business establishment to which the cart is furnished. No such written permission shall remain valid for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours from the date and time of its issuance. In order to be deemed valid and adequate, any documentation evidencing such written permission must include the following information: 
a.  The date and time upon which the permission was given; 
b.  The name of the person who granted such permission on behalf of the cart owner or the business establishment to which the cart is furnished; 
c.  The name of the person to whom such permission is granted; 
d.  A brief description of the nature and scope of such permission; and 
e.  Notice and instruction advising the person granted permission that abandonment of the cart is a violation of state law and the El Monte Municipal Code. 
Any person who has not been granted such permission or who fails to produce written documentation which adequately evidences the grant of such permission may be cited. 
D.  Seizure of Carts. Any cart seized in the course of issuing a citation for the violations enumerated under subsection A of this section shall be impounded in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.54.020 of this chapter. 
E.  Statutory Authorization. The procedures set forth under this section shall be enforced pursuant to, and in accordance with, Sections 22435.2 through 22435.5 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 8, 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.020 - Properly marked carts—Abandonment and procedures for impoundment. 
A.  Carts Subject to this Section. This section shall apply to all carts that satisfy all of the signage requirements set forth under Section 8.54.040 (Mandatory Cart Signage) of this chapter. 
B.  General Prohibition Against Abandonment. It is unlawful for any person to leave or abandon any cart subject to this section at a location other than the premises of the business establishment to which the cart is furnished, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart from the cart owner and/or the business establishment. Any cart owned by, provided to, or otherwise used by a business establishment or its customers in connection with its operations shall be considered to have been "furnished" to the business establishment for purposes of this section. 
C.  Expedited Impoundment Procedures. 
1.  Immediate Impoundment. With respect to any cart subject to this section, the Director and the City Manager shall have authority to immediately retrieve and impound any such cart located outside the property perimeter of the premises of the business establishment to which the cart is furnished, provided the cart owner or its agent is given actual notice of the City's immediate impoundment of the cart within twenty-four (24) hours following such impoundment and provided the cart owner or agent is given the location of the facility where the cart has been impounded. 
2.  Emergency Removal and Impoundment. With respect to any cart subject to this section, the Director, the City Manager and any other employee of the City may immediately remove and impound any such cart located on private property or in the public right-of-way in any instance where the location of the cart impedes emergency services or otherwise poses a hazard to the public. The City shall provide notice of such impoundment in accordance with subsection (C)(1) of this section. 
3.  Timely Retrieval from Impoundment. If the cart is reclaimed by the cart owner, the business establishment or their respective agents within three (3) business days following notice of the impoundment, the cart shall be released to the same at no charge, including any impound or storage fees or fines that would otherwise have been applicable under subsections (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section. Furthermore, any cart reclaimed within the three (3) business-day period set forth in this subsection shall not be deemed an "occurrence" within the meaning of subsection (C)(5) of this section. 
4.  Payment of Costs and Storage Fees. With respect to any cart impounded in accordance with subsection (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, the owner of a cart and the business establishment furnished with the cart shall be jointly and severally liable for the City's actual cost of retrieval and storage for any cart that is not retrieved within three (3) business days following notice of its impoundment as required under subsection (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section. By resolution, the City Council may adopt and from time to time amend a schedule of costs which reasonably estimates the cost of retrieving a cart and the per day cost of storing the same. 
5.  Payment of Fines. In addition to the costs and storage fees referenced in subsection (C)(4) of this section, the City may fine the cart owner and/or the business establishment in an amount that does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each occurrence in excess of three (3) occurrences during a specified six (6) month period. For purposes of this subsection (C)(5) of this section, the relevant six (6) month periods shall be January 1st through June 30th of each calendar year and July 1st through December 31st of each calendar year. As required under subdivision (f) of Section 22435.7 of the California Business and Professions Code, a single occurrence includes all carts impounded within a twenty-four (24) hour period. 
6.  Appeal of Costs, Fees and Fines. The decision of the Director or the City Manager to impose costs, fees and/or fines under this subsection C of this section shall be final unless appealed in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the imposition of the costs, fees and/or fine. All such appeals shall be filed at the office of the City Clerk. 
7.  Disposal of Unclaimed Carts. Any cart that remains unclaimed after thirty (30) days from the date notice of impoundment was received may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the City. 
D.  Delayed Impoundment. 
1.  Three-Day Retrieval Period. With respect to any cart subject to this section, the Director and the City Manager shall have authority to retrieve and impound any such cart located outside the property perimeter of the premises of the business establishment to which the cart is furnished, provided the cart has not been retrieved after three (3) business days' notice to the cart owner or the cart owner's agent of the discovery and location of the abandoned cart. 
2.  Payment of Costs and Fees. With respect to any cart impounded in accordance with subsection (D)(1) of this section, the owner of a cart and the business establishment furnished with the cart shall be jointly and severally liable for the City's actual cost of retrieval and storage. The City Council may adopt a schedule of costs which reasonably estimates the cost of retrieving a cart and the per day cost of storing an impounded cart. 
3.  Payment of Fines. In addition to the costs and storage fees referenced in subsection (D)(2) of this section, the City may fine the cart owner and/or the business establishment in an amount that does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each occurrence in excess of three (3) occurrences during a specified six (6) month period. For purposes of subsection D of this section, the relevant six (6) month periods shall be January 1st through June 30th of each calendar year and July 1st through December 31st of each calendar year. As required under subdivision (f) of Section 22435.7 of the California Business and Professions Code, a single occurrence includes all carts impounded in a twenty-four (24) hour period. 
4.  Appeal of Costs, Fees and Fines. The decision of the Director or the City Manager to impose costs and/or fines under subsection D of this section shall be final unless appealed in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the imposition of the costs and/or fine. All such appeals shall be filed at the office of the El Monte City Clerk. 
5.  Disposal of Unclaimed Carts. Any cart the remains unclaimed after thirty (30) days from the date notice of impoundment was received may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the City. 
E.  Proof of Ownership or Authorized Possession. All persons seeking to reclaim a cart impounded in accordance with this section shall be required to present documentation which establishes proof of ownership or authorized possession to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director or the City Manager. The presentation of such proof of ownership shall be an absolute defense of the Director, the City Manager and/or the City against any claim brought be a person contesting the true ownership to the cart. 
F.  Statutory Authorization. The procedures set forth under this section shall be enforced pursuant to and in accordance with Section 22435.7 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 9, 14 (part), 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.030 - Unmarked or inadequately marked carts. 
A.  Carts Subject to Section. This section shall apply to any cart which does not satisfy all of the signage requirements of set forth under Section 8.54.040 of this chapter. 
B.  Prohibition Against Abandonment. It is unlawful for any person to leave or abandon any cart subject to this section (i) upon any portion of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any sidewalk, alley, street or roadway; (ii) upon any public property, including, but not limited to, any public park or school; or (iii) upon any portion of private property without the express permission of the property owner. 
C.  Prohibition Against Unauthorized Removal or Possession. It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following with any cart subject to this section without the written permission of the business establishment to which the cart is furnished: 
1.  Remove the cart from the premises of the business establishment; 
2.  Be in possession of the cart after it has been removed from the premises of the business establishment; 
3.  Be in possession of the cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated or altered; 
4.  Alter, convert, or tamper with the cart; 
5.  Remove any part or portion of the cart from the premises of the business establishment; 
6.  Remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on the cart; 
7.  Be in possession of any such cart while that cart is not located on the premises of the business establishment. 
Any cart that is owned by, provided to, or otherwise used by a business establishment or its customers in connection with the operations of the business establishment shall be considered to have been "furnished" to the business establishment for purposes of this section. No written permission contemplated under this subsection shall remain valid for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours from the date and time of its issuance. In order to be deemed valid and adequate, any documentation evidencing such written permission must include the following information: (i) the date and time upon which the permission was given; (ii) the name of the person who granted such permission on behalf of the cart owner or the business establishment to which the cart is furnished; (iii) the name of the person to whom such permission is granted; (iv) a brief description of the nature and scope of such permission; and (v) notice and instruction advising the person granted permission that abandonment of the cart is a violation of state law and the El Monte Municipal Code. Any person who has not been granted such permission or who fails to produce written documentation which adequately evidences the grant of such permission may be cited. 
D.  Impoundment Procedures. Any abandoned cart subject to this section may be immediately impounded, maintained and subsequently destroyed or otherwise disposed of in conformity with Section 2080.4 of the California Civil Code. 
E.  Procedures for Final Disposition of Carts. In the event a valid and up-to-date phone number or address for returning the cart does not appear on an abandoned cart, the Director shall deliver possession of the cart to the El Monte Police Department (hereinafter, the "Police Department"). The Police Department shall hold the cart for a period of at least three (3) months. If the cart remains unclaimed beyond the expiration of the three (3) month holding period, the cart may be sold for its reasonable scrap value or at a public auction to the highest bidder, with notice of such sale being given by the Director at least five (5) calendar days before the time fixed therefore by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county of Los Angeles. 
F.  Retrieval by Cart Owner. If the owner of an abandoned cart or the business establishment to which it was furnished appears within the three (3) month holding period, the Police Department shall release and surrender the cart to the cart owner subject to payment of any and all fines set forth under the El Monte Municipal Code and the payment of all actual costs for retrieving and storing the cart and any impoundment fees established by City Council resolution. The owner of any such cart and the business establishment to which the cart is furnished shall be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of any fines, storage costs and fees established or otherwise authorized under this section. All persons seeking to reclaim a cart impounded in accordance with this section shall be required to submit proof identification in the manner required under subsection E of Section 8.54.020. 
G.  Occurrence. Each cart subject to this section shall constitute a separate occurrence for purposes of imposing fines, storage fees and other impoundment fees. 
(Ord. 2704 § 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.040 - Mandatory cart signage. 
A.  Required Cart Signage. Every cart owned by, furnished to, or otherwise used by, a business establishment for use by its customers or employees shall have, permanently affixed and easily visible, a cart identification sign or engraved surface which includes the following information: 
1.  The name of the owner of the cart and the name of the specific business establishment to which the cart has been furnished if different from the cart owner; 
2.  Notice that the unauthorized removal and/or possession of the cart beyond the perimeter of the premises upon which the business establishment is located is a violation of the El Monte Municipal Code and the laws of the state of California; 
3.  A written explanation of the procedures to be followed for the authorized removal of a cart from the premises; and 
4.  A valid and up-to-date telephone number or a valid and up-to-date address for reporting the location of an abandoned cart so that it may be retrieved by the cart owner or the business establishment to which it is furnished. 
Such mandatory cart signage shall be conspicuously located on each cart and all wording shall be in a font size of no less than sixteen (16) points so as to be easily visible and readable. 
B.  Parties Responsible for Cart Signage. The requirements of subsection A of this section shall be a joint and several responsibility of the cart owner and the business establishment to which the cart is furnished, if different from the cart owner. 
C.  Compliance Period. All cart owners shall be required to comply with this section within one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of the ordinance which codifies this chapter. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 10, 11, 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.050 - Use of carts on premises—Compliance with containment requirements. 
A.  Business Permit Required. Any business establishment which is furnished with a cart that is provided to, or otherwise made available for use by its customers, agents or employees; or which otherwise uses a cart in connection with its operations shall be required to posses a valid business permit accompanied by a duly approved cart containment plan as set forth under Chapter 5.25 (Use of Shopping and Laundry Carts) of this code. Except as otherwise provided under this section, every business establishment shall be required to comply with all of the terms, conditions and other requirements of its most current business permit and the corresponding cart containment plan. 
B.  Compliance with Zoning Requirements and Land Use Approvals. Every business establishment shall be required to comply with all requirements of Chapter 17.06 (General Regulations) of Title 17 Zoning of this code relating to the installation of physical containment measures designed to prevent the unauthorized removal of carts from a premises. Every business establishment shall be required to comply with all of the conditions of any and all applicable discretionary land use approvals (e.g., conditional use permits, modifications, variances, design review approvals, subdivision maps, parcel maps and the like) approved by the El Monte Planning Commission or the El Monte City Council on appeal, including all such conditions of approval relating to the installation and/or implementation of devices and/or practices designed to contain carts within the premises of the business establishment. 
C.  Conflicts with Land Use Approvals. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the express requirements or conditions of any discretionary land use approvals and the express requirements or conditions of any applicable business permit or cart containment plan approved by the Permit Committee, the terms of the discretionary land use approval shall control but only in so far as there is a conflict or inconsistency and no further. Unless expressly stated under the terms or conditions of any land use approval, nothing in any such approval shall be construed to prohibit the Permit Committee from imposing additional cart containment requirements in accordance with Chapter 5.25 (Use of Shopping and Laundry Carts). 
D.  Commencement of Business Permit Requirement. All business establishments shall be required to comply with subsection A of this section within one hundred twenty (120) days from the effective date of this chapter. Subsections B and C of this section shall take effect upon the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 12, 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.060 - Violation of chapter; alternatives to criminal prosecution. 
A.  Criminal Prosecution. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Section 8.54.010 or 8.54.020 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided under Section 22435.3 of the California Business and Professions Code. Violations of Section 8.54.010, Section 8.54.020 and all other provisions of this chapter shall also constitute a misdemeanor as set forth under subsection A of Section 1.24.010 of this code and any person so convicted shall be punishable in accordance with subsection A of Section 1.24.010. 
B.  Administrative Citation Process. In lieu of criminal prosecution pursuant to subsection A of this section, violations of this chapter may be prosecuted by the issuance of an administrative citation issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.18 (Administrative Citations) of this code. 
(Ord. 2704 § 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.070 - Cumulative effect. 
The provisions of this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any and all other procedures or remedies provided under this code or the laws of the state of California for the abatement of, or prosecutions for, nuisances. The proceedings for abatement pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice nor affect any other action, whether civil, criminal, equitable or administrative, for the abatement or other remedy of such conditions. 
(Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.080 - Notices; deadlines dates. 
A.  Notices. Any notices or written communication issued by the Director, the Permit Committee or any other official, officer or employee of the City which are required under this chapter shall be conclusively deemed received by the recipient on the date of personal service or three (3) consecutive days following deposit of the same in the United States Mail, certified and properly addressed. In the event contact information for a cart owner or a business establishment changes, the cart owner or business establishment, whichever the case may be, shall provide the Director and the Permit Committee with an update within three (3) business days of said change. 
B.  Deadline Dates. If any deadline date set forth under this chapter falls on a date in which the City of El Monte is not open for business, the deadline date shall be extended to five-thirty p.m. of the next day in which the City of El Monte is open for business. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 14 (part), 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.090 - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Director and the Permit Committee. Subject to approval by City Council resolution, the Director and the Permit Committee are authorized to promulgate, implement and enforce such rules, regulations and procedures as may be desirable, necessary or appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter and other provisions of this code relating to the use of carts. 
B.  The Director and the Permit Committee are authorized to enter into, on or upon any, public area to examine a cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of the cart owner, or to retrieve carts in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit or otherwise limit the authority of the Director and/or the Permit Committee to enter private property pursuant to permission granted by the owner or occupant thereof or pursuant to any duly issued inspection warrant or other court order. 
C.  In the event the City of El Monte delays enforcement of the provisions of this chapter against any person, the City of El Monte fully retains its right to prosecute or penalize violations in accordance with the powers granted herein. The City of El Monte shall not waive any violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2704 § 14 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.100 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall have the meanings set forth as follows: 
Abandoned Cart. The term "abandoned cart" means (i) any cart owned by, or otherwise furnished to, a business establishment which is placed or otherwise located outside of outer perimeter of the premises upon which business establishment is located; or (ii) any other cart left unattended in the public right-of-way, on a public street or on private property without the consent of the private property owner. 
Business Establishment. The term "business establishment" refers to any person, as defined herein, engaged in a for-profit or non-profit enterprise, undertaking or activity for which a City of El Monte business license and/or business permit is required, including but not limited to any for-profit commercial retail business or enterprise. 
Cart. The term "cart" means either a shopping cart or a laundry cart as defined herein. 
Cart Owner. The term "cart owner" means (i) any person who owns a cart that is use or otherwise located within the City of El Monte; (ii) any business establishment located in the City of El Monte which is furnished with a cart for use by its customers, agents, or employees; or (iii) any business establishment which uses a cart in connection with its operations in the City of El Monte. 
City. The capitalized term "City" means the City of El Monte, California. 
City Council. The term "City Council" means the City Council of the City of El Monte. 
City Manager. The term "City Manager" means the City Manager for the City of El Monte or designee. 
Director. The term "Director" means the Chief of Police of the City of El Monte or designee. 
Laundry Cart. The term "laundry cart" means any basket or other like container of any size, dimension or material construction which is mounted on wheels and used in a cash operated laundry or dry cleaning business establishment by the customer, agents, employees typically, but not necessarily exclusively, for the purpose of transporting clothing, fabrics and/or the supplies necessary to process them. 
Lot; Lot Area. The term "lot" means a parcel of real property shown with a separate and distinct number on a plot of map recorded or filed with the Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk for the county of Los Angeles, or as otherwise deemed under the Subdivision Map Act. The term "Lot Area" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot (excluding public streets and other public rights-of-way). 
Parking Area. The term "parking area" means any area within the perimeter of a premises as defined herein that is designated or otherwise used for the parking, stopping, loading or unloading of vehicles, including, but not limited to, any and all motor vehicles used by customers of the business establishment located on the premises. 
Permit Committee. The term "Permit Committee" means the El Monte Permit Committee organized under Chapter 5.12 (Business Permits Generally) of this code. 
Person. The term "person" means and includes, but is not limited to, any natural person, individual, firm, association, organization, sole proprietorship, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, business trust, living trust, joint venture or any other legal entity. The term "person" as applied under this chapter is to be given the broadest possible meaning and is inclusive of any business establishment or cart owner. 
Premises. The term "premises" means the lot area or portion thereof owned, leased, managed, maintained, occupied or otherwise used by a business establishment, including all buildings, structures parking areas, public areas, common areas owned, leased, managed, maintained, occupied or otherwise used by the business establishment or the customers, agents or employees of a business establishment in connection with, or in the furtherance of, its operations. 
Public Area. The term "public area" means any real property within the territorial boundaries of the City of El Monte that is open to, or otherwise accessible by, members of the general public, including, but not limited to, any public right-of-way, any public street and those areas of privately owned real property that are customarily open to, or otherwise accessible by, members of the general public such as the parking areas or common areas within a premises as defined herein. 
Shopping Cart. The term "shopping cart" means any basket or other like container of any size, dimension or material construction which is mounted on wheels or a similar device and is typically (but not necessarily exclusively) used by the customers, agents or employees of a retail business establishment for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. 
(Ord. 2704 §§ 13, 14 (part), 15 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
8.54.110 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
A.  The abandonment of carts on public property or upon the public right-of-way (including, but not limited to, public streets and sidewalks) as well as the unauthorized abandonment of carts upon private property constitutes a public nuisance that adversely effects the public health, safety and welfare in multiple ways set forth in subsection B of this section below. 
B.  The El Monte City Council has adopted this chapter in consideration of the following findings: 
1.  Abandoned carts contribute to visual blight that adversely impacts the image and quality of life in a community by contributing to a sense and atmosphere of neglect, decay, and public apathy. Abandoned carts can also become unsightly receptacles for trash and other debris and can even become trash themselves when damaged. The proliferation of abandoned carts also has an adverse impact on property values and generally undermines efforts to promote individual responsibility for the maintenance, upkeep and appearance of a community. 
2.  Abandoned carts are potential hazards to pedestrians and motorists alike as they can roll onto, or block, pedestrian and motor vehicle rights-of-way and even block sidewalk access to wheelchair bound residents and other persons with impaired mobility. 
3.  As determined by the American Academy of Pediatrics and news media reports on the subject, the design of many carts poses an inherent danger to young children in the form of tip-overs even when parents are present. It follows that abandoned carts pose an even greater threat to children who are attracted to carts, in the absence of any parental supervision whatsoever, when such devices are left abandoned on public streets, parks or other places where children pass or congregate. 
4.  Stolen and abandoned carts are all too frequently used to facilitate the unlawful scavenging of recyclable materials from City-authorized waste receptacles thereby undermining the City's efforts to meet certain recycling and waste diversion goals. 
5.  A significant number of the carts collected at the City's expense included carts that were not promptly collected by business establishments, including those who purportedly retain the services of companies in the business of shopping cart or laundry cart retrieval. The delayed or untimely retrieval of carts increases the likelihood that they will cause harm and/or be misused. 
6.  Although the installation of physical containment measures will involve an initial investment in containment equipment, a long term savings should be realized by business establishments, consumers/residents, and the City as the need for costly ongoing retrieval is diminished. 
7.  Section 22435 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code (hereinafter, the "State Scheme"). The state scheme relates to the following: (i) the manner by which abandoned carts which satisfy certain marking and identification requirements set forth under Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1 may be impounded by municipalities; (ii) the circumstances under which certain statutorily specified penalties and costs may (or may not) be imposed upon the owner of a properly marked cart as a result of its abandonment by a third-party and subsequent impoundment by a municipality; and (iii) the circumstances under which the removal, alteration or abandonment of a properly marked cart may be deemed unlawful and thereby become punishable as a misdemeanor. 
8.  In recognition of finding in subsection (B)(7) of this section, this chapter is not in conflict with, or otherwise preempted by, the provisions of the state scheme in that provisions of this chapter do not expressly conflict with any provision of the state scheme and largely track the provisions of the state scheme. 
9.  This chapter is found to satisfy the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 22435.8 which provides that the state scheme (Business and Professions Code Section 22435 et seq.) "shall not invalidate an ordinance of, or be construed to prohibit the adoption of an ordinance by, a City...which ordinance regulates or prohibits the removal of shopping carts or laundry carts from the premises or parking area of a retail establishment except to the extent any provision of such an ordinance expressly conflicts with any provision of the [State Scheme]. 
(Ord. 2704 § 14 (part), 2007; Ord. 2691 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 8.56 - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE 
Sections: 
 
8.56.010 - Adoption of the Uniform Housing Code. 
The City Council adopts by reference, the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, copyright 1997 by the International Conference of Building Officials, and said Uniform Housing Code is adopted in total as the law of the city except as provided by this chapter. One copy of the code has been and now is filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out at length in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2556 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.56.020 - Applicability. 
Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. This chapter may be used as a supplement to other chapters of this code or this chapter may be used in conjunction with other chapters of this code. 
(Ord. 2556 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.56.030 - Definitions. 
The words used in each of the codes herein adopted by reference shall have the meaning ascribed to them within each respective code, and in addition thereto the following words shall be understood and defined to have the meanings set forth in the following sub-sections: 
A.  Whenever the term "municipality," "City," or "city of El Monte" is used, it shall mean the city of El Monte or the appropriate agency of said city as the context may reasonably require. 
B.  Whenever the term "Legislative Body" or "City Council" is used, it shall mean the City Council of the city of El Monte, California. 
C.  Whenever the term "Building Official" is used, it shall mean the Chief Building Official and Code Enforcement Supervisor of the city of El Monte or their designee. 
D.  Whenever the term "Department" is used, it shall refer to the Building Division and Code Enforcement Division of the Community Development Department within city of El Monte. 
E.  Hearing Officer shall be a neutral party as designated by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2556 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.56.040 - Deletions. 
Sections 203, 1201.2, 1301.1, 1301.3, 1301.6, 1303.2 1305.1, 1305.2, 1305.3, 1305.4, 1305.5, 1305.6, 1305.7, 1502, 1612 of the Uniform Housing Code as adopted by Section 8.56.010 are deleted and therefrom repealed. 
(Ord. 2556 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.56.050 - Amendments. 
The Uniform Housing Code, as adopted by Section 8.56.010, is amended as follows: 
 Section 110 1.2 (5). Statements advising (i) that any person having any record or title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the building official to a hearing officer, provided that appeal is made in writing as provided in this code, and filed with the building official within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order, and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter. 
 Section 1201.1 (1). A heading in the words: "Before the Hearing Officer of the City of El Monte". 
 Section 1201.3 Scheduling and Noticing Appeal for Hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the hearing officer shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing. Such date shall not be less than ten (10) days or more than sixty (60) days from the date appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
 Section 1301.2. Record. A record of the entire proceeding shall be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the hearing officer. 
 Section 1301.4. Continuances. The hearing officer may grant a continuance for good cause shown, but in no event shall the hearing officer extend the hearing more than thirty (30) days. 
 Section 1301.5. Oaths-Certification. In any proceedings under this chapter, the hearing officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify his/her official acts. 
 Section 1303.1. Filing of Affidavit. The hearing officer may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at the hearing upon the request of the hearing officer upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an affidavit therefore that states the name and address of the proposed witness, specifies the exact things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to the issues involved, and states that the witness has the desired things in possession or under control. A subpoena need not be issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular manner. 
 Section 1304.7.1. What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact that may be judicially noticed by the court of this state or of official of the departments and ordinances of the city rules. 
 Section 1304.7.3. Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the hearing officer. 
 Section 1304.7.4. Inspection of premises. The hearing officer may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that (i) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made, (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection, and (iii) the hearing officer shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party shall then have the right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer. 
 Section 1401.1. General. After any order of the building official or hearing officer made pursuant to this code becomes final, no person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
 Section 1401.2. Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the building official or hearing officer made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may (i) cause each person to be prosecuted under Section 1401.1 or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
 Section 1501.2. Costs. The costs of such work may be made a special assessment against the property involved, or may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, whichever the legislative body of this jurisdiction shall determine is appropriate. 
(Ord. 2556 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.56.060 - Additions. 
The Uniform Housing Code, as adopted by Section 8.56.010, is amended by the following addition: 
 Section 1201.4. Additional Information. If the building official submits an additional written report concerning the notice and order to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall also be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
 Section 1201.5. Prima Facie Evidence. The notice, order, and any report submitted by the building official shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
 Section 1305.1. Written Decision. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the order of the building official and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant personally or sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. 2556 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 8.58 - UNIFORM CODE FOR ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
8.58.010 - Adoption of the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
The City Council adopts by reference, the Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, copyright 1997 by the International Conference of Building Officials, and said Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is adopted in total as the law of the city except as provided by this chapter. One copy of the code has been and now is filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out at length in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2557 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.58.020 - Applicability. 
Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. This chapter may be used as a supplement to other chapters of this code or this chapter may be used in conjunction with other chapters of this code. 
(Ord. 2557 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.58.030 - Definitions. 
The words used in each of the codes herein adopted by reference shall have the meaning ascribed to them within each respective code, and in addition thereto the following words shall be understood and defined to have the meanings set forth in the following subsections: 
A.  Whenever the term "municipality," "city," or "city of El Monte" is used, it shall mean the city of El Monte or the appropriate agency of said city as the context may reasonably require. 
B.  Whenever the term "Legislative Body" or "City Council" is used, it shall mean the City Council of the city of El Monte, California. 
C.  Whenever the term "Building Official" is used, it shall mean the Chief Building Official and Code Enforcement Supervisor of the city of El Monte or their designee. 
D.  Whenever the term "Department" is used, it shall refer to the Building Division and Code Enforcement Division of the Community Development Department of city of El Monte. 
E.  Hearing Officer shall be a neutral party as designated by the Community Development Director or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 2600 § 1 (part), 2004; Ord. 2557 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.58.040 - Deletions. 
Sections 205, 501.2, 601.1, 601.3, 601.6, 603.2 605.1, 605.2, 605.3, 605.4, 605.5, 605.6, 605.7, 802, 912 of the Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by Section 8.58.010 are deleted and therefore repealed. 
(Ord. 2557 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.58.050 - Amendments. 
The Uniform Code For the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted by Section 8.58.010, is amended as follows: 
 Section 401.2 (5) Statements advising (i) that any person having any record or title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the building official to a hearing officer, provided that appeal is made in writing as provided in this code, and filed with the building official within thirty (30) days from the date of service of such notice and order, and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter. 
 Section 501.1 (1). A heading in the words: "Before the Hearing Officer of the City of El Monte". 
 Section 501.3. Scheduling and Noticing Appeal for Hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the hearing officer shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing. Such date shall not be less than ten (10) days or more than sixty (60) days from the date appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
 Section 601.2. Record. A record of the entire proceeding shall be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the hearing officer. 
 Section 601.4. Continuances. The hearing officer may grant a continuance for good cause shown, but in no event shall the hearing officer extend the hearing more than thirty (30) days. 
 Section 601.5. Oaths-Certification. In any proceedings under this chapter, the hearing officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify his/her official acts. 
 Section 603.1. Filing of Affidavit. The hearing officer may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at the hearing upon the request of the hearing officer upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an affidavit therefore that states the name and address of the proposed witness, specifies the exact things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to the issues involved, and states that the witness has the desired things in possession or under control. A subpoena need not be issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular manner. 
 Section 604.7.1. What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact that may be judicially noticed by the court of this state or of official of the departments and ordinances of the city rules. 
 Section 604.7.3. Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the hearing officer. 
 Section 604.7.4. Inspection of the premises. The hearing officer may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that (i) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made, (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection, and (iii) the hearing officer shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party shall then have the right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer. 
 Section 701.1. General. After any order of the building official or hearing officer made pursuant to this code becomes final, no person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
 Section 701.2. Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the building official or hearing officer made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may (i) cause each person to be prosecuted under Section 701.1 or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
 Section 801.2. Costs. The costs of such work may be made a special assessment against the property involved, or may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, whichever the legislative body of this jurisdiction shall determine is appropriate. 
(Ord. 2557 § 1 (part), 2002)  
8.58.060 - Additions. 
The Uniform Code For the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted by Section 8.58.010, is amended by the following additions: 
 Section 501.4. Additional Information. If the building official submits an additional written report concerning the notice and order to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall also be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
 Section 501.5. Prima Facie Evidence. The notice, order, and any report submitted by the building official shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
 Section 605.1. Written Decision. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the order of the building official and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant personally or sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. 2557 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 8.59 - VACANT BUILDING SECURITY AND MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
8.59.010 - Purpose/scope. 
It is the purpose and intent of the El Monte City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish a vacant building security and maintenance program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of vacant buildings or structures which have been vacant or unoccupied for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
The words "boarded" or "boarding" shall mean and refer to the coverings of all entry points to a building or structure, including all doors, windows and roof openings, with plywood or other materials for the purpose of preventing entry into the building by any person except the owner or an authorized agent of the owner. For the purposes of residential property, the standards for boarding a vacant residential building or structure, shall be substantially in accordance with Attachment No. 4 of HUD Mortgagee Letter 2007-03, dated January 25, 2007. For the purpose of commercial or industrial use property, the standards for boarding a vacant commercial or industrial building or structure to prevent unauthorized entry into the building shall be as directed by written instruction of the Chief Building Official based upon an inspection of the vacant building by the Chief Building Official or his or her designee. 
The words "vacant building" means and refers to any building that is unoccupied by any person, or that is occupied by an authorized person for any amount of time. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.030 - Required boarding and maintenance of vacant buildings. 
A.  Each vacant building shall be boarded by the owner when the building can no longer be secured against intrusion by unauthorized persons by means of the closing and locking of doors and windows. 
B.  Vacant buildings that are immediately dangerous are defined in Chapter 8.58 of this code, and if any such vacant building is open and accessible to the general public, it may be summarily boarded by the city, pursuant to Chapter 8.58 of this code. 
C.  Any building that is boarded, whether by voluntary action of the owner, or as a result of enforcement activity by the city, shall be boarded in compliance with the standard as set forth in Section 8.59.020, under the definition of the term "boarded." 
D.  Each vacant building shall be actively maintained and monitored by the owner of the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.040 - Maintenance and monitoring of vacant buildings. 
Active maintenance and monitoring of each vacant building or structure on each parcel of land shall include all of the following: 
A.  Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials on the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located in good condition. 
B.  Maintenance of the exterior of the building and exterior signage and signage structures, in good condition. 
C.  Regular removal of all exterior trash and debris from the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located. 
D.  Maintenance of the vacant building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
E.  Prompt removal of graffiti which has been applied to any exterior surface on the vacant building or fencing surrounding the building, including graffiti applied to any sign attached to the vacant building. 
F.  Prevention of criminal activity on the premises (vacant building and/or the parcel of land on which the vacant building is located), including but not limited to use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution and criminal street gang activity. 
G.  The posting of a notice in a conspicuous place on the front of the vacant building stating the name, address, and telephone number of both the owner and, if applicable, the owner's agent in control of the building. This notice shall have lettering not less than two (2) inches high, and shall be generally readable from at least thirty (30) feet away. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.050 - Vacant building regulations. 
No owner shall allow a building designed for human use or occupancy to be a vacant building for more than thirty (30) days, unless one of the following applies: 
A.  The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the work of repair or rehabilitation. 
B.  The condition of the building complies with all codes, does not contribute to blight, is ready for occupancy, as evidenced by a current certificate of occupancy, and is both actively being: 
1.  Offered by the owner for sale, lease, or rent; and 
2.  Maintained and monitored by the owner as provided in Section 8.59.040. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.060 - Monitoring fee for vacant nuisance properties. 
Any vacant building that also constitutes a public nuisance, as defined under this code or as declared to be a public nuisance by the City Council or by the City Attorney in a manner permitted by other applicable law, shall be subject to monthly monitoring fee and enforcement response fee, to recover the city's regulatory costs to monitor and respond to the vacant building. The separate monthly monitoring fee and enforcement response fee as authorized under this section shall be in an amount set by resolution of the City Council and payable by the owner of the parcel of land on which the vacant building is situated. The monitoring fee shall be applicable even in the absence of any action, administrative or otherwise, by the city pursuant to any other provision of the city code. The monitoring fee shall be imposed upon the initial determination that the vacant property or building constitutes a public nuisance. The fee shall thereafter be imposed during each thirty (30) day period following the imposition of the initial monitoring fee. On buildings requiring more than one involuntary city enforcement response within any thirty (30) day period, an additional and separate enforcement response fee shall be imposed upon the owner of the property, for each response, upon the owner. Monitoring fees shall be imposed as long as the vacant building remains a public nuisance as provided in this section. 
Any monitoring fee imposed pursuant to this section may be appealed by the owner of the parcel of land on which the vacant building is situated to the city in the same manner as is specified in Chapter 1.18 of this code. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.062 - Administrative penalty. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.18.040 of this code, any owner of a parcel of property on which a building is situated which is in violation of Section 8.59.030 or 8.59.050 shall be subject to an administrative penalty, in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per building for the first violation. 
A second administrative penalty shall be imposed upon an owner pursuant to this chapter if the owner's building remains in violation of Section 8.59.030 or 8.59.050 thirty (30) days following the imposition of the first administrative penalty. Additional penalties may be imposed for each succeeding thirty (30) day period following the imposition of the preceding administrative penalty under this chapter. Additional penalties may be imposed for each violation so long as the violation continues. A second and subsequent penalty shall be in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
If a previous administrative penalty has been imposed pursuant to this chapter upon an owner within six (6) months of the date of the imposition of the prior administrative penalty, and that previous administrative penalty related to a vacant building other than the building subject to a subsequent administrative penalty, any such penalty imposed shall be imposed pursuant to Section 1.18.030 of this code, but in no case shall it be less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.064 - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters 1.18, 1.19 and 1.24 of this code, the Chief Building Official, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property and/or the vacant building. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.070 - Enforcement. 
A violation of this chapter may be enforced by any means as authorized in Chapters 1.18, 1.19 and/or 1.24 of this code. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.075 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter, or by an order of the Chief Building Official, may appeal such matter as provided in Chapter 1.18 of this code. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.080 - Violation/penalty. 
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution under Section 1.24.010 and/or administrative enforcement under Chapter 1.18 or 1.19. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.090 - Severability. 
If any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter is determined or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or if the application of any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter is inapplicable to a specific situation by reason of any preemptive state or federal legislation or regulation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 2730 § 4 (part), 2008)  
8.59.092 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2934, § 3, adopted August 21, 2018, repealed § 8.59.092. Former § 8.59.092 pertained to sunset and derived from Ord. 2730, adopted 2008; Ord. No. 2755, adopted August 3, 2010; Ord. No. 2800, adopted July 31, 2012 and Ord. No. 2863, adopted August 18, 2015.  
Chapter 8.60 - FORECLOSURE OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
8.60.010 - Purpose/scope. 
It is the purpose and intent of the El Monte City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish a foreclosure of residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned or unoccupied residential properties, including residential properties which are subject to foreclosure proceedings and residential properties which are being held by a beneficiary following the completion of a foreclosure proceeding, pending sale by the beneficiary or pending lease by the beneficiary and occupancy of the unoccupied residential structure. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008)  
8.60.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Abandoned" means any property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, and/or any property which has been the subject of a foreclosure sale trustee sale or judicially authorized sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary under its deed of trust upon the conclusion of the foreclosure and any property transferred by the trustor under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale to either the beneficiary, the trustee or to authorized entity as approved by the beneficiary. 
"Accessible property" means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc. 
"Accessible structure" means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
"Agent" means and refers to a trustee, a mortgage servicer and any other person authorized to act on behalf of a beneficiary with respect to a mortgage loan account, or real property which is pledged to the beneficiary as security to a mortgage loan, and for the purposes of this chapter, the term "agent" includes any person authorized to act on behalf of a beneficiary who has completed a foreclosure of property from and after the time such beneficiary has acquired title to the property which was formerly secured by a deed of trust in favor of such beneficiary when the agent is undertaking any work or responsibility for the former beneficiary with respect to the ownership, maintenance, use or other disposition of such property, including any affiliate of such a beneficiary which acquire title to such property either, at the time of foreclosure (or recordation of a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
"Agreement" means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
"Assignment of rents" means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one lender/entity to another. 
"Beneficiary" means a lender under a promissory note to pay money secured by a deed of trust on property. The word "beneficiary" as used in this Chapter 8.60 means and includes any assignee or successor to such beneficiary, whether such assignee or successor acquires its interest in the beneficiary's promissory note either before a notice of default is recorded on the property securing the obligation payable to the beneficiary or after a notice of default is recorded. In the event that a property may provide security for the loan or obligation of more than one beneficiary, the beneficiary who causes its notice of default to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property as set forth in this Chapter 8.60. 
"Buyer" means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this subsection. 
"Dangerous building" means any building/structure that is violation of any condition referenced in Chapter 8.58 of this code. 
"Days" means consecutive calendar days. 
"Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale" means an instrument that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
"Deed of trust" means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc. 
"Default" means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or conditional. 
"Default inspection" means a physical inspection of the exterior areas of the property conducted by the beneficiary or its agent following the occurrence of a breach or event of default by the trustor under a deed of trust. When practicable, each default inspection shall be conducted upon prior reasonable notice and consent of the trustor and/or the occupant of the property. In instances when the trustor and/or the occupant cannot reasonably be obtained despite due and diligent inquiry by the beneficiary, or where the trustor or the occupant may expressly refuse to give the beneficiary consent to a default inspection, the beneficiary or its agent shall conduct the default inspection of the exterior areas of the property which may be viewed from the adjacent public right-of-way or from adjacent property on which the owner or occupant of such adjacent property has consented to entry onto such adjacent property by the beneficiary for the purpose of conducting a default inspection of the adjoining property. The beneficiary, or its agent, shall maintain a written record of the time and date of each default inspection and shall identify the individual who conducted the default inspection. The written record of each default inspection shall at a minimum indicate whether, at the time of the default inspection, the property was: (1) occupied or vacant, and if vacant, set forth facts to support the evidence of vacancy; (2) in compliance with the general maintenance and monitoring standard set forth in Section 8.60.040; and (3) if security appliances have been installed on the property by either the trustor, the beneficiary or its agent, or by another entity, the default inspection report shall indicate whether the installed security appliances are intact and in good and serviceable condition. A default inspection report shall contain such other property-specific information as the Chief Building Official or the City Manager or his/her designee may direct in writing to the beneficiary. 
"Distressed" means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
"Evidence of vacancy" means any set of facts or conditions that on its own or combined with other facts and conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
"Foreclosure" means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults. 
"Mortgage servicer" or "servicer" means a person or entity responsible for the day-to-day management of a real estate or mortgage loan account, including collecting and crediting periodic loan payments, managing any escrow account, or enforcing mortgage loan terms, either as the holder of the loan note or on behalf of the holder of the loan note. 
"Notice of default" means a recorded notice that states that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
"Owner" means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
"Owner of record" means the person having recorded title to the property at any given point in time the record is provided by the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office. 
"Property" means any residential, zoned or occupied real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on such property, regardless of condition. 
"Residential building" means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use. 
"Securing" means such measures as may be directed by the Chief Building Official or the City Manager or his/her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the installation or repair of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door, window and/or other openings. In the case of residential buildings the boarding of doors, windows and/or other openings shall be installed in accordance with the HUD Mortgagee Letter 2007-03, dated January 25, 2007 or such successor written standard as may hereafter be approved from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council. 
"Trustee" means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a property. 
"Trustor" means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
"Vacant" means a building/structure that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 5, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 2800, §§ 4—7, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.030 - Registration. 
A.  Prior to recording a notice of default on a property located in the City of El Monte which is subject to a deed of trust, the beneficiary, or its agent, shall conduct a default inspection of the property. 
B.  The beneficiary, or its agent shall register the property with the Chief Building Official or the City Manager or his/her designee, on forms provided by the City of El Monte within ten (10) days from the date a notice of default is recorded on the property. 
C.  For all property for which a notice of default has been recorded before July 31, 2010, and where since that date, such notice of default has not either been rescinded or superseded, modified or amended by a subsequent notice of default recorded on or after July 31, 2010, then in such event, the beneficiary or its agent shall register the property with the City Building Official or the City Manager or his/her designee, on forms provided by the City by no later than September 30, 2012. The provisions of this Section 8.60.030(C), are intended to apply to all property where: (i) a foreclosure proceeding may have been initiated prior to the adoption of City of El Monte Ordinance No. 2755; (ii) the pre-July 31, 2010 notice of default has not been either rescinded or superseded, modified or amended by a separate notice of default recorded on or after July 31, 2010; and (iii) the beneficiary has not completed the exercise of its remedy identified under such pre-July 31, 2010 notice of default, for whatever reason, including without limitation one or more trial mortgage loan modification attempts by the trustor or borrower, loan forbearance by the beneficiary, beneficiary foreclosure moratorium or the effect of the pendency of bankruptcy proceedings of the trustor for which relief from stay has not been obtained from the bankruptcy court by the beneficiary. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 6, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 2800, § 8, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.031 - Duration of regulation under this chapter. 
The beneficiary and its agents shall be deemed exempt from further compliance with the regulations of this chapter with respect to a property for which a notice of default has been recorded, upon the earlier of the following times: 
1.  Provided that the beneficiary is not then in violation of this chapter with respect to the particular property, the date on which the beneficiary or its agent gives the City of El Monte the written notice described in Section 8.60.048(A) for the particular property. 
2.  Provided that the beneficiary is not then in violation of this chapter with respect to the particular property, the date on which the beneficiary or its agent gives the City of El Monte the written notice described in Section 8.60.048(B) for the particular property. 
(Ord. No. 2800, § 9, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.040 - Maintenance requirements. 
A.  Properties which are abandoned or vacant shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, maintained and kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. Such property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. In general, the maintenance of abandoned or vacant property shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 8.59.040 and HUD Mortgagee Letter 2007-03, dated January 25, 2007, or such other standard as may hereafter be ordered in writing by the Chief Building Official or the City Manager. Adherence to the maintenance and monitoring standard set forth in this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
B.  Each property which is acquired by a beneficiary following the recordation of a notice of default, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure, judgment of foreclosure, or in any other manner, shall be maintained by the beneficiary in accordance with the general standard set forth in Section 8.60.040(A), for so long a period of time as the beneficiary may own such property. 
C.  Nothing in this Section 8.60.040 shall be deemed to prevent the City of El Monte, upon appropriate written application to the Superior Court, from seeking appointment of a receiver for property under applicable law, to provide appropriate preservation, maintenance, security or abatement of adverse conditions on property which is abandoned or vacant under Section 8.60.040(A), or to appoint a receiver or take other action for property acquired by the beneficiary under Section 8.60.040(B), but which thereafter is not being maintained under the standards set forth in this chapter. The remedies available to the City under this Chapter 8.60 to respond to adverse property maintenance conditions on properties where foreclosure proceedings have been initiated by a beneficiary or to respond to adverse property maintenance conditions on properties where a beneficiary has completed the exercise of its remedies following the recordation of a notice of default under this Chapter 8.60 are expressly declared to be cumulative with all other remedies available to the City under applicable law. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 7, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 2800, § 10, 7-312012)  
8.60.045 - Security requirements. 
Properties which are abandoned or vacant shall be maintained by the beneficiary in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. In general, the security of abandoned or vacant property by the beneficiary shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 8.59.030 and HUD Mortgagee Letter 2007-03, dated January 25, 2007, or such other standard as may hereafter be ordered in writing addressed to the beneficiary by the Chief Building Official. 
If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable law, are being satisfied. 
The property shall be posted with name and address of the beneficiary and shall include a twenty-four (24) hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet and shall contain along with the name and twenty-four (24) hour contact number the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL. [X] OR CALL THE CITY OF EL MONTE AT (626) 580-2050." The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials. 
The local property management company shall make available to the city upon request written confirmation that the property has been inspected not less frequently than once per week to confirm that the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008)  
8.60.046 - Property inspection report upon sale or transfer of property. 
A.  Property which is acquired by a beneficiary following the recordation of a notice of default, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure or judgment of foreclosure, shall also be subject to compliance with the provisions of El Monte Municipal Code Section 17.16.040, upon the sale, exchange, transfer or other conveyance of such property by the beneficiary to a third person. 
B.  Property which is vacant or abandoned at the time of acquisition by a beneficiary, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure or judgment of foreclosure shall also be subject to compliance with the provisions of El Monte Municipal Code Section 17.16.040, prior to the earlier date of either: (i) re-occupancy of such property by any tenant of the beneficiary; or (ii) sale, exchange, transfer or other conveyance of such property by the beneficiary to a third person. 
C.  Property which is occupied by either the trustor or a tenant of the trustor at the time of acquisition by a beneficiary, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure or judgment of foreclosure, shall also be subject to compliance with the provisions of El Monte Municipal Code Section 17.16.040 prior to the earlier date of either: (i) the re-occupancy of such property by any successor tenant to the trustor or such other successor tenant to the tenant in possession of the property at the time of the beneficiary's acquisition of the property; or (ii) sale, exchange, transfer or other conveyance of such property by the beneficiary to a third person. 
D.  Property Inspection Report For Short Sales/Short Pay Agreements. 
1.  As used in this subsection (D) of Section 8.60.046 the words "short-pay agreement" mean an agreement in writing in which the beneficiary agrees to release its lien on a property in return for payment of an amount less than the secured obligation affecting the property. As also used in this subsection (D) of Section 8.60.046, the words "short-pay demand statement" means a written statement issued subsequent to and conditioned on the existence of a short-pay agreement that is prepared in response to a written demand made by a trustor or an authorized agent of such trustor, whereby a beneficiary sets forth an amount less than the outstanding debt, together with any other terms and conditions under which the beneficiary will execute and deliver a reconveyance of the deed of trust securing the note that is the subject of the short-pay demand statement. 
2.  All property which is proposed to be transferred, sold or otherwise conveyed by a trustor to a third party bona fide purchaser following the recordation of a notice of default and the issuance by the beneficiary (or its agent) of a short-pay demand statement, shall prior to the completion of such transfer, sale or other conveyance, be subject to compliance with the provisions of Section 17.16.040. The beneficiary, and each of its agents who cause to be recorded the reconveyance of the deed of trust securing the note that is subject to the short-pay agreement, shall each be responsible for obtaining compliance with Section 17.16.040, in the event that the bona fide purchaser may fail to provide the City with an acceptable surety for such compliance prior to the recordation of the reconveyance of the deed of trust described in the short-pay demand statement. 
E.  Property Inspection Report for Property Sold by Foreclosure Trustee at Auction. For the purpose of compliance with provisions of Section 17.16.040, in the case of property sold at auction to a bona fide purchaser pursuant to the powers conferred on a trustee by a deed of trust following the recordation of a notice of default, the beneficiary under such deed of trust, and each of its agents shall be presumed to be the parties who are responsible for the completion of all needed corrections identified in the property inspection report, as provided in Section 17.16.040, unless: (i) at least one business day prior to the recordation of the trustee's deed conveying such property to the bona fide purchaser following the completion of the foreclosure sale, the trustee provides a copy of the text of Chapter 8.60 and Section 17.16.040 to such bona fide purchaser; and (ii) the trustee provides written notice to the Chief Building Official or the City Manager or his/her designee of the full name, address and telephone or email contact information of such bona fide purchaser within ten (10) business days following the recordation of the trustee's deed under (i), above. As used in this Section 8.60.046(E), the words "business day" means and refers to any day of the week on which the Office of the Registrar-Recorder of Los Angeles County accepts delivery of documents and instruments from the general public for recordation in the official land records of Los Angeles County. 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 8, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 2800, §§ 11, 12, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.047 - Administrative memorandum with a beneficiary. 
Upon prior written application in a form approved by the City Manager, a beneficiary or a trustee or agent on behalf of one or more beneficiaries, may enter into a memorandum of agreement with the city for administration of the provisions of this Chapter 8.60 to one or more properties which are either owned by such beneficiary (or represented group of such beneficiaries) or for which the beneficiary has caused to be recorded a notice of default. Such a memorandum shall have a duration of not more than twelve (12) months, unless renewed or extended by the beneficiary and the city and shall contain other provisions reasonably acceptable to the City Manager. Each such memorandum of agreement shall reference this Section 8.60.047, and shall be subject to the approval by the City Council in the sole and absolute discretion of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 9, 8-3-2010)  
8.60.048 - Notice by beneficiary to city of disposition of registered property. 
A.  Within ten (10) days following the release of a notice of default and the reinstatement of the loan of the trustor, the beneficiary or its agent shall give the city written notice of such release and reinstatement. 
B.  Within ten (10) days following the sale, transfer or other conveyance to a third person of a property registered with the city under this Chapter 8.60, the beneficiary or its agent, shall give the city written notice of such sale, transfer or other conveyance together with current contact information for such bona fide purchaser/successor-in-interest to the beneficiary in such property. 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 10, 8-3-2010)  
8.60.049 - Re-registration of property subject to this chapter. 
A.  The beneficiary or its agent shall annually renew a registration of each property which the beneficiary has previously registered with the city under this Chapter 8.60, and in which such beneficiary retains either an equitable or legal interest as of the first anniversary of the registration of such property with the city. The beneficiary or its agent shall re-register the property on forms provided by the city. 
B.  The provisions of this Section 8.60.049, shall apply to each property for which a notice of default was recorded on or after October 1, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 11, 8-3-2010)  
8.60.050 - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters 1.18, 1.19 and 1.24 of this code, the Chief Building Official or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner and/or owner of record of any property subject to this chapter to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to abate and correct the decline of the property. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008)  
8.60.060 - Fees. 
Fees and charges for the administration of the regulatory program established by this Chapter 8.60 shall be set by resolution of the City Council including without limitation the fee for registering with the city a property for which a notice of default has been recorded, and the separate fee for registering with the city a property which either the beneficiary or the city has found to be vacant or abandoned. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 12, 8-3-2010)  
8.60.061 - Additional fees where property serves as security for multiple liens. 
In some instances, property may be subject to the recordation of multiple notices of default by different beneficiaries or other lienholders. The City may establish fees and charges for the administration of the regulatory program established by this Chapter 8.60, which shall be applicable to the recordation of multiple notices of default by different beneficiaries or other lienholders, and such fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2800, § 13, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.070 - Enforcement. 
A violation of this chapter may be enforced by any means authorized by Chapters 1.18, 1.19 and/or 1.24 of this code. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008)  
8.60.071 - Fine for failure to timely register a property with the city. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter or Chapter 1.18 or Chapter 1.19 to the contrary, the city may impose a fine on a beneficiary for its failure to timely register a property with the city under this Chapter 8.60 in the following amounts: 
1.  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation; 
2.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation; 
3.  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the third and each subsequent violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation. 
B.  The special fine amount provisions of this Section 8.60.071 shall be applicable to citations issued on or after September 30, 2010, by the city under Chapter 1.18 or Chapter 1.19 of the Code to a beneficiary for a violation of this Chapter 8.60. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or Chapter 1.18 or Chapter 1.19 to the contrary, the City may impose a fine on an agent of a beneficiary for its failure to timely register a property with the City under this Chapter 8.60 or to give timely notice to the City of the disposition of the registered property under Section 8.60.048(A) and/or (B), in the following amounts: 
1.  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation; 
2.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation; 
3.  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the third and each subsequent violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation. 
D.  The special fine amount provisions of subsection (C) shall be applicable to citations issued on or after September 1, 2012 by the City under Chapter 1.18 or Chapter 1.19 of the Code to an agent of a beneficiary for a violation of this Chapter 8.60. 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 13, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 2800, § 14, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.072 - Special provisions where property is encumbered with the security interests of multiple beneficiaries. 
A.  In the event that a property is encumbered by the security interests of more than one beneficiary at the time when a notice of default is recorded, the beneficiary who causes a notice of default for its security interest to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property with the city as provided in Section 8.60.030 and 8.60.049. 
B.  Upon the recordation of a notice of default on a property by any beneficiary, regardless of the security lien interest priority of such beneficiary in the property in relation to the priority of the security interests of the other beneficiaries in the same property, the city, in its discretion may elect to enforce the provisions of this Chapter 8.60 against one or more beneficiaries who have not separately recorded a notice of default against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2755, § 14, 8-3-2010)  
8.60.075 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter, or by an order of the Chief Building Official, may appeal such matter to the city as provided in Chapter 1.18 of this code. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008)  
8.60.080 - Violation/penalty. 
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution under Section 1.24.010 and/or administrative enforcement under Chapter 1.18 or 1.19. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008)  
8.60.081 - Unlawful auction sale by trustee/penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for a trustee to sell a property at auction pursuant to the powers conferred on such trustee by a deed of trust to a bona fide purchaser following the recordation of a notice of default, unless the property sold at auction pursuant to the powers conferred on such trustee by the deed of trust in favor of the beneficiary has been registered with the City as set forth under Section 8.60.030 by the beneficiary or its agent for at least thirty (30) days prior to date on which the notice of sale for such property has been recorded which sets the initial time and date of the auction. 
B.  A violation of subsection (A) of this Section 8.60.081 shall be subject to prosecution under Section 1.24.010 as a misdemeanor, and/or administration enforcement under Chapter 1.18 or Chapter 1.19. 
(Ord. No. 2800, § 15, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.082 - Unlawful participation by trustee in short pay agreement/short sale/penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for a trustee to release and reconvey a deed of trust following the issuance of a short pay demand statement, as this term is defined in Section 8.60.046(A), pursuant to the powers conferred on such trustee by a deed of trust following the recordation of a notice of default, unless the property which is the subject of the short pay demand statement has been registered with the City as set forth under Section 8.60.030 by the beneficiary or its agent. 
B.  A violation of subsection (A) of this Section 8.60.082 shall be subject to prosecution under Section 1.24.010 as a misdemeanor, and/or administration enforcement under Chapter 1.18 or Chapter 1.19. 
(Ord. No. 2800, § 16, 7-31-2012)  
8.60.090 - Severability. 
If any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter is determined or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or if the application of any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter is inapplicable to a specific situation by reason of any preemptive state or federal legislation or regulation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 2730 § 5 (part), 2008)  
8.60.092 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2934, § 4, adopted August 21, 2018, repealed § 8.60.092. Former § 8.60.092 pertained to sunset and derived from Ord. 2730, adopted 2008; Ord. No. 2755, adopted August 3, 2010; Ord. No. 2800, adopted July 31, 2012 and Ord. No. 2863, adopted August 18, 2015.  
Chapter 8.70 - MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2860, § 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2015, amended Ch. 8.70 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 8.70, §§ 8.70.010—8.70.160, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2829, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 2013; Ord. No. 2837, § 2, adopted May 13, 2014; Ord. No. 2843, § 2, adopted July 8, 2014; Ord. No. 2852, § 3, adopted March 30, 2015; and Ord. No. 2855, § 3, adopted June 2, 2015. 
 
8.70.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  The purposes of this chapter are to: 
1.  Prevent excessive and unreasonable increases in mobilehome park space rents. 
2.  Preserve the availability of available mobilehome park spaces in the city. 
3.  Enable mobilehome owners to preserve their equity in their mobilehomes. 
4.  Permit mobilehome park owners to receive a fair return. 
5.  Help preserve the affordability of space rents within the city. 
B.  In the city, there are thirty-three (33) mobilehome parks with one thousand four hundred twenty-seven (1,427) spaces for mobilehomes. 
C.  The mobilehome parks in the city are very diverse in terms of size and facilities. 
D.  The survey conducted as part of the study found a very low level of household incomes among mobilehome owners. Forty-eight (48) percent of the households responding to the city had an annual income under fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). Fourteen and three-tenths (14.3) percent had an annual income between fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) and nineteen thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($19,999). 
E.  A survey of fifty (50) mobilehome parks in other cities in the area confirmed that the rate of vacant spaces is very low — one and thirty-four hundredths (1.34) percent — and indicated that turnover in mobilehome ownership in mobilehome parks is low — usually under ten (10) percent per year and commonly under five (5) percent per year. 
F.  Of the fifty (50) parks surveyed in other cities, none reported a higher average rent than one thousand twenty-five dollars ($1,025.00). In the largest mobilehome park in the city, which contains over one-quarter of the mobilehome spaces in the city, the average rent is one thousand two hundred forty-three dollars ($1,243.00). 
G.  If a mobilehome owner in the city cannot afford the rents in the mobilehome park he or she is residing in and desires to move into another mobilehome park, it would be necessary for him or her to purchase a mobilehome already in the other park, because only newer mobilehomes would be accepted in another mobilehome park. 
H.  The survey conducted as part of the study found that sixty-three and nine-tenths (63.9) percent of mobilehome park residents who responded live in singlewide mobilehomes and thirty-five and four-tenths (35.4) percent live in doublewide mobilehomes. 
I.  The survey conducted as part of the study, found that a majority of respondents had purchased their mobilehomes for under fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). Eighty (80) percent of the singlewide homes purchase prices costs fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less. 
J.  Approximately ninety (90) jurisdictions in California have rent stabilization ordinances. Generally, such ordinances apply to all of the mobilehome parks in the jurisdiction except for very small parks (e.g. less than ten (10) spaces). 
K.  For the purposes of meeting constitutional fair return standards under rent stabilization, a maintenance of net operating income ("MNOI") standard is a "fairly constructed formula." Rainbow Disposal Co. v. Escondido Mobilehome Rent Review Bd. (1998) 64 Cal. App. 4th 1159. 
L.  Adoption of this chapter is not subject to the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA") pursuant to Section 15060(c)(2), as the activity will not result in a direct or reasonably foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment, and Section 15060(c)(3), as the activity is not a project as defined in Section 15378 of the CEQA Guidelines because it has no potential for resulting in physical change to the environment, directly or indirectly. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "City Manager" shall include the City Manager or a person designated by the City Manager to perform the functions required by this chapter. 
B.  "Consumer Price Index" means the Consumer Price Index—All Items for all urban consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor. 
C.  "In-place transfer" means the sale or transfer of the ownership of a mobilehome with the mobilehome remaining on the mobilehome lot following the transfer. 
D.  "Landlord" means a mobilehome park owner, mobilehome owner, lessor or sublessor who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit or portion thereof, and the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing. 
E.  "Mobilehome" means a vehicle, designed or used for human habitation, including a camping trailer, travel trailer, motor home and slide-in camper, when used as the principal place of habitation for the occupants thereof, as well as mobilehomes as defined by Civil Code Section 798.3. 
F.  "Mobilehome park" means any area or tract of land where two (2) or more mobilehome lots are rented or leased, or held out for rent or lease, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation for permanent, as opposed to transient, occupancy. 
G.  "Rent" means any consideration, including any bonus, benefit or gratuity, demanded or received by a landlord for or in connection with the use or occupancy, including housing services, of a rental unit or in connection with the assignment of a lease or in connection with subleasing of the rental unit. "Rent" shall not include: 
1.  Utility charges for charges for sub-metered gas and electricity; 
2.  Charges for water, refuse disposal, sewer service, and/or other services which are either provided and charged to mobilehome residents solely on a cost pass-through basis and/or are regulated by state or local law; 
3.  Any amount paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome unit (as opposed to amounts paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome space); 
4.  Charges for laundry services; 
5.  Storage charges. 
H.  "Rent increase" means any rent demanded of or paid by a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant in excess of rent paid for the rental unit immediately prior to such demand or payment. Rent increase includes any reduction in the services provided to a mobilehome resident or transfer of the cost without a corresponding reduction in the moneys demanded for or paid as rent. 
I.  "Rental agreement" means a written agreement between a landlord and a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant for the use and occupancy of a rental unit to the exclusion of others. 
J.  "Service reduction" means a decrease or diminution in the basic material service level provided by the park since July 2015 including but not limited to services the park owner is required to provide pursuant to: 
1.  California Civil Code Sections 1941.1 and 1941.2; 
2.  The Mobilehome Residency Law (Civil Code § 798 et seq.); 
3.  The Mobilehome Parks Act (Health & Safety Code § 18200 et seq.); 
4.  The landlord's implied warranty of habitability; and 
5.  An express or implied agreement between the landlord and the resident. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.030 - Applicability of chapter. 
This chapter shall apply to all mobilehome park spaces within the city of El Monte except as provided in Section 8.70.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.040 - Exemptions from this chapter. 
A.  Spaces that are subject to a lease which exempts that space from rent regulation pursuant to the California Mobilehome Residency Law (Civil Code § 798 et seq.) 
B.  New mobilehome park spaces which are exempted pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.45. 
C.  Units Owned or Operated by Government Agencies. This chapter shall not apply to mobilehomes or mobilehome parks owned or operated by any governmental agency or any rental unit whose rent is subsidized pursuant to a public program that limits the rent that can be charged for the mobilehome. 
D.  Certain Mobilehomes Owned by Mobilehome Park Owners. With the exception of Section 8.70.160 (Annual registration and other notices required from owner) and Section 8.70.140 (Resident representatives—Applicable to all city mobilehome parks), this chapter shall not be applicable to mobilehome spaces occupied by mobilehomes which were owned by the mobilehome park owner as of July 1, 2015. All mobilehome parks in the city must comply with Section 8.70.160 and Section 8.70.140. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.050 - Permissible rent increases. 
No rent in excess of the rent in effect as of July 1, 2015 may be charged unless authorized by one of the following sections of this chapter: 
1.  Section 8.70.060 (Annual increases based on increases in the Consumer Price Index); 
2.  Section 8.70.075 (Rent levels for in-place sales of mobilehomes); 
3.  Section 8.70.080 (Fair return standard); or 
4.  Section 8.70.100 (Rent increases for new capital improvements). 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.060 - Annual increases based on increases in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). 
A.  Annual Rent Increases Starting in 2016. Starting in 2016, on or after May 1 of each year, the rent may be increased over the allowable rent as of May 1 of the prior year by one hundred (100) percent of the percentage increase in the CPI last reported as of January 30 in the current year over the CPI last reported as of January 30 in the prior year. The percentage amount of said increase shall be rounded to the nearest one-quarter of one percent. 
B.  The allowable rent increase pursuant to subsection A of this section is subject to the limitation that the rent may not be increased in calendar year 2016 over the rent in effect as of July 1, 2015, by a percentage that exceeds the percentage increase in the CPI from July 1, 2015, to the date of the notice of the increase. 
C.  Notice of Annual Allowable Rent Increases. 
1.  Notice by City Manager. The allowable annual rent increase shall be posted by March 15 of each year in City Hall and on the city's website. 
2.  Notice in Mobilehome Parks. A copy of the clerk's notice shall be posted in a prominent place in each mobilehome park by each mobilehome park owner within three (3) business days after it is received by the mobilehome park owner. 
D.  No Required Rent Decrease if the CPI Decreases. In the event that the CPI decreases, no rent decrease shall be required pursuant to this section. 
E.  Compliance with State Law. Rent increases permitted pursuant to this section shall not be effective and shall not be demanded, accepted, or retained until the landlord has given the notice required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.070 - Allowable rent following the expiration of an exempt lease. 
In the event a space was previously exempt under a lease pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17, the base space rent, for purposes of calculating the annual adjustment under this chapter, shall be the rent on such space in effect as of the date of expiration of the lease. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.075 - Rent levels for in-place sales of mobilehomes. 
A.  The maximum rent which may be charged pursuant to this chapter shall not be modified upon an in-place transfer as defined Section 8.70.020 or the replacement of the mobilehome by the homeowner. 
B.  With regard to an in-place transfer of a mobilehome in which the seller of the mobilehome is the mobilehome park owner of the mobilehome park in which such mobilehome is located, the maximum rent which may be charged following the date of such sale of the mobilehome shall be the rent as of the date in which such mobilehome park owner acquired the mobilehome, adjusted by the percentage increase in the CPI since such acquisition date to the month preceding the date of such sale. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.080 - Fair return standard. 
A.  Right of the Mobilehome Park Owner to Request Special Rent Increase. It is expected that a rent increase within the limits of Section 8.70.060 will provide the mobilehome park owner with a fair and reasonable return. However, in the event a rent increase as set forth in Section 8.70.060 does not provide the park owner with a fair and reasonable return, the mobilehome park owner may request an increase in excess of said amounts by filing a petition for rent adjustment in order to obtain a fair return, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 8.70.080 and 8.70.090. 
B.  Presumption of Fair Return. For the purposes of determining the rent adjustment necessary to provide the park owner with a fair and reasonable return, it shall be presumed that the net operating income, as described below, received by the park owner in the base year, provided the park owner with a fair and reasonable return. 
C.  Base Year and Current Year. 
1.  "Base year" means the 2012 calendar year. The base year net operating income shall be determined by subtracting the actual operating expenses for the base year from the gross income realized during the base year. 
2.  "Current year" net operating income shall be determined by annualizing the rents in effect as of the day of the mobilehome park owner's filing of a petition for rent adjustment to determine the annualized gross income and subtracting from such amount the operating expenses during the immediate preceding calendar year. 
D.  Adjustment of Base Year Net Operating Income. The park owner or mobilehome owners may present evidence to rebut the presumption of fair return in Section 8.70.080 based upon evidence provided by the mobilehome park owner to the city of gross income, operating expenses, and the determination of net operating income for the base year and current year. The presumption of fair return in Section 8.70.080 may be rebutted if at least one of the following findings is made: 
1.  Exceptional Expenses in the Base Year. The park owner's operating expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating operating expenses so the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the property over a reasonable period of time. The following factors shall be considered in making such a finding: 
a.  Extraordinary amounts were expended for necessary maintenance and repairs. 
b.  Maintenance and repair was below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration in the quality of services provided. 
c.  Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding the application of prudent business practices. 
2.  Exceptional Circumstances in the Base Year. The gross income during the base year was disproportionately low due to exceptional circumstances. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating base year gross rental income consistent with the purposes of this chapter. The following factors shall be considered in making such a finding: 
a.  If the gross income during the base year was lower than it might have been because some residents were charged reduced rent. 
b.  If the gross income during the base year was significantly lower than normal because of the destruction of the premises and/or temporary eviction for construction or repairs. 
c.  The pattern of rent increases in the years prior to the base year and whether those increases reflected increases in the CPI. 
d.  Base period rents were disproportionately low in comparison to the base period rents of other comparable parks in the city. 
e.  Other exceptional circumstances. 
E.  Calculation of Net Operating Income. 
1.  Net Operating Income. Net operating income shall be calculated by subtracting operating expenses from gross rental income. 
2.  Gross Rental Income. 
a.  Gross rental income shall include: 
i.  Gross rents calculated as gross rental income at one hundred (100) percent occupancy, adjusted for uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent such vacancies or bad debt are beyond the control of the landlord. Uncollected space rents in excess of three (3) percent of gross space rent shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless established otherwise and shall not be included in computing gross income. 
ii.  All other income or consideration received or receivable in connection with the use or occupancy of the rental unit, except as provided in subsection (F)(2)(b) of this section. 
b.  Gross rental income shall not include: 
i.  Utility charges for charges for sub-metered gas and electricity. 
ii.  Charges for water, refuse disposal, sewer service, and/or other services which are either provided and charged to mobilehome residents solely on a cost pass-through basis and/or are regulated by state or local law. 
iii.  Any amount paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome unit (as opposed to amounts paid for the use and occupancy of a mobilehome space). 
iv.  Charges for laundry services. 
v.  Storage charges. 
3.  Operating Expenses. 
a.  Included in Operating Expenses. Operating expenses shall include the following: 
i.  Reasonable costs of operation and maintenance. 
ii.  Management Expenses. It shall be presumed that management expenses have increased by the percentage increase in rents or the CPI, whichever is greater, between the base year and the current year unless the level of management services has either increased or decreased significantly between the base year and the current year. 
iii.  Utility Costs. Utility costs except utility where the consideration of the income associated with the provision of the utility service is regulated by state law and consideration of the costs associated with the provision of the utility service is preempted by state law. 
iv.  Real Property Taxes. Property taxes are an allowable expense, subject to the limitation that property taxes attributable to an assessment in a year other than the base year or current year shall not been considered in calculating base year and/or current year operating expenses. 
v.  License and Registration Fees. License and registration fees required by law to the extent these expenses are not otherwise paid or reimbursed by tenants. 
vi.  Landlord-Performed Labor. Landlord-performed labor compensated at reasonable hourly rates. 
(A)  No landlord-performed labor shall be included as an operating expense unless the landlord submits documentation showing the date, time, and nature of the work performed. 
(B)  There shall be a maximum allowed under this provision of five (5) percent of gross income unless the landlord shows greater services were performed for the benefit of the residents. 
vii.  Costs of Capital Replacements. Costs of capital replacements plus an interest allowance to cover the amortization of those costs where all of the following conditions are met: 
(A)  The capital improvement is made at a direct cost of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per affected rental unit or at a total direct cost of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is lower. 
(B)  The costs, less any insurance proceeds or other applicable recovery, are averaged on a per unit basis for each rental unit actually benefited by the improvement. 
(C)  The costs are amortized over a period of not less than thirty-six (36) months. 
(D)  The costs do not include any additional costs incurred for property damage or deterioration that result from any unreasonable delay in undertaking or completing any repair or improvement. 
(E)  The costs do not include costs incurred to bring the rental unit into compliance with a provision of the El Monte Municipal Code or state law where the original installation of the improvement was not in compliance with code requirements. 
(F)  At the end of the amortization period, the allowable monthly rent is decreased by any amount it was increased because of the application of this provision. 
(G)  The amortization period shall be in conformance with a schedule adopted by the City Manager unless it is determined that an alternate period is justified based on the evidence presented in the hearing. 
viii.  Legal Expenses. Attorneys' fees and costs incurred in connection with successful good faith attempts to recover rents owing, successful good faith unlawful detainer actions not in derogation of applicable law, and legal expenses necessarily incurred in dealings with respect to the normal operation of the park to the extent such expenses are not recovered from adverse or other parties, subject to the following requirements: 
Reasonable fees, expenses, and other costs incurred in the course of successfully pursuing rights under or in relationship to this chapter and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter including costs incurred in the course of pursuing successful fair return petitions. Said expenses shall be amortized over a five-year period, unless the City Manager concludes that a differing period is more reasonable. 
Recovery of expenses incurred in the course of preparing and presenting a fair return petition shall be limited when a park owner rejects a settlement offer and then does not recover more than proposed settlement. The purpose of this limitation is to encourage both park owners and mobilehome owners to minimize, to the extent possible, the cost and expense of fair rate of return mobilehome space rent administrative proceedings by providing a mechanism for the early settlement of fair rate of return administrative proceedings. 
At any time after filing a fair rate of return rent application, the designated representative of the residents of the mobilehome park may serve an offer in writing to the mobilehome park owner who has filed that petition to stipulate to a compromise amount for the fair rate of return rent increase requested in the petition. The designated representative shall also file a copy of this written settlement offer with the city in a separately sealed envelope and with a statement on the outside of the envelope stating that it is a written settlement offer pursuant to this subsection. 
The sealed copy of the written settlement offer that is so filed with the city is not to be opened by the city until it is either accepted by the park owner or, if it is not accepted by the park owner, after a final rent increase award or denial has been made on the park owner's petition by either the City Manager or by the hearing officer. Upon receiving such offer to compromise, the mobilehome park owner has seven (7) days to accept the offer by filing a written acceptance with the City Clerk. 
A mobilehome park owner is not entitled to recover a portion of application expenses, fees, or other costs that are incurred following the submission of a prevailing offer and the residents may recover reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the residents after the rejection of a "prevailing" offer. The designated mobilehome owners' representative shall be determined to have made a prevailing offer if a settlement offer has been made and that offer has not been accepted by the park owner within seven (7) days after the making of that offer, and the park owner's rent increase award fails to exceed the amount of that settlement offer. 
Allowable legal expenses which are of a nature that does not recur annually shall be amortized over a reasonable period of time. At the end of the amortization period, the allowable monthly rent shall be decreased by any amount it was increased because of the application of this provision. 
ix.  Interest Allowance for Expenses that are Amortized. An interest allowance shall be allowed on the cost of amortized expenses; the allowance shall be the interest rate on the cost of the amortized expense equal to the "average rate" for thirty-year fixed rate on home mortgages plus two (2) percent. The "average rate" shall be the rate Freddie Mac last published in its weekly Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS) as of the date of the initial submission of the petition. In the event that this rate is no longer published, the index which is most comparable to the PMMS index shall be used. 
b.  Exclusions from Operating Expenses. Operating expenses shall not include the following: 
i.  Mortgage principal or interest payments or other debt service costs. 
ii.  Any penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other provision of law. 
iii.  Land lease expenses. 
iv.  Political contributions and payments to organizations which are substantially devoted to legislative lobbying purposes. 
v.  Depreciation. 
vi.  Any expenses for which the landlord has been reimbursed by any utility rebate or discount, security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement or any other method or device. 
vii.  Unreasonable increases in expenses since the base year. 
viii.  Expenses associated with the provision of master-metered gas and electricity services. 
ix.  Expenses which are attributable to unreasonable delays in performing necessary maintenance or repair work or the failure to complete necessary replacements (e.g., a roof replacement may be a reasonable expense, but if water damage occurred as a result of unreasonable delays in repairing or replacing the roof, it would not be reasonable to pass through the cost of repairing the water damage). 
c.  Adjustments of Operating Expenses. Base year and/or current operating expenses may be averaged with other expense levels for other years or amortized or adjusted by the CPI or may otherwise be adjusted, in order to establish an expense amount for that item which most reasonably serves the objectives of obtaining a reasonable comparison of base year and current year expenses. Grounds for such adjustments include, but are not limited to: 
i.  An expense item for a particular year is not representative; 
ii.  The base year expense is not a reasonable projection of average past expenditures for that item in the years immediately preceding or following the base year; 
iii.  The current year expense is not a reasonable projection of expenditures for that item in recent years or of future expenditures for that item; 
iv.  A particular expense exceeds the normal industry or other comparable standard for the area, the park owner shall bear the burden of proving the reasonableness of the expense. To the extent that it is found that the expense is unreasonable it may be adjusted to reflect the normal industry standard; 
v.  A base year expense is exceptionally low by industry standards and/or on an inflation adjusted basis is exceptionally low relative to current year expenses although the level or type of service has not changed significantly; 
vi.  An increase in maintenance or management expenses is disproportionate to the percentage increase in the CPI, while the level of services has not changed significantly and/or is not justified by special circumstances. 
F.  Rent Increases for Periods Preceding Date that a Park Owner May Implement Rent Increases pursuant to this Section. In the event that the period for determining the allowable rent increase pursuant to this section exceeds one hundred twenty (120) days, the park owner may recover increases that would have been permitted if the rent increase decision had been made within one hundred twenty (120) days. The allowance for these increases may be amortized or may be factored into the prospective allowable increase in order to avoid undue hardship on the mobilehome owners. 
G.  Per Space Rent Adjustment pursuant to Fair Return Standard. The allowable rent increase per mobilehome park space pursuant to this section shall not be increased as a result of the fact that there are exempt spaces in the park. 
H.  Assurance of a Fair Return. It shall be presumed that the MNOI standard provides a fair return. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City Manager or hearing officer from granting an increase that is necessary in order to meet constitutional fair return requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.090 - Procedures for city review of mobilehome park owner petition for rent adjustment in order to obtain a fair return. 
A.  Right to Petition. A park owner may petition for a rent increase in order to obtain a fair return. No petition for a fair return rent adjustment may be filed pursuant to this chapter until thirty (30) days after this chapter goes into effect. After 2015, no petition may be filed in November or December except in cases of exceptional unforeseen circumstances. 
B.  Limit on Frequency of Petitions. Only one petition pursuant to this section may be filed for a mobilehome park within a twelve-month period. An exception to this limitation shall be authorized in the event of extraordinary circumstances that could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time the prior petition was filed. 
C.  Submission of Petition. 
1.  Petition Form Required. Such petition shall be on a form prescribed by the City Manager. 
2.  Petition Fee. Upon the receipt of a fair return application, the City Manager shall determine if the employment of experts will be necessary or appropriate for a proper analysis of the applicant's presentation. If the City Manager so determines, it shall also determine the anticipated cost of employing any such experts. The resulting figure shall be communicated to the applicant. The application shall not be further processed until the applicant has paid to the city the estimated cost of expert analysis. Any unused portion of the advance payment for expert analysis shall be refunded to the applicant. 
3.  Contents of Petition Form. The form may require any information deemed relevant by the administrator. The form shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  A list of the names and addresses of all mobilehome park tenants subject to the rent increase. 
b.  A statement of the date the rent increase is proposed to be effective. 
c.  The rent for each space in the park in the base year, the current year, and the three (3) prior years. 
d.  An income and expense statement for the base year, the current year, and the three (3) years prior to the current year. 
e.  Evidence documenting the income and expenses claimed by the park owner. 
f.  All other documentation and opinion testimony upon which the park owner is relying to justify the rent increase. 
g.  A statement of the petitioner's theories in support of the rent increase application. 
4.  Notice of Petition. The park owner and the city shall provide notice of a petition by: 
a.  Sending a hard copy and electronic .pdf copy of the petition to the homeowners' representative; 
b.  Providing the city with hard and electronic copies of the petition; 
c.  Notifying each tenant household that the petition has been filed on a form provided by the city. 
5.  Determination that the Petition is Complete. The City Manager will determine if a petition pursuant to this section is complete within thirty (30) days after the petition is submitted. An application will not be deemed complete if the required fees have not be paid. If the application is incomplete, the City Manager will inform the petitioner as to what additional information is required. 
6.  Access to the Petition. The documentation required by this section shall be available for inspection and copying by any person during the normal business hours of the city. The city shall make a copy of all submissions by the park owner and the residents in conjunction with a petition that shall be available in the form of an electronic .pdf file. 
7.  Cost of Expert Analysis. Upon the receipt of a fair return application, the City Manager shall determine if the employment of experts will be necessary or appropriate for a proper analysis of the applicant's petition. If the City Manager so determines, the City Manager shall also determine the anticipated cost of employing any such experts. The resulting figure shall be communicated to the petitioner. The petition shall not be further processed until the petitioner has paid to the city the estimated cost of expert analysis. Within thirty (30) calendar days after a petition and the required fee, if any, is submitted to the city, the City Manager shall determine if the petition is complete. Any unused portion for payments so collected shall be refunded to the petitioner. 
8.  Contents of Expert Analysis. Any analysis pursuant to this subsection shall include a determination of: 
a.  Base year and current year rental income; 
b.  Base year and current year operating expenses by category; 
c.  Base year and current year overall operating expenses; 
d.  Base year and current year net operating income; 
e.  The percentage change in net operating income between the base period and the current period; 
f.  The percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period; 
g.  The ratio of the percentage change in net operating income to the percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period; 
h.  The rent adjustment required under an MNOI standard pursuant to chapter. 
9.  Submission by Mobilehome Owner Tenants. The mobilehome owner tenants may submit a written response to the park owner's submission within twenty (20) days after the petition is deemed complete. 
D.  Review Procedures. 
1.  An application for a fair return adjustment shall be decided by the City Manager within sixty (60) calendar days of the date that the application has been complete. 
The decision shall be emailed and sent by mail, with proof of mailing to the park owner, the park owner's designated representative for the petition, and a designated representative of the residents. 
2.  Appeal of City Manager's Decision. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed within twenty (20) calendar days to a hearing officer. An appeal by the mobilehome owner tenants must be signed by residents from a majority of the mobilehome spaces that are subject to the City Manager's decision. The appealing party shall be required to pay for costs of the appeal process in accordance with any fees set forth by resolution of the City Council. 
3.  Procedure for Selection of a Hearing Officer. 
a.  Qualifications. Hearing officers shall be licensed attorneys of the State Bar of California in good standing, and shall have no financial interest in mobilehomes, mobilehome spaces or mobilehome parks and shall not have represented mobilehome park owners or mobilehome park residents in rent setting cases or park closing or park conversions or any disputes between park owners and park residents. 
b.  A hearing officer shall be selected through the California Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). In the event that it is not possible to set up a hearing through the OAH, the City Manager may elect to contract with another statewide agency that provides arbitration services or may establish a panel in accordance with the following procedure set forth in subsection (D)(3)(c) of this section. 
c.  In the event that a panel of hearing officers is established, the City Manager shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that there are at least five (5) qualified candidates to form a panel of prospective hearing officers. 
The hearing officers shall be selected on a rotational basis from the panel list. A hearing officer shall disqualify himself or herself from serving as hearing officer in a particular matter where he/she has a conflict of interest within the meaning of the Political Reform Act (Gov. Code, § 87100 et seq.), and shall otherwise comply with the disqualification provisions of Canon 3.E. of the Code of Judicial Ethics. The parties shall be advised in writing of the selected hearing officer, and advised of their right to disqualify the selected hearing officer. In the event of a disqualification, another hearing officer shall be randomly selected from the panel, and a new notice of hearing sent to the parties. Each party shall have the right to disqualify one hearing officer for a particular matter if there are five (5) or fewer hearing officers on the list and may disqualify up to two (2) hearing officers if there are eight (8) or more hearing officers on the list. 
4.  Time of and Scheduling of Hearing. 
a.  A hearing on the petition shall commence within thirty (30) days of the selection of a hearing officer unless both parties agree to a different schedule. The hearing shall be completed within fifteen (15) days after it is commenced. These time deadlines may be extended if the hearing officer finds that there is good cause to commence and/or complete the hearing at a later date. 
b.  The hearing may be scheduled during the normal business hours of the city unless a majority of the residents that are subject to the petition requests that the hearing be scheduled during the evening. The hearing shall be scheduled at a time that it is convenient for the residents' and park owner's representatives. 
c.  The presentations of each party at the hearing and of the city staff and experts shall be limited to ninety (90) minutes each unless there is good cause for providing a greater period of time. Each party and the city shall be permitted one hour of cross-examination of expert witnesses. 
5.  Notice of Hearing. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
6.  Requests for Additional Information by Opposing Party. 
a.  Either party or the city may request that additional specific supporting documentation be provided to substantiate the claims made by a party. The request shall be presented in writing to the hearing officer. 
b.  The hearing officer may order production of such requested documentation, if the hearing officer determines the information is relevant to the proceedings. 
7.  Submission of Reports. 
a.  Any response by the residents or the park owner to the decision of the City Manager or report by the city must be submitted to the other parties at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. The submissions shall be in printed and electronic form. 
b.  Rebuttal reports may be submitted by the park owner, residents, and/or city staff and/or a consultant on behalf of the city; it shall be submitted to the parties at least five (5) days prior to a hearing. 
c.  For good cause, the hearing officer may accept additional information at the hearing. 
8.  Conduct of Hearing. 
a.  The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the City Council and any rules set forth by the hearing officer. 
b.  The hearing officer shall have the power and authority to require and administer oaths or affirmations where appropriate, and to take and hear evidence concerning any matter pending before the hearing officer. 
c.  The rules of evidence generally applicable in the courts shall not be binding in the hearing. Hearsay evidence and any and all other evidence which the hearing officer deems relevant and proper may be admitted and considered. 
d.  Any party or such party's representative, designated in writing by the party, may appear at the hearing to offer such documents, oral testimony, written declaration or other evidence as may be relevant to the proceedings. 
e.  The hearing officer may grant or order not more than two (2) continuances of the hearing for not more than ten (10) working days each. Additional continuances may be granted only if all parties stipulate in writing or if the hearing officer finds that there is a good cause for the continuance. Such continuances may be granted or ordered at the hearing without further written notice to the parties. 
f.  A tape recording of the proceedings shall be made by the City Manager in a format that is easily made available and is easily usable. 
g.  The hearing shall be conducted in a manner that ensures that parties have an opportunity to obtain documents and to obtain information about the theories and facts to be presented by the opposing parties in adequate time in advance of the hearing to enable preparation of a rebuttal. 
9.  Required Findings in Decision. Any decision pursuant to this subsection shall include a determination of: 
a.  Base year and current year rental income; 
b.  Base year and current year operating expenses by category; 
c.  Base year and current year overall operating expenses; 
d.  Base year and current year net operating income; 
e.  The percentage change in net operating income between the base period and the current period; 
f.  The percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period; 
g.  The ratio of the percentage change in net operating income to the percentage change in the CPI between the base period and the current period; 
h.  The rent adjustment required under an MNOI standard pursuant to Section 8.70.080 and this section. 
10.  Conditions for Allowance or Disallowance of Rent Increase. The allowance or disallowance of any proposed rent increase or portion thereof may be reasonably conditioned in any manner necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. 
11.  Deadline for Decision. An application for a fair return adjustment shall be decided by the hearing officer within sixty (60) calendar days of the date that the filing of the appeal, including the receipt of fees, has been deemed complete, unless the hearing officer determines that there is good cause for an extension of this period or the City Manager extends this period due to the length of time required to accommodate scheduling availability and limitations required to obtain the services of a hearing officer. 
12.  Notice of Decision. The City Manager shall mail copies of the decision to the park owner and all affected mobilehome park tenants within three (3) calendar days of the decision. Copies of the decision shall be emailed to the park owner and residents' representative as soon as possible after the decision is made and in all cases within twenty-four (24) hours after the decision is made. 
13.  Preservation of Record. Any findings pursuant to this section shall be reported to the city in an agenda packet and permanently preserved in the city records, so that they are available in the event of a future rent increase application involving the same mobilehome park. 
14.  Representation of Parties. 
a.  The parties in any hearing may be represented at the hearings by a person of the party's choosing. The representative need not be an attorney. 
b.  Written designation of representatives shall be filed with the City Manager or hearing officer. 
c.  The written designation of the representative shall include a statement that the representative is authorized to bind the party to any stipulation, decision or other action taken at the administrative hearing. 
15.  Modification of Decision in the Event of Mathematical or Clerical Inaccuracies. Any party alleging that the hearing officer's statement of decision contains mathematic or clerical inaccuracies may so notify the hearing officer and the other party within fifteen (15) calendar days of the mailing of the decision. The hearing officer may make any corrections warranted, and re-file the statement of decision within ten (10) business days after receiving the allegation of the mathematical error. Upon re-filing of the statement, the decision shall be final. 
16.  Calculation of Allowable Application Expenses if a Sealed Offer has been Submitted. If any sealed settlement offers have been submitted to the city by any parties to the dispute, after the hearing officer determines the allowable rent adjustment pursuant to this section, the hearing officer shall open the sealed offers and make a determination of whether there has been a "prevailing party" and shall announce that determination in the hearing officer's notice of decision issued pursuant to subsection (D)(12) of this section. Within seven (7) calendar days of their receipt of the notice of decision awarding fees, the prevailing party shall submit a written request and accounting of these fees and serve that request simultaneously on all parties by regular mail and electronic mail. Within seven (7) days of receiving the request by the prevailing party, the opposing party may file an objection to that request. Within seven (7) calendar days of the date that an opposition is submitted or within seven (7) days of the deadline for an opposition, if none is submitted, the hearing officer shall submit a proposed supplemental decision stating the amount of fees included in the award, which shall become final in seven (7) days after the proposed decision, unless either party requests an evidentiary hearing within seven (7) calendar days, in which case a final decision shall be made within seven (7) calendar days after the hearing. If the prevailing party is the mobilehome owners' representative, then the park owner shall file an affidavit with the City Manager, stating that the award of attorneys' fees has been paid in full and shall not be permitted to implement a rent increase pursuant to this section until such payment has been made. For good cause, the hearing officer may modify the procedure set forth in this subsection for determining an award for a prevailing party. 
E.  Overall Period for Review of Fair Return Petition. After a petition is deemed complete, the overall time for a decision of the City Manager and conducting a hearing and issuing a final decision by the hearing officer shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) calendar days, unless the hearing officer determines that there is good cause for extending this deadline or the City Manager extends this period due to the length of time required to accommodate scheduling availability and limitations required to obtain the services of a hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.100 - Rent increases for new capital improvements. 
A.  A park owner may obtain a pass-through of a new capital improvement cost under this section. Any capital improvement assessment shall be identified separately and listed on rent statements along with their date of expiration. 
B.  New Capital Improvements. Improvements that did not previously exist in the park shall be deemed "new capital improvements," unless the park owner was required by law to make the capital improvements. A park owner may charge each affected mobilehome owner as additional rent the pro rata share of new service and capital improvement costs including financing costs subject to the following preconditions: 
1.  Prior to initiating the service or incurring the capital improvement cost, the park owner must consult with the mobilehome owners regarding the nature and purpose of the improvements and the estimated cost of the improvements. 
2.  The park owner must obtain the prior written consent of at least one adult mobilehome owner in each of a majority of the mobilehome spaces which are occupied by the mobilehome owner to the proposed capital improvement. Each space shall have only one vote. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.110 - Rent reductions for service reductions. 
A.  Definition. "Service reductions" shall mean the elimination or reduction of any material service or facility provided as of April 2015. "Service" shall also include physical improvements or amenities. 
B.  Submission of Service Reduction Complaint to City Manager. A service reduction complaint shall be submitted to the City Manager alleging in a written form and should state: 
1.  The affected spaces; 
2.  The prior level of service established by the park owner for that homeowner's mobilehome space and common facilities used by that homeowner; 
3.  The specific changes in the prior level of services comprising the alleged reduction in service; 
4.  The date the service reduction was first noticed by the homeowner; 
5.  The date of notice to the park owner of the alleged service reduction, and if such notice was given, whether the notice was given orally or in writing; 
6.  When and how the park owner responded to the homeowner's notice, if notice was given; 
7.  Whether the condition was improved or corrected, and if so, when and how; 
8.  The status of the condition as of the date the complaint is signed; and 
9.  Where such service reduction was the result of a vote of a majority of the affected homeowners. 
C.  Submission of Service Reduction Complaint to Hearing Officer. 
1.  Thirty (30) calendar days after the service reduction complaint is submitted to the City Manager, if the dispute is not settled, either one-third of the tenants in a park or the park owner may request that the dispute be submitted to a hearing officer. 
2.  If the hearing officer finds that a material service reduction has occurred, the hearing officer shall determine the resultant percentage reduction in the homeowners' enjoyment of their homes due to the service reduction. 
3.  Rent shall be reduced by that percentage or amount. The homeowners also shall be entitled to a rebate of the following sum: the monthly rent reduction multiplied by the number of months between the date the homeowners notified the park owner of the reduction in service, and the date the City Manager determined the rent reduction. 
4.  A service reduction shall not include the elimination or reduction of a recreational facility or service when such elimination or reduction and rent decrease resulting therefrom have the prior written approval of two-thirds of the homeowners. In such cases no rebate shall be required. 
5.  No recreational service or facility which has been reduced or eliminated shall be reinstituted at any cost to the homeowners without prior written approval of two-thirds of the homeowners. 
D.  Consolidation of Service Reduction Complaint with Consideration of Fair Return Petition. In the event that a service reduction claim is filed while a fair return petition is pending, either the city, the park owner, or the tenants may require consideration of a claim pursuant to this section in conjunction with the fair return claim. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.120 - Waivers. 
A.  Any waiver or purported waiver by a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant of rights granted under this chapter shall be void as contrary to public policy. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a landlord to require or attempt to require, as a condition of tenancy in a mobilehome park, a mobilehome owner, mobilehome tenant, prospective mobilehome owner, or prospective mobilehome tenant to waive in a lease or rental agreement or in any other agreement the rights granted to a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant by this chapter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for a landlord to deny or threaten to deny tenancy in a mobilehome park to any person on account of such person's refusal to enter into a lease or rental agreement or any other agreement under which such person would waive the rights granted to a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.130 - Information to be supplied by the park owner to tenants and prospective tenants and information to be provided by the city to the public. 
Posting of Chapter. A copy of this chapter shall be posted in both English and Spanish in the office of every mobilehome park and in the recreation building or clubhouse of every mobilehome park. Only city-provided Spanish translations of this chapter may be posted. The city's web page shall include a copy of this chapter, a summary of this chapter and other issues related to mobilehome park space rentals within the city, and a copy of California's Mobilehome Residency Law. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.140 - Resident representatives—Applicable to all city mobilehome parks. 
The residents of each mobilehome park in the city shall annually elect by majority vote, with one vote per space, a resident representative to receive all notices required by this chapter. The residents shall advise the City Manager of the name, address and phone number of the elected resident representative in writing no later than January 31 of each year and shall promptly notify the City Manager of any change of representative. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.150 - Rights of prospective tenants. 
A.  Any prospective tenant must be offered the option of renting a mobilehome space in a manner which will permit the "tenant-to-be" to receive the benefits of the mobilehome space rent stabilization program which includes, but is not limited to, rental of a mobilehome space on a month-to-month basis. Such a person cannot be denied the option of a tenancy of twelve (12) months or less in duration. 
B.  The park owner shall provide each prospective tenant with a photocopy of the written notification in both English and Spanish (see Appendix A of this chapter) and will provide each prospective tenant with a copy of this chapter in both English and Spanish. Only city-provided Spanish translations of the written notification (Appendix A) and this chapter may be provided. 
C.  Pursuant to Civil Code Section 1632, if any mobilehome rental agreement is negotiated primarily in the Spanish, Chinese, Tagalog, Vietnamese, or Korean languages, the park owner must provide the prospective tenant with a translated copy of the text of the proposed mobilehome rental agreement from English into the same language in which it was negotiated, which includes a translation of every term and condition in that proposed rental agreement. 
D.  Any effort to circumvent the requirements of this section shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.160 - Annual registration and other notices required from owner—Applicable to all city mobilehome parks. 
A.  All mobilehome parks in the city shall comply with this Section 8.70.160. 
B.  Due Date. The initial annual registration statement (for calendar years 2015 and 2016) shall be due no later than December 1, 2015. Starting in 2017, no later than February 1 of each year, each park owner shall file an annual registration statement, on a form provided by the City Manager. 
C.  Contents of Registration Form. The registration forms shall include the following information: 
1.  The name(s), business address(es), and business telephone number(s) of each person or legal entity possessing an ownership interest in the park and the nature of such interest; 
2.  The number of mobilehome spaces within the park; 
3.  A rent schedule reflecting the current space rents within the park; a listing of all other charges, including utilities not included in space rent, paid by mobilehome owners within the park and the approximate amount of each such charge; 
4.  The vacant spaces in the park; 
5.  The spaces which were occupied by a new household during the year; 
6.  Spaces occupied by park owned mobilehomes; 
7.  The purchase prices paid by the park owner for any mobilehomes acquired by the park owner and the sale prices of any mobilehomes sold by the park owner; 
8.  The name and address to which all required notices and correspondence may be sent; and 
9.  Any other information deemed relevant by the City Manager for the purposes of obtaining information deemed useful and relevant to the implementation of this chapter and the formulation of mobilehome park legislation in the city. 
D.  Certification of Registration Forms. All registration forms, and any documentation accompanying any registration forms, shall contain an affidavit or declaration, signed by the park owner or a designated agent, with his/her signature notarized, certifying that the information contained therein is true, correct and complete. 
E.  Notice of Sale of a Park. Upon the sale or transfer of a mobilehome park, the seller or transferor shall notify the City Manager of the sale or transfer and of the name and address of the buyer or transferee and shall notify the buyer or transferee of the requirements of this section. Within twenty (20) days of the sale or transfer of a mobilehome park, the buyer or transferee shall provide a new registration form. 
F.  Notice to Prospective Park Purchasers. The park owner shall provide prospective park purchasers with a copy of this chapter and notice that the following would be a prerequisite to filing a rent increase application pursuant to Sections 8.70.080 and 8.70.090: 
1.  A statement of the base year income, expenses, and net operating income of the park with a breakdown of income and expenses by category. 
2.  Documents supporting the amounts reported in the income and expense statement. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.170 - Retaliation prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any landlord to evict a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant where the landlord's dominant motive in seeking to recover possession of the rental unit is: 
1.  Retaliation for the mobilehome owner's or mobilehome tenant's organizing, petitioning government for rent relief, or exercising any right granted under this chapter; or 
2.  Evasion of the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a landlord to retaliate against a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant for the owner's or tenant's assertion or exercise of rights under this chapter in any manner, including but not limited to: 
1.  Threatening to bring or bringing an action to recover possession of a rental unit. 
2.  Engaging in any form of harassment that causes the owner or tenant to quit the premises. 
3.  Decreasing housing services. 
4.  Increasing rent. 
5.  Imposing or increasing a security deposit or other charge payable by the owner or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.180 - Excessive rents or demands therefor. 
It shall be unlawful for a park owner to demand, accept, receive, or retain any rent in excess of the amounts authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.190 - Excessive rents—Civil penalties. 
A.  If any person is found to have demanded, accepted, received or retained any payment of rent in excess of the maximum rent allowed by this chapter, such person shall be liable to the mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant from whom such payment was demanded, accepted, received, or retained for damages as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.  In the event a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant is the prevailing party in a civil action against a person found to have demanded, accepted, received or retained any payment of rent described in subsection A of this section, such mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant, in addition to damages as determined by the court pursuant to subsection A of this section, may, in the discretion of the court, be awarded an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or three (3) times the damages determined by the court pursuant to subsection A of this section, whichever is greater. For the purposes of this subsection, a mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant shall be deemed to be a prevailing party if the judgment is rendered in such mobilehome owner's or mobilehome tenant's favor or if the litigation is dismissed in such mobilehome owner's or mobilehome tenant's favor prior to final judgment, unless the parties otherwise agree in the settlement or compromise. 
C.  Remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies and are not intended to be exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.200 - Rules and guidelines. 
The City Manager may adopt rules and procedures to implement the applications, notices, registration, verification and certification required by this chapter, and for the review of rent increase applications and the conduct of hearings. Such rules and guidelines shall be submitted to the City Council for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.210 - Authority of City Council to bring action to compel compliance. 
The City Council may institute a civil action to compel compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
8.70.220 - Appeal of decisions pursuant to this chapter. 
City determinations pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to fair return determinations, shall be subject to review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 as a final administrative determination, within the time constraints established pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015) 
APPENDIX A 
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE HOMEOWNER REGARDING THE PROPOSED RENTAL AGREEMENT FOR THE_______________________ MOBILEHOME PARK. 
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE THAT THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT CREATES A TENANCY WITH A TERM IN EXCESS OF TWELVE MONTHS. 
BY SIGNING THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT, YOU ARE EXEMPTING THIS MOBILEHOME SPACE FROM THE PROVISIONS OF THE CITY OF EL MONTE MOBILEHOME RENT STABILIZATION ORDINANCE FOR THE TERM OF THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT. 
THE CITY OF EL MONTE MOBILEHOME RENT STABILIZATION ORDINANCE AND THE STATE MOBILEHOME RESIDENCY LAW (CALIFORNIA CIVIL CODE SEC. 798 et seq.) GIVE YOU CERTAIN RIGHTS. BEFORE SIGNING THIS RENTAL AGREEMENT YOU MAY CHOOSE TO SEE A LAWYER. 
UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW, YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO BE OFFERED A RENTAL AGREEMENT FOR: 
(1)  A TERM OF TWELVE MONTHS, OR 
(2)  A LESSER PERIOD AS YOU MAY REQUEST, OR 
(3)  A LONGER PERIOD AS YOU AND THE MOBILEHOME PARK MANAGEMENT MAY AGREE. YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO REVIEW THIS AGREEMENT FOR 30 DAYS BEFORE ACCEPTING OR REJECTING IT. 
IF YOU SIGN THE AGREEMENT YOU MAY CANCEL THE AGREEMENT BY NOTIFYING THE PARK MANAGEMENT IN WRITING OF THE CANCELLATION WITHIN 72 HOURS OF YOUR EXECUTION OF THE AGREEMENT. 
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR A MOBILEHOME PARK OWNER OR ANY AGENT OR REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OWNER TO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST YOU BECAUSE OF THE EXERCISE OF ANY RIGHTS YOU MAY HAVE UNDER THE CITY OF EL MONTE MOBILEHOME RENT REVIEW LAW, OR BECAUSE OF YOUR CHOICE TO ENTER INTO A RENTAL AGREEMENT WHICH IS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THAT LAW. 
(Ord. No. 2860, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
Chapter 8.74 - SMOKE-FREE MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCES 
 
8.74.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the City Council of the city, in enacting this Chapter 8.74, to provide for the public's health, safety, and welfare by discouraging the inherently dangerous activity of tobacco use around non-consenting individuals, protecting children from exposure to smoking where they live and play, and protecting the public from non-consensual exposure to second hand smoke in and around their homes. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter 8.74, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  "Adjacent property" shall mean any enclosed area or unenclosed area of property, publicly or privately owned, that abuts a multi-unit residence, but does not include property developed with non multi-unit residence or property specifically identified as an exception under this chapter. 
B.  "Common area" means every enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence that residents of more than one unit of that multi-unit residence are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls and paths, lobbies and courtyards, elevators, stairs, community rooms and playgrounds, gym facilities and swimming pools, parking lots and garages, shared restrooms, shared laundry rooms, shared cooking areas, and shared eating areas. 
C.  "Common interest complex" means a multi-unit residence that is a condominium project, a community apartment project, a stock cooperative, or a planned development, as defined by Civil Code Section 4100. 
D.  "Designated smoking area" shall mean an area where smoking is permissible and has been established in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.74.030. 
E.  "Enclosed area" means an area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has: 
1.  Any type of overhead cover whether or not that cover includes vents or other openings and at least three (3) walls or other vertical boundaries of any height, whether or not such boundaries include vents or other openings; or 
2.  Four (4) walls or other vertical boundaries that exceed six (6) feet in height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings. 
F.  "Existing unit" shall mean a unit in existence on or before February 19, 2016. 
G.  "Family day care home" shall be defined as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78. 
H.  "HOA" shall mean an organization or entity established for the purpose of managing and/or maintaining a common interest complex. 
I.  "Landlord" means any person who owns property with a multi-unit residence and lets such property for residential use, any person who lets residential property used as multi-unit residences and any person who manages such property, except that "landlord" does not include a master tenant who sublets a unit, as long as the master tenant sublets only a single unit of a multi-unit residence. 
J.  "Multi-unit residence" means property containing three (3) or more attached units and shall include a rental complex and a common interest complex, except the following specifically excluded types of housing: 
1.  A hotel or motel that meets the requirements set forth in Civil Code Section 1940(b)(2), as amended; 
2.  A mobilehome park; and 
3.  A campground. 
K.  "New unit" means a unit that is issued a certificate of occupancy on or after February 19, 2016. 
L.  "Nonsmoking area" means any enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence in which smoking is prohibited by: (1) this Chapter 8.74 or other law; (2) binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of real property or; (3) designation of a person with legal control over the enclosed or unenclosed area. In the case of a smoking prohibition established only by private agreement or designation and not by this Chapter 8.74 or other law; it shall not be a violation of this Chapter 8.74 for a person to engage in smoking or to allow smoking in a nonsmoking area, unless the person knows smoking is not permitted or a reasonable person would know smoking is not permitted. 
M.  "Person" means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity, including governmental agencies. 
N.  "Rental complex" means a multi-unit residence for which fifty (50) percent or more of then units are let by or on behalf of the same landlord. 
O.  "Smoke" means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory or congestion relief, such as, for example, smoke from incense or vapor from a congestion relieving vaporizer. The term "smoke" includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, and marijuana smoke. However, "smoke" shall not include marijuana smoke when the person smoking holds a valid, current Medical Marijuana Identification Card issued by the California Department of Public Health which identifies the relevant person authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana. 
P.  "Smoking" means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for example: possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, a lighted cigar, an operating electronic cigarette or a lighted cigarette of any kind or lighting or igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar or a cigarette of any kind. 
Q.  "Unenclosed area" means any area that is not an enclosed area. 
R.  "Unit" means a personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking facilities or private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated exclusive-use enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.025 - Smoking prohibited by law in certain areas. 
A.  Smoking in a common area, other than a designated smoking area established pursuant to Section 8.74.030, is prohibited and a violation of this Chapter 8.74. 
B.  Smoking in a new unit or existing unit, as set forth in Sections 8.74.050, 8.74.060, and 8.74.080, is prohibited and a violation of this Chapter 8.74. 
C.  Smoking in a designated nonsmoking unit is prohibited and a violation of this Chapter 8.74. 
D.  Smoking in an exclusive-use unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio, as set forth in Sections 8.74.040, 8.74.050, 8.74.060, and 8.74.080, is prohibited and a violation of this Chapter 8.74. 
E.  Smoking in an unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence within twenty-five (25) feet in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent into an enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area, as set forth in Section 8.74.040(A). 
F.  Smoking in an unenclosed area of an adjacent property within twenty-five (25) feet in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent into an enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area, as set forth in Section 8.74.040(B), is prohibited and a violation of tis Chapter 8.74. 
G.  Smoking in any nonsmoking area is prohibited and a violation of this Chapter 8.74. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.030 - No smoking permitted in common areas except in designated smoking areas. 
A.  Smoking is prohibited in all common areas pursuant to Section 8.74.025(A), except that a person with legal control over a common area, such as, for example, a landlord or HOA may designate a portion of the common area as a designated smoking area, provided that, at all times, such designated smoking area, at a minimum, complies with subsection B, below. 
B.  For a location to be considered a designated smoking area, at a minimum it: 
1.  Must be an unenclosed area; 
2.  Must be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area, provided, that a person with legal control over a common area in which a designated smoking area has been established shall modify, relocate, or eliminate such smoking area so as to maintain compliance with the requirements of this subsection B as laws changes, as binding agreements are created, and/or as nonsmoking areas on neighboring property are established; 
3.  Must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from unenclosed areas primarily used by children and unenclosed areas with improvements that facilitate physical activity including, for example, playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, and school campuses; 
4.  Must be no more than ten (10) percent of the total unenclosed area of the multi-unit residence for which it is designated; 
5.  Must have a clearly marked perimeter; and 
6.  Must be clearly identified by conspicuous signage. The signs shall have letters of no less than one inch in height and shall be maintained by the person or persons with legal control over the designated smoking area. 
C.  No person with legal control over a common area in which smoking is prohibited by this Chapter 8.74 or other law shall knowingly permit the presence of any ashtray, ash can, or other receptacle designed for or primarily used for disposal of Smoking waste within the Common Area. 
D.  Clear and unambiguous "No Smoking" signs shall be posted in sufficient numbers and locations to make common areas where smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law obvious to a reasonable person. The signs shall have letters of no less than one inch in height or contain the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle crossed by a red bar). Such signs shall be maintained by the person or persons with legal control over the common areas. The absence of signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any provision of this Chapter 8.74. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.040 - Non-smoking buffer zones. 
A.  Smoking is prohibited in every unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence, including any balcony, porch, deck and patio that is within twenty-five (25) feet in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent into an enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area. 
B.  Smoking is prohibited in unenclosed areas of adjacent property within twenty-five (25) feet in any direction of any doorway, window, opening, or other vent into an enclosed area that is a nonsmoking area. 
C.  Smoking is prohibited in all exclusive-use unenclosed areas associated with a unit, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, and patio. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.050 - Smoking restrictions in new units of multi-unit residences. 
Each new unit of a multi-unit residence is hereby designated a nonsmoking unit, including without limitation, each new unit in a rental complex or in a common interest complex. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.060 - Non-smoking designations for existing units of a common interest complex. 
A.  All existing units of a common interest complex, including any associated exclusive-use enclosed areas or unenclosed areas, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, and patio, are hereby designated as nonsmoking units as of August 19, 2017. 
B.  At least six (6) months before August 19, 2017, the HOA shall provide each tenant with: 
1.  A written notice clearly stating that all units, including the homeowner's unit, are designated nonsmoking units and that smoking in a unit shall be prohibited as of August 19, 2017; and 
2.  A copy of this Chapter 8.74. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.070 - Required and implied terms to be included in rules and regulations for all new and existing units in common interest complexes. 
A.  All existing rules and regulations for common interest complex shall include the provisions set forth in subsection B, below, on the earliest possible date such rules and regulations may be amended in accordance with applicable law, including providing the minimum legal notice. 
B.  All existing rules and regulations applicable a complex interest complex shall be amended to include the following provisions: 
1.  A clause providing that as of August 19, 2017, or an earlier date if the HOA board so determines, it is a violation of the rules and regulations to engage in smoking in a unit. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following: "It is a violation of these rules and regulations for a homeowner or any other person subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to engage in smoking in the unit as of August 19, 2017 [or an earlier date that the HOA board so determines]." 
2.  A clause providing that it is a violation of the rules and regulations from the homeowner or any other person subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to engage in smoking in any common area of the property other than a designated smoking area. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following: "It is a violation of these rules and regulations for a homeowner or any other person subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to engage in smoking in any common area of the property, except in an outdoor Designated Smoking Area, if one exists." 
3.  A clause providing that it is a violation of the rules and regulations for the homeowner or any other person subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following: "It is a violation of these rules and regulations for a homeowner or any other Person subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property." 
C.  Whether or not an HOA board complies with subsections A and B, above, the clauses required by those subsections shall be implied and incorporated by law into all rules and regulations of the common interest complex to which subsections A and B apply and shall become effective as of the earliest possible date on which the HOA board could have amended such rules and regulations pursuant to subsections A and B. 
D.  A homeowner who violates a smoking provision of the rules and regulations for a common interest complex, or who knowingly permits any other person subject to the control of the homeowner or present by invitation or permission of the homeowner, shall be liable for the violation to: 
1.  The HOA board; and 
2.  Any occupant of the common interest complex who is exposed to smoke or who suffers damages as the result of the violation. 
E.  This Chapter 8.74 shall not create additional liability in an HOA board to any person for a homeowner's violation of any smoking provision in the rules and regulations for a common interest complex if the HOA board has fully complied with this Section 8.74.070 and Section 8.74.060. 
F.  Failure to enforce any smoking provision required by this Chapter 8.74 shall not affect the right to enforce such provision in the future. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.080 - Non-smoking designations for existing units of a rental complex. 
A.  All existing units of a rental complex, including any associated exclusive-use enclosed areas or unenclosed areas, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio, are hereby designated nonsmoking units as of August 19, 2017. 
B.  Prior to the effective date of a new or amended lease, or at least six (6) months prior to August 19, 2017, whichever occurs earlier, a landlord shall provide each tenant with: 
1.  A written notice clearly stating that all units, including the tenant's unit, are designated nonsmoking units and that smoking is prohibited in a unit as of August 19, 2017; and 
2.  A copy of this Chapter 8.74. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.090 - Required and implied lease terms for all new and existing units in rental complexes. 
A.  Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex, including, for example, new units and existing units, entered into, renewed, or continued month-to-month after February 19, 2016, shall include the provisions set forth in subsection B, below, on the earliest possible date when such an amendment is allowable by law when providing the minimum legal notice. 
B.  Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex, including, for example, new units and existing units, entered into, renewed, or continued month-to-month after February 19, 2016, shall be amended to include the following provisions: 
1.  At clause providing that as of August 19, 2017 or an earlier date if the landlord so determines, it is a material breach of the lease or other rental agreement to allow or engage in smoking in the unit. Such a clause shall be substantially consistent with the following, "It is a material breach of this agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in the unit as of August 19, 2017 [or an earlier date if the Landlord so determines]." 
2.  A clause providing it is a material breach of the agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in any common area of the property other than a designated smoking area. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following, "It is a material breach of this agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in any common area of the property, except in an outdoor area designated for smoking, if one exists." 
3.  A clause providing it is a material breach of the agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following, "It is a material breach of this agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property." 
4.  A clause expressly conveying third-party beneficiary status to all occupants of the rental complex as to the smoking provisions of the lease or other rental agreement. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following: "Other occupants of the property are express third-party beneficiaries of those provisions in this agreement that concern smoking. As such, other occupants of the property may seek to enforce such provisions by any lawful means, including by bringing a civil action in a court of law." 
C.  Whether or not a landlord complies with subsections A and B, above, the clauses required by those subsections shall be implied and incorporated by law into every agreement to which subsection A or B apply and shall become effective as of the earliest possible date on which the landlord could have made the insertions pursuant to subsection A or B. 
D.  A tenant who breaches a smoking provision of a lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex, or who knowingly permits any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant, shall be liable for the breach to: 
1.  The landlord; and 
2.  Any occupant of the rental complex who is exposed to smoke or who suffers damages as a result of the breach. 
E.  This Chapter 8.74 shall not create additional liability for a landlord to any person for a tenant's breach of any smoking provision in a lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex if the landlord has fully complied with this Section 8.74.090 and Section 8.74.080. 
F.  Failure to enforce any smoking provision required by this Chapter 8.74 shall not affect the right to enforce such provision in the future, nor shall a waiver of any breach constitute a waiver of any subsequent breach or a waiver of the provision itself. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.100 - Smoking in family day care facilities. 
Health and Safety Code Section 1596.795 prohibits smoking in a single-family dwelling licensed as a family day care home during operations of that facility for that purpose. If smoking is permitted and occurring at a location licensed as a family day care home during hours of nonoperation of that facility for day care purposes, then the person with legal control over the family day care home must disclose, to the parents and guardians of the those potentially to be serviced by that facility, smoking is permitted and does occur at that facility during those hours of non-operation. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.110 - Procedures and requirements for mandated submissions. 
A.  Submissions required by this Chapter 8.74 must be received by the Economic Development Department on or before any applicable due date. The submissions shall include all material and information required by this chapter and such other materials and information as the Economic Development Manager deems necessary for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter 8.74. 
B.  All material and information submitted pursuant to this Chapter 8.74 constitute disclosable public records and are not private or confidential. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.120 - Smoking and smoke generally. 
A.  The provisions of this Chapter 8.74 are restrictive only and establish no new rights for a person who engages in smoking. Notwithstanding (i) any provision of this chapter or other provisions of this code, (ii) any failure by any person to restrict smoking under this chapter or (iii) any explicit or implicit provision of this code that allows smoking in any place, nothing in this code shall be interpreted to limit any person's legal rights under other laws with regard to smoking, including, for example, rights in nuisance, trespass, property damage, and personal injury or other legal or equitable principles. 
B.  For all purposes within the jurisdiction of the city, nonconsensual exposure to smoke is a nuisance, and the uninvited presence of smoke on property is a nuisance and a trespass. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.130 - Penalties and enforcement. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection B, below, a violation of this Chapter 8.74 is not a misdemeanor or an infraction. The enforcement of this Chapter 8.74 shall be by the private parties involved. 
B.  A violation of Sections 8.74.030(B), 8.74.030(C), 8.74.030(D), 8.74.060(B), 8.74.070(A), 8.74.070(B), 8.74.080(B), 8.74.090(A), and 8.74.090(B): 
1.  In the discretion of the City Attorney, may be prosecuted as an infraction or a misdemeanor, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.24 of this code; 
2.  Is subject to enforcement through the imposition of an administrative fine as set froth in Chapter 1.18 of this code; and 
3.  Is subject to a civil action brought by the City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. 
C.  The remedies set forth in this Section 8.74.130 and 8.74.140 are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available in law or in equity. 
D.  Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Chapter 8.74 shall also constitute a violation of this Chapter 8.74. 
E.  Any violation of this Chapter 8.74 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
F.  No person shall intimidate, harass, or otherwise retaliate against any person who seeks compliance with this Chapter 8.74. Moreover, no person shall intentionally or recklessly expose another person to smoke in response to that person's effort to achieve compliance with this Chapter 8.74. 
G.  Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public may bring a civil action to enforce this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.74.140, below. 
H.  Under no circumstances shall the city have any responsibility or obligation to enforce or seek any legal redress, civil or criminal, for any violation of this Chapter 8.74. Nothing in this Chapter 8.74 shall create a right of action in any person against the city or its agents to compel public enforcement of this Chapter 8.74 against private parties. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
8.74.140 - Private enforcement. 
A.  Any person, including a legal entity or organization or a government agency acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public may bring a civil action to enforce this Chapter 8.74. Upon proof of a violation, a court shall award the following: 
1.  Damages in the amount of either: 
a.  Upon proof, actual damages; or 
b.  With insufficient or no proof of damages, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation of this Chapter 8.74 (hereinafter "statutory damages"). Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter 8.74, no person suing on behalf of the general public shall recover statutory damages based upon a violation of this Chapter 8.74 if a previous claim brought on behalf of the general public by another person for statutory damages and based upon the same violation has been adjudicated, whether or not the person bringing the subsequent claim was a party to the prior adjudication. 
2.  Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice, retaliation, or a conscious disregard for the public health. 
B.  The person may also bring a civil action to enforce this Chapter 8.74 by way of a conditional judgment or an injunction. Upon proof of a violation, a court shall issue a conditional judgment or an injunction. 
C.  Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar against a person seeking relief on its own behalf, a person may bring an action to enforce this Chapter 8.74 solely on behalf of the general public. When a person brings an action solely on behalf of the general public, nothing about such an action shall act to preclude or bar the person from bringing a subsequent action based upon the same facts but seeking relief on his, her, or its account. 
D.  Nothing in this Chapter 8.74 prohibits a person from bringing a civil action in small claims court to enforce this Chapter 8.74, so long as the amount in demand and the type of relief sought are within the jurisdictional requirements of such court. 
(Ord. No. 2871, § 2, 1-19-2016)  
Chapter 8.78 - PERSONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION 
 
8.78.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter 8.78, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. 
B.  "Cultivate" means participation any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
C.  "Private residence" means a house, an apartment unit, a mobilehome, or other similar dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2902, § 3, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 2903, § 2, 12-6-16)  
8.78.020 - Outdoor personal cannabis cultivation prohibited. 
The personal cultivation of cannabis outdoors upon the grounds of a private residence shall be completely prohibited in all zones in the city, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(3). 
(Ord. No. 2902, § 3, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 2903, § 2, 12-6-16)  
8.78.030 - Indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit required. 
A.  Personal cannabis cultivation, as authorized under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1(a)(3), shall require a valid city-issued indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(1). 
B.  Personal cannabis cultivation shall be limited to the inside of a private residence, or inside [of] an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure, so long as the portion of the residence or eligible accessory structure utilized for such cultivation does not reduce the amount of required parking applicable to the relevant residence. 
C.  If a residence or residence pertaining to an accessory structure as described in Section 8.78.030(B), above, is leased or rented, then an indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit may only be issued upon a written authorization from the owner of such property that explicitly allows such cultivation. Such written authorization shall accompany an application for an indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit. The property owner may revoke such authorization by providing written notice of revocation to the city and to the permittee. Thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of such notice by the city, the relevant indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit shall be null and void. 
D.  Indoor personal cannabis cultivation permits shall be non-transferrable without the written consent of the city. 
E.  Indoor personal cannabis cultivation permits shall be valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance of an indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit, unless renewed for an additional one year period prior to expiration. 
F.  Application. 
1.  The form and content of the application for an indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit shall be approved by the Chief of Police. 
2.  Prior to the issuance or renewal of an indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit, the Building Official or designee shall conduct an inspection of the proposed cultivation area to confirm that that no immediate threats to health or safety exist in the proposed cultivation area and that cultivation would comply with the standards set forth in this chapter 8.78. The Building Official or designee may require additional standards to those set forth in this chapter 8.78 in order to ensure compliance with the building, zoning, housing, and fire codes. 
3.  Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk and accompanied by an application (including inspection) fee, as established by City Council resolution. 
4.  The Chief of Police, or designee, shall consider and either approve or disapprove an application for an Indoor Personal Cannabis Cultivation Permit and deliver written notice of such approval or disapproval by first class mail to the applicant within thirty (30) calendar days of the city's receipt of such complete application. 
5.  Appeal of Disapproval. 
a.  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of transmittal of the Chief of Police's notice of disapproval of an application, the applicant denied approval may appeal the disapproval by notifying the City Clerk in writing of the appeal, the reasons for the appeal, and payment of any accompanying fees. 
b.  The City Clerk shall set a hearing on the appeal and shall fix a date and time certain, within thirty (30) calendar days after the receipt of the applicant's appeal, unless the city and the applicant agree to a longer period of time to consider the appeal. The City Clerk shall provide notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing, at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
c.  The City shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the appeal and determine the order of procedure, and rule on objections to the admissibility of evidence. The applicant and the city shall each have the right to submit documents, call and examine witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and argue their respective positions. The proceedings shall be informal, free of application of the strict rules of evidence. All evidence shall be admissible if it is of the and that a reasonably prudent person would rely upon in making a determination on the matter. 
d.  The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days after the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
G.  Periodic Inspections. Permittees who possess current and valid indoor personal cannabis cultivation permits shall be subject to periodic city inspections, not to exceed more than one inspection every six (6) month period, to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter 8.78 upon at least seventy-two (72) hours written notice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2902, § 3, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 2903, § 2, 12-6-16)  
8.78.040 - Standards for indoor personal cannabis cultivation. 
A.  Any and all live cannabis plants cultivated by persons in the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1(a)(3) shall be kept in a locked space that is not visible by normal unaided vision from a public place, subject to any and all limitations applicable under Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2. 
B.  All structures in which such indoor personal cannabis cultivation occurs shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, housing, and fire code requirements. 
C.  The use of grow lights, fans, ventilation devices or any other electrical, irrigation, or mechanical equipment shall comply with all applicable building, housing, and fire code requirements and related permitting and inspection requirements. 
D.  Indoor grow lights shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) watts total illumination, and the installation, wiring, and operation of such lighting shall comply with the applicable building, housing, and fire code requirements and related permitting and inspection protocols. 
E.  The use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) or generators for personal indoor cannabis cultivation under this section 8.78.040 shall be prohibited. 
F.  Any structure utilized for personal indoor cannabis cultivation under this section 8.78.040 shall have ventilation and filtration systems installed to prevent the odor of cannabis from escaping the interiors of such structure and the accumulation of mold. Such systems shall be compliant with applicable building, housing, and fire code requirements and has undergone and related necessary inspections. 
G.  The cultivation area shall not be accessible to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
H.  A portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the same room where indoor cultivation occurs. 
I.  There shall be no external or noxious olfactory evidence of marijuana cultivation from any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or adjacent property. 
J.  Runoff and waste disposal by the residence where cultivation occurs must be in compliance with any applicable local, state, and federal regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2902, § 3, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 2903, § 2, 12-6-16)  
Chapter 8.79 - TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE 
 
8.79.010 - Findings. 
The City Council finds and determines that: 
A.  Some rental units in the city have severe building code violations which are so extensive and extreme that they threaten the health and safety of tenants and require the units or rooms to be vacated to allow for repairs to take place. 
B.  Such building code violations are often caused by deferred maintenance and may breach the landlord's implied warranty of habitability and sometimes constitute constructive eviction of the tenant household from its residence. 
C.  Health and Safety Code Section 17975 requires property owners or designated agent to pay certain relocation expenses when the need to relocate arises from violations which are so extensive and of such a nature that the immediate health and safety of the tenants is endangered. 
D.  Financial hardship often arises because relocating generally requires large sum of moneys, including first and last month's rent, deposits, moving expenses and utility deposits for a new residence. Low-income tenants are typically unable to obtain such sums and, as a result, are at great risk of becoming homeless. 
E.  Health and Safety Code Sections 17975.1 and 17975.2 specify the timing and level of payments the property owner must provide. If a tenant is entitled to relocation benefits, the Building Official or designee must provide either telephonic or written notice to the tenant of his or her entitlement to the benefits. Written notice may be satisfied by posting notice on the premises stating that tenants may be entitled to relocation benefits. 
F.  The delayed payment of relocation benefits by the property owner, or designated agent, may impose extreme hardship upon tenants who then must themselves obtain the large sums of money necessary to relocate. Delayed payment may also require the city to expend general funds to provide tenants with financial assistance for relocation. Any requirement to pay relocation benefits should contain disincentives for delayed payment in the form of appropriate penalties. 
G.  Health and Safety Code Section 17975.5 authorizes the city to adopt an ordinance that allows the city at its sole discretion, to advance relocation payments to tenants where the property owner, or designated agent, fails, neglects, or refuses to pay displaced tenants and to subsequently collect from the property owner any amount paid to displaced tenants, along with an additional penalty amount, which shall not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00.) 
H.  This chapter is adopted pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 17975 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
8.79.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
"Displaced tenant" means a tenant that is ordered to move out of a residential unit or structure by an order to vacate issued by the city or another enforcement agency. 
"Order to vacate" means the first notice sent by an authorized city official to the property owner and posted on the affected property declaring that, due to a failure to repair or maintain, the unit or structure must be vacated. 
"Property owner" means the owner of the property at the time the order to vacate is issued, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and any successor in interest. 
"Residential unit or structure" means any dwelling, apartment, room or place which is the place of permanent or customary and usual abode of any person or household. Residential unit or structure shall include mobile homes located in mobilehome parks, provided that the city has assumed enforcement authority over such parks from the State Department of Housing and Community Development. 
"Tenant" means any resident of the affected property who is a tenant as that term is used in California Civil Code Sections 1940 et seq. 
"Vacation date" means the date by which a tenant is required to vacate a unit or structure, pursuant to an order by an authorized city official. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
8.79.030 - Eligibility for relocation benefits and appeal. 
A.  A tenant shall be eligible for relocation assistance and payments pursuant to this chapter and Health and Safety Code Sections 17975 et seq. when the city determines that the condition of a building or portion thereof is such that a residential unit cannot be safely occupied by that tenant while the building or portion thereof is being brought into code compliance. 
B.  Exceptions: A tenant shall not be eligible for relocation assistance and payments under the following conditions: 
1.  Within twenty-nine (29) days from the vacation date, the tenant is offered the right to return to the rehabilitated unit upon clearance by the appropriate code enforcement official. The tenant may still assert his/her rights and remedies under the law to recover its losses and damages for the period in which it was required to vacate the premises; 
2.  The property owner provides a replacement dwelling of comparable size and appurtenances to the tenant; 
3.  The tenant has caused or substantially contributed to the condition giving rise to the order to vacate or unreasonably prevented the property owner or designated agent from undertaking maintenance or repairs that would have prevented or rectified the code violation. Nor shall any relocation benefits be payable to a tenant if any guest or invitee of the tenant has caused or substantially contributed to the condition giving rise to the order to vacate, as determined by the Building Official or designee. The Building Official or designee shall make the determination whether a tenant, tenant's guest, or invitee caused or substantially contributed to the condition, giving rise to the order to vacate; 
4.  If the residential unit or structure becomes unsafe or hazardous as a result of a natural disaster or act of God; 
5.  If the residential unit or structure is operated as an emergency or temporary shelter for homeless persons (whether such persons have assigned rooms or beds, and regardless of duration of stay by any occupant) by a nonprofit organization or public agency owning, leasing, or managing such dwelling unit; or 
6.  The tenant is in default in payment of rent, unless rent is being lawfully withheld by the tenant. 
C.  The Building Official shall have sole discretion to determine the amount, type and duration of the relocation benefits pursuant to this chapter and Health and Safety Code Sections 17975 et seq. The property owner or designated agent and any displaced tenant or his or her representative shall be entitled to meet with the Building Official to present facts demonstrating that relocation benefits should or should not be paid. The Building Official or designee shall make a determination based on the provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, and the factual information submitted by the parties or otherwise readily available and shall communicate his or her determination in writing to the tenant and the property owner or designated agent. When notice to the property owner of the Building Official's relocation benefits determination is not reasonably possible because immediate vacation is necessary, the property owner shall have only the appeal right set forth in Section 8.79.050. 
D.  When the property owner or tenant wishes to contest a determination regarding eligibility or relocation payment amounts made by the Building Official, such party should file a written request for a hearing with the city manager or designee within seven (7) days of the determination. Any property owner requesting an appeal must first deposit with the Building Official the full unpaid amount in dispute, unless the property owner can demonstrate significant hardship or other extraordinary circumstances to The Building Official that would justify a waiver of such deposit. The City Manager or designee shall hold a hearing and shall use reasonable efforts to render his or her decision on any such appeal within thirty (30) days of a timely hearing request. The City Manager's or designee's decision shall be final with no appeal to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
8.79.040 - Payment of relocation costs by city. 
A.  In the event the property owner or designated agent fails, neglects or refuses to pay relocation benefits as required by this chapter to a displaced tenant, the City Council with a recommendation from a committee consisting of the City Manager, City Attorney, Economic Development Director, and the Chief Building Official may at its sole discretion and within budgetary limitations, opt to make payment of such relocation benefits as determines is necessary to assist the displaced tenant to relocate, up to the amount payable by the property owner under this chapter and Health and Safety Code Section 17975.2. 
B.  The city may recover from the property owner any amount paid to a tenant pursuant to this chapter. As a penalty for failure to make a timely payment to the displaced tenant, the city shall also be entitled to recover from the property owner an additional amount, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which is equal to one-half (½) the amount so paid. The city shall also be entitled to recover from property owner its actual costs (including direct and indirect costs) of administering the provision of benefits to the displaced tenant. 
C.  Any amount paid by the city and any applicable penalties and administrative costs shall be a personal obligation of the property owner and may be recorded as a lien against the property with the county recorder if the property owner fails to pay the city. 
D.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall require the city to pay any relocation benefits to any tenant, or to assume any obligation, requirement, or duty of the property owner or designated agent pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  The damages which a displaced tenant may receive from the property owner under Health and Safety Code Section 17975.2 shall be reduced by the amount of any benefits received from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
8.79.050 - Recovery of relocation costs by city—Notice, hearing, appeal. 
A.  Prior to instituting any action to collect relocation payments from the property owner or to record a lien pursuant to this chapter, the Building Official or designee shall send to the property owner by first-class mail, postage prepaid, at the property owner's address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, an itemized accounting of all benefits paid by the city to the property owner's tenants, and any penalties or costs the city is seeking to recover. 
B.  If the property owner contends that not all of the benefits are chargeable to the property owner because the recipients were not displaced tenants, or on other grounds, the property owner shall submit a written appeal to the Building Official within twenty (20) days after receipt of the itemized accounting. The Building Official, or designee, shall hold an administrative hearing for the purpose of determining the amount of benefits and any penalties or costs. 
C.  The Building Official's decision may be appealed to the City Manager within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the service of the Building Official's written decision. The City Manager may appoint a hearing officer in his or her discretion. The City Manager's or hearing officer's decision shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served no later than five (5) calendar days after the decision is signed and be sent first-class mail, postage prepaid to the property owner's address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The property owner shall pay the charge that was the subject of the appeal within thirty (30) days after the date an adverse decision is mailed to the property owner. The decision shall be appealed pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 and review of the decision shall be in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The decision shall include reference to this section and Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
D.  If the property owner fails to obtain a more favorable decision than that set forth in the itemized accounting, the property owner or designated agent shall be liable to the city for the costs of the administrative hearing and appeal, not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The failure to receive the itemized accounting shall not relieve the property owner of any obligation to the city. 
E.  Notwithstanding Section 8.79.040(b) of this chapter, if there are fewer than ten (10) days between the first posting and mailing of the order to vacate and the vacation date, and if the city advances relocation benefits to any tenant, no penalty shall be payable by the property owner if reimbursement is made to the city within thirty (30) days after the date an itemized accounting from the city is mailed as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
8.79.060 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies hereunder are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available under law. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
8.79.070 - Establishment of relocation benefits account. 
The city may establish a relocation benefits expenditure account and provide appropriations through City Council action by resolution. A relocation revenue account will include revenue generated by the program. The Building Official shall make periodic reports to the City Council on the activity and status of these accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2921, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Standing, sitting or occupying center medians by pedestrians is prohibited. 
No person shall stand or sit upon or otherwise occupy a public street or highway center median for any purpose other than to do so temporarily as a pedestrian while making a lawful pedestrian crossing of a public street or highway from one side to the other side of the roadway in which the center median is located. For purposes of this section, the term "center median" means and refers to that portion or a public street or highway, which is marked or identified by painted line or painted area of which is raised from the roadway and which separates the vehicle traffic lanes of the roadway which move in opposite directions of travel. 
(Prior code § 4235.1)  
9.04.020 - Deposit of offensive matter in public place prohibited. 
No person shall deposit, by means of urination or defecation, any human waste material in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view or upon the surface of the ground or upon any premises, lot or in any building, basement or in any public street, or into any standing water, stream or excavation or public place other than a proper toilet or portable toilet. 
(Prior code § 4271.1)  
9.04.030 - B-girls prohibited. 
No employee shall accept or solicit for himself or herself drinks of alcoholic beverages from any customer at the place where he or she is employed. 
(Prior code § 4274)  
9.04.040 - Public nudity prohibited. 
A.  No person shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk, dress or undress, or ride in or on any vehicle, or be in any public parking playground or place or on any public land, or on any private property which is open to view from any public area or public right-of-way in such a manner that the genitals, pubic hair, anus, anal regions, natal cleft, perineum, or the crease of the buttocks of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view or is not covered by any opaque covering. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to children under age ten (10). 
C.  It shall be an infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1.24.010 of the El Monte Municipal code. 
(Prior code § 4276)  
9.04.050 - Aggressive panhandling/solicitation prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to coerce, threaten, hound, or intimidate another person for the purpose of soliciting alms on any street or other place that is open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned. For purposes of this section, the term "soliciting alms" means and refers to any activity or conduct commonly known as panhandling in which one person seeks to obtain money or something of value from a third person, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs, or other means in a face-to-face setting. For purposes of this section, the terms "coerce, threaten, hound, or intimidate" means that: 
1.  The conduct of the persons soliciting alms causes a reasonable solicitee to fear for his or her safety; or 
2.  The person soliciting aims intentionally blocks the path or unreasonably obstructs the movement of the solicitee; or 
3.  The person soliciting alms follows the solicitee while the solicitor demands money or something of value after the solicitee informs the solicitor by words, bodily gesture, signs or other means that the solicitee does not want to give the solicitor money or some other thing of value to which he or she is not entitled under law. 
B.  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to prosecution and punishment under Section 1.24.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 4277)  
9.04.060 - Handbills. 
No person shall place or affix any commercial advertising handbill, leaflet, dodger or other printed commercial advertisement of any kind on any vehicle parked in any public place or parked on any privately owned parking lot open to the public without the express written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the vehicle or property. The provisions in this section shall not apply to political or bona fide nonprofit charitable organizations or communications. 
(Prior code § 5503)  
Chapter 9.08 - GRAFFITI PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to help prevent the spread of graffiti and to establish a program for its removal from city-owned property and non-city owned property within the city of El Monte. 
B.  California Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes the city, under certain circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed material from private as well as public property. The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and unless the city causes it to be removed from city-owned and non-city owned property within the city of El Monte, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city. 
C.  It is the purpose of the City Council of the city of El Monte, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti on walls, natural objects and structures. Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.020 - Definitions. 
"Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint, or other substance capable of defacing property. 
"Felt-tip marker" means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width is greater than one-eight of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid which is not water soluble. 
"Graffiti" means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface of city-owned property or non-city owned property within the city of El Monte by or with, but not limited to, any of the following: felt-tip marker, paint stick or graffiti stick, or graffiti implement, to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant thereof, or despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed by the City Council to be a public nuisance. 
"Graffiti implement" means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching tool including but not limited to etching creams and substances, or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete or wood or any other surface. 
"Paint stick" or "graffiti stick" means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, of leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width. 
"Responsible party," means any person who is the owner, or who has primary responsibility for repair or maintenance of property in the city of El Monte. 
"Structure" as used in this chapter means any trees, or edifice including, but not limited to buildings, walls, fences, poles and signs. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.030 - Unlawful to apply graffiti—Prohibition of defacement. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any structure on any city-owned property, or on any non-city owned property within the city of El Monte without the permission of the owner or occupant. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to intentionally deface, tear down, obliterate or destroy any copy, transcript or extract of or from any ordinance of the city of El Monte posted in any public place, or any proclamation, advertisement or notice set up at any place by authority of any ordinance of the city of El Monte before the expiration of the time such ordinance, proclamation, advertisement or notice was to remain posted or set up. 
C.  It is unlawful to affix, attach or post any sign, handbill, or advertisement to a structure unless it is authorized under the El Monte Municipal Code. The Police Department and Code Enforcement Department public works supervisor, and any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council is authorized to order the removal of such posters. The decision to remove such posters shall not be based on content. Any person who is actually or constructively responsible for the posting, creating, printing or copying of such posters shall be liable for the costs incurred in the removal thereof and the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor, and any additional department head, as authorized by the City Council, is authorized to effect the collection of such costs. Such costs shall be the actual or reasonable costs attributable to the removal of such posters. Persons billed for such removal may appeal such cost assessment to the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer will be final for purposes of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, judicial review, unless the hearing officer within ninety (90) days of that decision is made, grants, in its sole discretion, a hearing on the appeal. 
For purposes of subsection C of this section, there shall be a presumption that a person (corporate or individual), whose name or telephone number or address or notice of public or private appearance or business location appears on the poster is a person responsible for posting the poster. 
D.  Each violation of Subsection A of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
E.  Each violation of subsection B of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($250.00). 
F.  Any person violating subsection C of this section is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first infraction, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second infraction in one year, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each infraction thereafter within one year. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.040 - Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to these specific locations upon public property, or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to possession of felt-tip-markers by minors attending, or traveling to or from school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at said school that formally requires the possession of felt-tip markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a felt-tip marker. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.050 - Possession of graffiti implements prohibited in designated public places. 
It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building owned or operated by the city or while in or within one hundred (100) feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the city. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.060 - Limiting access to graffiti implements—Furnishing to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish or cause to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian, which consent shall be given in advance and in writing. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.070 - Display for sale—Requirements, penalties and liability. 
A.  Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail, commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall display and store or cause such implements to be displayed and stored in areas which may be viewable by, but shall not be accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
B.  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day in which the violation exists shall be treated as a separate violation. 
C.  Civil Responsibility for Damages or Wrongful Display or Storage. Any person who displays or stores, or permits the display or storage, of any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be personally liable for any and all costs, including attorney's fees and court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, the repair of any property containing graffiti, or such party's prosecution of a civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of any of the sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.080 - Graffiti declared public nuisance. 
A.  The existence of graffiti on any city-owned property, or without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city owned property within the city of El Monte is expressly declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  The City Council hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures herein contained. 
C.  It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied, and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property, to keep such property clear and free of graffiti at all times. 
D.  The existence of any surface of a structure on any non-city owned property within the city of El Monte where such surface has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five (5) times in twelve (12) months is hereby deemed to be a nuisance, and may be abated by the city by requiring modifications thereto, or to the immediate areas surrounding same, according to the provisions and procedures adopted by the city. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to: retrofitting of such surface with such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient, expedient or efficient removal of graffiti therefrom. The city may, at its option, assess the cost of such modification against the property owner, provided that such assessment may not exceed a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.090 - Removal of graffiti by perpetrator. 
A.  Any person applying graffiti on city-owned property or within the city of El Monte shall have the duty to remove same within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor, or his or her designee or any additional city department head as authorized by the City Council, and may be deemed by the City Council to satisfy any payment or penalty that might otherwise be imposed. 
B.  Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment thereof. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti or pay for its removal shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment therefore. The police chief, the code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any other department head as authorized by the City Council may convert such payment into equivalent forms of community service hours. Such payment or equivalent forms of community service hours shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.100 - Removal provisions. 
Graffiti may be removed by either of the following methods: 
A.  A responsible party shall remove graffiti defacing the property for which they are the responsible party within ten (10) days after service of notice that there is graffiti on the property. Notice shall be given to the responsible party by first class mail. 
1.  A responsible party may be relieved of the requirement to remove the graffiti within ten (10) days after service of the notice if 
a.  The responsible party demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she does not have the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti, or 
b.  It can be demonstrated by the responsible party that the responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of fifteen (15) days after service by first-class mail of notice of same. 
B.  Right of City to Remove. 
1.  Whenever the city becomes aware, or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on non-city owned property within the city of El Monte that is viewable by persons utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, the city may use public funds to provide for the painting or repairing of same. 
a.  Any painting or repair for which the cost is estimated to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) must be authorized by the City Council before it is undertaken. 
b.  The City Council may authorize the repair if it finds the painting or repair is necessary to detrimental affects to the neighborhood or community from the graffiti. 
2.  Right of Entry on Private Property. 
a.  Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city of El Monte for purposes of graffiti removal, the city shall secure the consent of the responsible party, and a release of the city from any liability, if possible. 
C.  If a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time herein specified, or if they have refused to consent for entry onto the property by the city on terms acceptable to the city and consistent with the provisions of this section, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.44. Notwithstanding the foregoing, owner occupied single-family residences are excluded from such cost recovery proceedings, including the recordation of a lien on the property. 
1.  Whenever the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, determines that graffiti has been applied to non-city owned property within the city of El Monte, the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head as authorized by the City Council, determines that the graffiti is obnoxious and that it is in the interest of the city of El Monte to remove such graffiti through the use of city resources, then the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, obtains the consent of the private property owner and release of the city from liability. 
2.  a.  Whenever the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, determines that graffiti is being maintained upon any non-city owned property within the city of El Monte in violation of this chapter, the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, may issue a written notice and order to abate the graffiti. The notice shall be issued to the owner of the property and shall inform the owner that the owner is maintaining graffiti that constitutes a public nuisance and that maintenance of the graffiti is a violation of El Monte Municipal Code. The notice shall state that the graffiti is not removed within that time, then the city proposes to remove the graffiti and the cost of such removal, if not paid by the owner, shall be made a lien upon the property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a notice of graffiti nuisance shall not be issued to the owner of a single-family residence that is owner-occupied. 
b.  The notice shall also inform the property owner that if the graffiti is not removed within the specified ten (10) day period, then a hearing shall be held before the hearing officer, to hear any protest of the property owner. The notice shall specify the time and place at which the hearing officer, shall hold such hearing pursuant to subsection (C)(4) of this section. Such hearing shall be scheduled not less than ten (10) days after the date of the notice. 
c.  The police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, determines that compliance within the time specified in the notice would place an undue burden on the property owner. 
3.  a.  The notice issued pursuant to subsection (C)(2) of this section shall be addressed to the owner of the property as shown on the latest tax assessment roll at the owner's last known address and shall be delivered by depositing a copy of the notice in the United States mail, postage paid, or personally delivering a copy of the notice to the owner. Notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject property. Except no such notice shall be either mailed to or posted on an owner-occupied single-family residence. 
b.  The failure of any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this chapter. 
4.  Before any abatement of any graffiti, the police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, shall hold a hearing regarding the proposed abatement to determine whether the graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and whether abatement is appropriate. The hearing officer shall receive and consider all relevant evidence presented at the hearing. Any interested person shall be given notice and opportunity to be heard. 
5.  The hearing officer shall provide notice of the hearing officer's decision and shall provide an order to abate the graffiti, if appropriate, to the owner of the subject property as shown in the latest tax assessment as shown in subsection (C)(3) of this section. 
6.  The police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, may order that the city abate any graffiti that has been determined to be a public nuisance and that remains unabated at least seven (7) days after the hearing officer gives notice of the hearing officer's decision and issues an order to abate under subsection (C)(5) of this section. 
7.  a.  The police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, shall keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of abating such graffiti on each separate property where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the costs of abatement of the graffiti. The term incidental expenses shall include but is not limited to the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, title searches, specifications and contracts, inspection of work, the cost of posting and mailing required under this chapter, any attorney's fees expended in the abatement of the nuisance, all costs and nuisance abatement action, and all costs or expenses to which the city may be entitled under state law. Costs and expenses for which the city may be reimbursed begin to accrue at the time the city first receives a complaint regarding the graffiti. Costs and expenses may be recovered once it has become necessary for the city to conduct an abatement hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, costs and expenses of abatement may not be recovered from the owners of single-family residences that are owner-occupied. 
b.  The police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, shall notify, in writing the owner or possessor of the property upon which graffiti has been abated by the city, the cost of said abatement in accordance with Section 25845 of the Government Code. Within ten (10) days of the mailing of such notice, any such party concerned and any other person having any right, title, or interest in the property, may file with the said city a written request for a hearing on the correctness, reasonableness or both of such claim of abatement costs. The police chief, code enforcement supervisor, department of public works supervisor or his or her designee or any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, shall then cause notice of the time and place of the hearing before the public works supervisor or his or her designee to be given to the owners and possessors of the property, and to any other interested person requesting the same by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his/her last known address at least five (5) days in advance of the hearing. 
c.  The time and place fixed for receiving the report. The department of public works supervisor or his or her designee shall hear and pass upon the report together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable for the cost of abating the nuisance. Thereupon, the department of public works supervisor or his or her designee shall make such revision, correction and modification to the report as it may deem just, after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the department of public works supervisor or his or her designee is final. 
8.  If the total cost of the abatement of the graffiti by the city is not paid to the city within ten (10) days after the date of notice of the cost of the abatement, the city shall record, in the Office of Finance, a statement of the total balance due to the city, a legal description of the property, and the name of the owner concerned. From the date of such recording, the balance due will constitute a lien on the property. The lien will continue in full force and effect until the entire amount due, together with interest as the maximum legal rate accruing from the date of the completion of the abatement, is paid in full. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no lien shall be placed on a single-family residence which is owner occupied. 
9.  The city may also, in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State of California, cause the amount due to the city by reason of its abating graffiti together with interest at the maximum legal rate, accruing from the date of completion of the abatement, to be charged to the owners of the property, on the next regular bill. All laws of the State of California applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of the city taxes are hereby applicable to the collection of these charges. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no charges shall be added to the tax bill of an owner of a single family residence that is owner-occupied. 
10.  The City Council may bring appropriate actions, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to collect any amount due by reason of the abatement of graffiti by the city and to foreclose any existing liens for such amounts. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the city may bring the appropriate civil and criminal action in a curt of competent jurisdiction for abatement of any nuisance within the city pursuant to any other provision of law. 
D.  Ease of Removal Provisions. 
1.  Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone or other utility operating in the city, other than an electric utility, shall paint their above surface metal fixtures which are installed after the effective date of this chapter with a uniform paint type and color as directed by the department of public works supervisor or his or her designee. 
2.  Encroachment permits issued by the city may, among other things, be conditions on (a) the permitee applying anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object or structure of a type and nature that is acceptable to the department of public works supervisor or his or her designee; (b) the immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; (c) the right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching structure; (d) the permittee providing city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object or structure containing graffiti. 
3.  In imposing conditions upon conditional use permits, variances, building permits to the extent permitted by this code, or other similar land use entitlement or development or design applications, the city may impose any or all of the following conditions or other similar or related conditions: 
a.  Applicant shall apply anti-graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the department of public works supervisor or his or her designee to such of the publicly viewable surfaces to be constructed on the site deemed by the supervisor or designee, to be likely to attract graffiti ("graffiti attracting surfaces"); 
b.  Applicant shall grant in writing, the right of entry over and access to such parcels, upon forty eight (48) hours' posted notice, by authorized city employees or agents, for the purpose of removing or painting over graffiti on graffiti-attracting surfaces previously designated by the department of public works supervisor or his or her designee. Such grant shall be made an express condition of approval and shall be deemed to run with the land. 
c.  Applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall for a period of two years after approval, provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting or removal of designated graffiti-attracting surfaces; 
d.  Persons applying for subdivision maps shall, as part of any conditions, covenants and restriction, covenant, which covenant shall run with the land in a form satisfactory to the city, that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed on public viewable trees and structures thereon to the city's satisfaction. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.110 - Penalties and civil liability of parents. 
It is the city's intent that pursuant to California Penal Code Section 640.6(a), all acts of graffiti vandalism occurring within the city shall be prosecuted as misdemeanors pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594, et seq., or this chapter. 
A.  Criminal Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by either six (6) months in jail, a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine, or both such fine and imprisonment, and by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti-clean-up to the maximum extent permitted by law. Each person, firm, corporation, or partnership shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of the provisions of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by such a person, firm, corporation, or partnership, and shall be deemed punishable thereof as provided in this section. 
B.  Parental Liability. Any parent or legal guardian having custody and control of a minor who violates any section of this chapter, shall be personally liable for any and all costs to the city or any person or business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by conduct of said minor, and for all attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each violation of the minor. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.120 - Violations—Civil remedies available. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
9.08.130 - Code as a supplement to state law. 
A.  Nothing in this code shall prohibit the enforcement of any laws or definitions regarding graffiti, anti-graffiti, or its implements as found in the California Code and is intended to supplement such laws. This includes, but is not limited to the Civil Code, Penal Code, Evidence Code, Government Code, and the Business and Professions Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 2563 § 2 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 9.10 - SMOKING AND USE OF PRODUCTS IN AND AROUND PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT AREAS AND TOT SANDBOX AREAS 
Sections: 
 
9.10.010 - Definitions. 
"Playground" means any park or recreational area specifically designed to be used by children that has play equipment installed, or any similar facility located on city park grounds. 
"Smoke" means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term "smoke" includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, marijuana smoke or any other weed, herb, flower or plant. 
"Smoking" means engaging in an act that generates smoke, including but not limited to the carrying and/or possession of a lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe, an operating electronic cigarette, a lighted cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; or lighting or igniting of a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind. 
"Tot lot sandbox area" means a designated play area within a city park for the use by children under five (5) years of age. Where the area is not contained by a fence, the boundary of a tot lot sandbox shall be defined by the edge of the resilient surface of safety material, such as concrete or wood, or any other material surrounding the tot lot sandbox area. 
(Ord. 2549 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2778, § 1, 9-20-2011)  
9.10.020 - Prohibition. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of smoking, as defined herein, upon any city-owned or city-operated bus, shuttle, van or other motor vehicle or upon any "park or recreational facility" as defined under Section 12.48.020 of the El Monte Municipal Code, including but not limited to any play areas, tot lot sandbox areas, buildings or any city-owned parking lot adjacent to such park or recreational facilities. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to discard any tobacco-related waste, including but not limited to cigarette and/or cigar butts or any electronic cigarette device or component thereof upon any city-owned or city-operated bus, shuttle, van or other motor vehicle or upon any "park or recreational facility" as defined under Section 12.48.020, including but not limited to any play areas, tot lot, sandbox area, buildings or any city-owned parking lot adjacent to such park or recreational facilities. 
C.  The department or division responsible for maintenance of all city of El Monte parks shall post signs indicating the prohibitions set forth in subsections A and B of this section. Such signs shall be posted in at least three (3) conspicuous locations in each park. 
(Ord. 2645 § 1, 2005: Ord. 2549 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2778, §§ 2, 3, 9-20-2011)  
9.10.030 - Posting. 
A.  Signs notifying the public of the prohibition against smoking or the disposal of tobacco-related waste pursuant to this section shall be posted in locations where they are clearly visible to the general public at the entrances of city parks. 
B.  Signs notifying the public of the prohibition against smoking or the disposal of tobacco-related waste pursuant to this section shall be posted at the boundary of the areas where smoking or the disposal of tobacco-related waste is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2549 § 1 (part), 2002)  
9.10.040 - Punishment. 
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction for a first offense, which shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). Conviction of a second violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Third and subsequent violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. 2549 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 9.12 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Intoxicating beverages. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or to have in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk or parkway, or in any public park, buildings, lavatories, parking lot, auto park or lobby or entrance way to any building within the city. 
B.  Exception. The prohibition set forth under subsection A of this section shall not apply to consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages within the enclosed, interior confines of a city-owned, public building by the authorized members, patrons, attendees or agents of any association, organization, club or group, whether public or private, that has been duly authorized by the city to serve alcohol within the public building as part of a city-authorized event. Such authorized consumption or possession of alcohol shall be subject to any rules, restrictions, requirements and/or prohibitions set forth in (1) the city's facilities use policy, as referenced in Section 12.48.040 of the El Monte Municipal Code; (2) any permit, licenses or other like authorizations granted by the city or the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control; and (3) the laws of the state of California and any other applicable provision of the El Monte Municipal Code. The consumption and/or possession of alcoholic beverages by any person in violation of such rules, restrictions, requirements and/or prohibitions shall constitute a violation of subsection A of this section. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of each association, organization, club or group serving alcoholic beverages to obtain the necessary permits from both the city and the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control. 
D.  The provisions of subsection A of this section and Section 9.12.030 shall not apply to any location or premises where the consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages is authorized pursuant to a valid license or permit issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(Ord. 2719 § 7, 2008; Ord. 2688 § 1, 2007; prior code §§ 4240—4240.3)  
9.12.020 - Alcoholic beverages in open containers prohibited on posted premises. 
A.  No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. 
B.  As used in subsection A of this section "posted premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the patrons of the licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk, that the provisions of this section are applicable. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. 
D.  All off-sale liquor establishments in the city shall post their premises in accordance with the provisions of this section. Establishments licensed to do business on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall post their premises at the time of their business license renewal. New off-sale liquor establishments starting business after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall post their premises immediately upon opening for business. 
(Prior code § 4244)  
9.12.030 - Alcoholic beverages in open containers prohibited on public property. 
Except as provided in subsections 9.12.010(B) and (D), no person shall have in his or her possession any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, while such person is in or upon any public street, sidewalk, public park, public hall, or other public place, or other place open to the public, or upon any premises whereat a public dance is being conducted or upon any automobile parking lot or other property used in conjunction with any premises whereat a public dance is being conducted, whether such person is or is not in or upon any automobile, street, or interurban car, vehicle or conveyance. 
(Prior code § 4244.1)  
9.12.040 - Exemption for leased or licensed city property. 
A.  The prohibitions set forth under this chapter shall not apply to the sale, distribution, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on any city-owned real property which has been leased or licensed by the city for the exclusive use and possession of any lessee or licensee. The sale, distribution, consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages upon such properties shall be subject to the terms of the lease or license agreement under which the property has been leased or licensed; and in accordance with city zoning laws and any governing or superseding state laws or laws of the county of Los Angeles. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall relieve or otherwise release any lessee, licensee or lawful occupant of any real property described in subsection A of this section from: (1) complying with any applicable state laws relating to the sale, distribution, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages; (2) obtaining any approvals required by any other public agency with jurisdiction over such matters, including, but not limited to, any approvals required by the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control; or (3) obtaining any other standard permits or approvals required elsewhere under the El Monte Municipal Code. 
C.  "City zoning laws" include, but are not necessarily limited to, those laws set forth under Title 16 (Subdivisions) and Title 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code. "State laws" means the laws of the state of California, including all statutes, regulations and administrative orders issued by any department or subdivision of the state of California. 
(Ord. 2698 § 2, 2007)  
Chapter 9.16 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Sale and display of drug paraphernalia. 
No person shall display for sale or offer for sale, in a place of business open to the public, any drug paraphernalia. As used in this chapter, the phrase "drug paraphernalia" shall include any of the items possession of which is prohibited by Section 11364 of the State of California Health and Safety Code, or any instrument used, designed for use, or intended for use in ingesting, smoking, administering, or preparing marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, or cocaine such as: 
A.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic marijuana, or hashish pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
B.  Water pipes designed for use or intended for use with marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, or cocaine; 
C.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
D.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
E.  Roach clips; 
F.  Separation gins designed for use or intended for use in cleaning marijuana; 
G.  Cocaine spoons and vials; 
H.  Chamber pipes; 
I.  Carburetor pipes; 
J.  Electric pipes; 
K.  Air driven pipes; 
L.  Chillums; 
M.  Bongs; and 
N.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(Prior code § 4330)  
9.16.020 - Sale authorized in posted room. 
The prohibitions set for in Section 9.16.010 shall not apply when drug paraphernalia are displayed for sale or offered for sale in a room the entrance of which is posted by a conspicuous sign clearly indicating that drug paraphernalia are displayed for sale or offered for sale therein and that minors may not enter such room unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Prior code § 4330.1)  
9.16.030 - Minors prohibited from entering. 
No person in control of any place of business open to the public shall allow a minor not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian to enter or remain in a room at such place of business in which drug paraphernalia are displayed for sale or offered for sale. 
(Prior code § 4330.2)  
9.16.040 - Sale to minors prohibited. 
No person at any place of business open to the public shall sell drug paraphernalia to a minor who is not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
A.  No minor who is not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian shall enter or remain in a room at a place of business open to the public in which drug paraphernalia are displayed for sale or offered for sale. 
B.  No minor who is not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian shall purchase drug paraphernalia at a place of business open to the public. 
(Prior code §§ 4330.3—4330.5)  
9.16.050 - Sale of drug paraphernalia declared adult business. 
The sale of drug paraphernalia shall constitute an adult business within the meaning of the city zoning ordinance. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 4331)  
9.16.060 - Unauthorized sale of drug paraphernalia declared public nuisance. 
The display for sale or possession for sale of drug paraphernalia in a place of business open to the public, except as permitted in this chapter, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state or pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 8.44 of this code. (Amended during 1999 recodification as prior code § 4332)  
Chapter 9.20 - GAMBLING 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Gambling equipment. 
No person shall exhibit or expose to view in any barred or barricaded house or room or in any place built, maintained, or protected in a manner to make it difficult of access or ingress to police officers, when three (3) or more persons are present, any cards, dice, roulette table, roulette wheel, or layout, or any part of such layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever. 
(Prior code § 4200)  
9.20.020 - Gambling places. 
No person shall visit or resort to any such barred or barricaded house or room or other place built, maintained, or protected in a manner making it difficult of access or ingress to police officers where any cards, dice, roulette table, roulette wheel, or layout or any part of such layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever are exhibited or exposed to view when three (3) or more persons are present. 
(Prior code § 4201)  
9.20.030 - Gambling. 
No person shall deal, play, carry on, open, cause to be opened, or conduct any game, or bet at any game, played with cards, dice, or any other device, for money, checks, credits, chips, tokens, or anything of value or for anything representative of anything of value. 
(Prior code § 4202)  
9.20.040 - Gambling places. 
No person shall place, maintain or operate any card game for money, checks, credits, chips, tokens, or anything of value or for anything representative of anything of value, where such playing, maintenance or operation is in a room, hall, place of business, or any public place, and a charge is made as a rental for the use of tables, chairs, cards or any other equipment, and such place is opened, maintained or operated for profit. No person shall knowingly permit any game prohibited by this chapter to be played, conducted or dealt in any house, building, or other premises owned by, rented by, or in the lawful possession of such person. No person shall resort to, attend, visit, or be present at any house, room, building, or other place where any gambling is being conducted, played, or carried on, or where any game is being played, conducted, or dealt contrary to any provision of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4203)  
9.20.050 - Gambling signs. 
No person shall maintain, display or exhibit any sign visible to any person upon any sidewalk or street that any specific game can be played therein, where such game is played with cards for money, checks, credits, chips, tokens, or anything of value or for anything representative of anything of value. 
(Prior code § 4204)  
9.20.060 - Games not prohibited. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to or shall be construed to permit the playing, maintaining, or operating of any game prohibited by law, nor to prohibit the playing, maintaining or operating of any game already prohibited by law. 
(Prior code § 4205)  
9.20.070 - Bingo. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to or shall be construed to prohibit the playing, maintaining or operating of any bingo game as defined by Section 326.5(n) of the California Penal Code, if played, maintained or operated in accordance with all provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and of Section 5.24.010 of this code of the El Monte Municipal Code, so long as a permit therefor issued pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of the of the El Monte Municipal Code is in effect. 
(Prior code § 4206)  
Chapter 9.24 - PIN GAMES, MARBLE GAMES AND HORSE RACING MACHINES 
Sections: 
 
9.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning and shall be construed as hereinafter set forth: 
"Any game similar to a marble game" means "B alley," "alley" and any other miniature mechanical bowling game device, by whatever name called, any table, cabinet or mechanical device equipped for the playing of any game whereby any marble, ball, pellet or any moving object is propelled, rolled, shot or released toward a goal, pin, set of pins, or other objective by means of any plunger, ejector, mechanical bat, mechanical hand, or by means of any other striking or releasing mechanism which is affixed or attached to the table or cabinet, or which is an integral part of the mechanical device or which is mechanically manipulated, controlled or guided, and which game is so contrived that, at the conclusion of the operation or play thereof the score or result of play thereof is visible or otherwise discernible so as to permit or make practicable the paying off or awarding of a prize or reward upon the operation or play of the game. 
"Horse racing machine" means any mechanically operated amusement machine or device contrived to simulate in miniature the running of a horse race or any other race run by beasts, humans or machines, or which is contrived to put in motion any number of objects or symbols which then do, or appear to, run or move against each other in the manner of a miniature race, or which is designed to represent, by symbols, the running of any race and the order of the finish therefor. 
"Marble game" means any table, cabinet or stand equipped for the playing of a game whereby marbles or balls are, with the aid of a mechanical plunger or other affixed device, propelled, released, shot or rolled so as to drop or come to rest in holes, slots, cups or traps, resulting in a score or tally being electrically or otherwise registered or shown, which score or tally depends upon the course followed or point reached by the marble or ball or upon the contact points touched by it along its course, or upon any combination of such factors. 
"Pin game" means any table, cabinet or mechanism equipped for the playing of any game whereby any marble, ball, pellet, or other moving object is propelled, released, rolled or shot along, over or above a surface set with pins, pegs or other obstructions or irregularities which deflect or impede the course of the moving object or which may divert or direct it beyond the control of the player. 
(Prior code § 4275)  
9.24.020 - Possession prohibited. 
A.  No person shall use, keep, operate, maintain, place, or possess in the city any of the following: 
1.  Any pin game, any marble game or any game similar to a marble game, or any horse race machine the operation of which game or machine is controlled, permitted or made a variable by placing therein a coin, plug, disk, key, or token or which is let for use, operation or play upon the payment or delivery of anything of value therefor, or upon the making of any purchase. 
2.  Any mechanical device or mechanically operated contrivance for the playing of any game of chance, the use or operation of which is controlled, permitted or made available by placing therein any coin, plug, disk, key or token, or which is let for use, operation, or play upon the payment or delivery of anything of value therefor, or upon the making of any purchase. 
B.  Exception. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to the keeping, possessing, or exhibiting of any such mechanical contrivance or device at or in any mercantile store in which such mechanical contrivances or devices are kept solely for sale and which mechanical contrivances or devices members of the public are not permitted or allowed to operate, manipulate or play except as incident to a demonstration for the purpose of sale. 
(Prior code §§ 4275.1, 4275.2)  
9.24.030 - Abatement. 
Any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, ticket, chance, share, interest, instrument or article operated, used, kept, possessed, placed, or maintained in violation of the provisions of: 
A.  Sections 330a of the Penal Code of the state; or 
B.  Any section enumerated in Part I, Title 9, Chapter 9 of the Penal Code of the State of California; or 
C.  Subsection 9.24.020A is declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as follows: 
1.  When any person has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of any provision of this code or of any law of this state involving the operation, use, maintenance, or possession of any article declared by this section to be a nuisance, such article shall be destroyed by the Chief of Police after the plea or after the judgment of conviction has become final. 
2.  If any article subject to destruction as hereinabove provided is in the custody of any court, the Chief of Police shall cause an application to be made to the judge of said court for an order releasing such article to him or her in order that he or she may comply with this section. 
(Prior code § 4275.3)  
Chapter 9.28 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
9.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Air gun" means any object capable of discharging or projecting any missile by the force of compressed air or gas, including but not limited to: air rifle, BB gun, peashooter, blowgun, pellet gun, pellet rifle, paintball gun, or any other similar device capable of inflicting injury to person or damage to property. 
"Firearm" means any object capable of discharging or projecting any missile by the force of any explosion or other form of combustion, including but not limited to: shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolved, target pistol, target gun, tommy gun, spring gun, wham-o gun, or any other similar device capable of inflicting injury to person or damage to property. 
"Harmful device" means any object capable of discharging or projecting any missile by physical force from muscle power or mechanical device, including but not limited to: sling, slingshot, catapult, crossbow, longbow or any other similar device capable of inflicting injury to person or damage to property. 
"Knife" means any instrument used for cutting consisting of a sharp-edged metal blade over two (2) inches in length and provided with a handle, including but not limited to: springback knife, fixed or locking blade knife, scalpel, kitchen knife, hunting knife, bayonet, sickle, hatchet, ax or any other similar device. 
(Prior code §§ 4250—4250.4) 
(Ord. No. 2788, § 1, 3-20-2012)  
9.28.020 - Possession by minors prohibited. 
No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall own or possess any fireams. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall wear, display, brandish or carry a firearm, a knife, an air gun or harmful device on public property in the city except in a bona fide transportation of said object from one private premises to another provided that during such transport said object is not readily useable by virtue of its being dismantled, unstrung or otherwise enclosed in a carrying case or similar container. 
(Prior code § 4251)  
9.28.030 - Parental duty. 
No parent, guardian, custodian or person in charge of any person under eighteen (18) years of age shall permit any such person under the age of eighteen (18) years to own, possess or use any firearm. 
(Prior code § 4252)  
9.28.040 - Sale to minors prohibited. 
No person shall sell, exchange, give, deliver, transport or loan any firearm to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Prior code § 4253)  
9.28.050 - Discharge prohibited—Exception. 
A.  No person shall fire, discharge, shoot or use any firearm in the city except in the performance of official duty or in the lawful defense of person or property. No person shall fire, discharge, shoot or use any air gun or harmful device on any public property or on any private property from where any missile is discharged or projected from said private property onto any public property or any other private property except in the lawful defense of person or property. 
B.  Exception. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the possession or use of firearms, air guns, or harmful devices in bona fide shooting galleries or other facilities licensed by the city and operated in accordance with all regulations applicable thereto nor to the possession or use of firearms, air guns or harmful devices by members of organizations or students of educational institutions authorized to give instruction in the use of such devices or by clients of businesses engaged in the sale, or repair of such devices while such devices are being used in conjunction with the regular business of such organization, institution or business; nor to the possession of firearms at the place of employment by a bona fide employee of a merchant while such possession is necessary in the usual course of such employment; nor to any other possession of firearms specifically authorized by law. 
(Prior code §§ 4254, 4255)  
Chapter 9.32 - JUVENILE CURFEWS 
Sections: 
 
9.32.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
"Curfew hours" means: 
1.  The periods of time commencing at ten p.m. on each Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, terminating at six a.m. of the next following day; and 
2.  The periods of time commencing at 12:01 a.m. on each Saturday and Sunday, terminating at six a.m. the next following day. 
"Daytime curfew" means the periods of time commencing at eight-thirty a.m. terminating at one-thirty p.m. on each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, while schools are in regular session. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. Emergency includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life or property damage. 
"Guardian" means a person or public or private agency who, under court order, is designated as the guardian of the person of a minor. 
"Minor" means any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public is invited, or has access. "Public place" includes, but is not limited to, public streets and the common public areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Remain" means to: 
1.  Linger or stay; or 
2.  Fail to leave a location when requested to do so by a police officer as to a public place. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 4230)  
9.32.020 - Offenses. 
A.  A minor shall not remain in any public place within the city during curfew hours or during the hours of a daytime curfew. 
B.  A parent or guardian of a minor shall not knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, such minor to remain in any public place within the city during curfew hours or during the hours of a daytime curfew. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 4231)  
9.32.030 - Defenses. 
A.  It shall be a complete defense to a prosecution of a minor for a violation under Section 9.32.020 that the minor was, at the time of the charge was: 
1.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; or 
2.  Directly engaged in an errand at the express direction of the minor's parent or guardian; or 
3.  In a motor vehicle which is engaged in intrastate or interstate travel; or 
4.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going directly to or directly returning home from an employment activity; or 
5.  Involved in an emergency; or 
6.  Attending a school activity or religious activity sponsored by a school or religious group/church, or a recreational activity sponsored by a public entity or a private sponsoring entity which supervises the activity; or while going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such an activity; or 
7.  Lawfully exercising constitutional rights such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, or the right of assembly; or 
8.  Judicially declared emancipated. 
B.  It shall be a complete defense to the prosecution of a minor under Section 9.32.030 for a violation occurring during daytime curfew hours, if the minor: 
1.  Has permission to leave the school campus where the minor is enrolled as a student for lunch or a school-related activity, or has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit or is supervised by school personnel; or 
2.  Has in his or her possession a written document from the minor's parent(s) or legal guardian(s), excusing, for good cause, the minor's absence from school; or 
3.  Is not subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education pursuant to the California Education Code; or 
4.  Is not required to be in school because school is not in session. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 4232)  
9.32.040 - Curfew pass. 
A.  If it is necessary for any minor to remain in any public place during curfew hours or during the hours of a daytime curfew, the parent or guardian of the minor may, but is not required to, file with the Chief of Police an application for a curfew pass to allow such minor to remain in any public place during curfew hours or during the hours of a daytime curfew, as is necessary. 
B.  The application for such curfew pass shall: 
1.  Be in writing; 
2.  State the name and age of such minor; 
3.  Describe the height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair, and other physical characteristics of such minor; 
4.  Explain the reason which requires such minor to remain in a public place or in an establishment during curfew hours or during the hours of a daytime curfew; 
5.  State the public place in which the minor seeks to remain during curfew hours or during the hours of a daytime curfew, if applicable; and 
6.  State the exemption under Section 9.32.030 which is applicable. 
C.  After the filing of an application therefor, the Chief of Police shall issue a curfew pass in writing for such minor to remain in the public place during curfew hours or during the hours of a daytime curfew to the extent that the application shows that an exemption of Section 9.32.030 applies to such minor. Such curfew pass shall clearly state thereon the Section 9.32.030 exemption under which the curfew pass is issued. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 4234)  
9.32.050 - Violations—Civil penalties. 
A.  Infraction. A violation of this chapter by a minor shall be deemed to be, upon the first occasion, an infraction; second and subsequent violations within a period of ninety (90) consecutive calendar days by the same minor shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
B.  Parent or Guardian. A violation of this chapter by the parent or guardian of a minor shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
C.  Penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per occurrence, for each violation, which shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought by the District Attorney or the City Attorney. In any action brought pursuant to this section, one-half of the penalty shall be paid to the treasurer of the county, and one-half to the treasurer of the city. 
D.  Remedies—Cumulative. The civil remedies and penalties for violations which are provided for in this chapter, are cumulative with all other remedies and penalties available to the city under other provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code or other applicable law. 
E.  Concurrent Actions. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from seeking the enforcement and prosecution of any violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor or infraction concurrently with the enforcement of any violation of the chapter by means of any civil fine, penalty or civil proceeding in which money or equitable relief may be obtained by the city under this chapter or under other applicable law. 
F.  Nuisance. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through administrative civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such a nuisance. 
(Ord. 2466 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 4233)  
Chapter 9.36 - REWARDS FOR CRIMINAL INFORMATION 
Sections: 
 
9.36.010 - Purpose. 
The City Council finds that there are a variety of crimes that are committed in the city or against the residents of the city that are difficult to investigate and obtain sufficient evidence to apprehend and convict the responsible person without the cooperation of knowledgeable witnesses. It is in the best public interest for the protection and safety of persons who reside or work in the city and for protection of property located within the city that a procedure be established for giving rewards to persons who furnish information that lead to the arrest and/or conviction of persons charged with crimes affecting residents of the city or persons who may work or conduct business in the city or who may own property in the city. In addition, the public interest, safety and welfare shall also be served by providing rewards to informants who provide reliable information to the police which permit the police to pursue an investigation concerning a felony crime or a misdemeanor crime (or the preparation for commission of a felony crime) and which information provides a basis on which arrests may be made. 
(Prior code § 3950)  
9.36.020 - Offer of reward by resolution. 
Specific authorization for offering a reward may be undertaken by resolution of the City Council. Such resolution shall incorporate by reference the provisions of this chapter, set forth the amount of reward, the crime to which it applies, and terms and conditions in addition to those contained herein that will apply to a specific reward. 
(Prior code § 3950.1)  
9.36.030 - Filing claim. 
Any person claiming a reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of a person charged with a crime, as authorized by resolution of the City Council, must, within ten (10) days of furnishing such information complete and file with the Police Department a "claim for reward." Such claim form shall be provided by the Police Department and shall be in the following form: 
CLAIM FOR REWARD 
 I,_____, address _____ hereby claim reward in the amount of _____ for information that I have voluntarily furnished to the El Monte Police Department. This claim is made in accordance with Chapter 9(A), Article III of the El Monte Municipal Code and Resolution No. _____ of the City Council of the City of El Monte, a copy of which I have received. 
 That I will cooperate with the El Monte Police Department and the Los Angeles County District Attorney to the extent of furnishing information and testifying at any hearing or trial. 
 I recognize that the reward is limited to the amount set forth in the Resolution and that other persons may claim this reward. In the event there is a dispute as to my entitlement to receive the reward or the amount, I agree to having this claim determined by the City Administrative Officer as set forth in Section 3950.5 of the Municipal Code. 
 I understand that payment of the reward is conditional upon the information/testimony that I furnished being of a type and nature that would lead to arrest and/or conviction. 
 There has been no other offer or promise to me except as contained in the described Resolution. 
 DATED: _____ 
 SIGNED: ___________ 
(Prior code § 3950.2)  
9.36.040 - Time of payment. 
Rewards as provided herein shall not be paid until a criminal case is closed by sentencing of the defendant, judgment of acquittal, dismissal of charges or expiration of five years from the date the information was furnished. 
(Prior code § 3950.3)  
9.36.050 - Anonymity of informant. 
Upon request of the Chief of Police and a finding by the City Council that it is in the best public interest, the name of the claimant for a reward as authorized by resolution may be confidential information and kept anonymous. 
(Prior code § 3950.4)  
9.36.060 - Decision by City Administrative Officer. 
The determination as to whether an individual(s) is qualified to receive a reward as authorized by resolution and the amount(s) and the persons who shall receive such a reward or proportion thereof, shall be subject to the sole discretion and approval of the City Administrative Officer after report and recommendation by the Chief of Police. The decision of the City Administrative Officer shall be final and without appeal to the City Council. 
(Prior code § 3950.5)  
9.36.070 - Authorization for payment of confidential informants by the Chief of Police. 
The Chief of Police may, from time to time, offer a reward to a confidential informant and authorize the payment of a reward to such an individual in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in any case in which a confidential informant provides information to the El Monte Police Department which the Chief of Police finds and determines to be of substantial evidentiary value in connection with a police investigation which leads to the arrest of one or more persons who have committed a felony crime or who are preparing for the commission of a felony crime within the city; provided however that the Chief of Police shall not authorize payments of an aggregate amount of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) of such rewards to confidential informants during any fiscal year of the city. The Chief of Police shall keep and maintain a record of accounts of such payments and include in such record a brief written explanation of the basis on which the reward was paid. Such records shall be maintained in a confidential manner in order to protect the identity of such confidential informants and such records of the Police Department shall not be deemed to be public records for any purpose. 
(Prior code § 3950.6)  
9.36.080 - Authorization for payment of confidential information by Chief of Police (misdemeanor crimes). 
The Chief of Police may, from time to time, offer rewards to a confidential informant and authorize the payment of a reward in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) in any case in which a confidential informant provides information to the El Monte Police Department which the Chief of Police finds and determines to be of substantial evidentiary value in connection with a police investigation which leads to the arrest and conviction of one or more persons who have committed a misdemeanor crime or who are preparing for the commission of a misdemeanor crime within the city, including without limitation a crime of malicious vandalism or other misdemeanor crime against property; provided however, that the Chief of Police shall not authorize payments of an aggregate amount of more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) of such rewards to confidential informants during any fiscal year of the city. The Chief of Police shall keep and maintain a record of accounts of such payments (identified as the "Police Department Misdemeanor Reward Account") and include in such record a brief written explanation of the basis on which the reward was paid. Such records shall be maintained in a confidential manner in order to protect the identity of such confidential informants and such records of the Police Department shall not be deemed to be public records for any purposes. 
(Prior code § 3950.7)  
Chapter 9.40 - DAY WORKERS 
Sections: 
 
9.40.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Day worker center" means that location which shall be designated by the City Council, operated for the purposes of facilitating solicitation of and the solicitation for temporary employment. 
"Employment" means any offer for a consideration for labor, including part-time or temporary services, for wages or any other form of compensation. 
"Private parking areas" means all privately owned property in the city comprising vehicle parking areas, including, but not limited to, driveways, walkways, setbacks, and landscaped areas. 
"Solicit" or "hire" means any request, offer, announcement, endorsement or other action or gesture which induces another person to reasonably believe that his or her services are being sought or are made available for hire, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created. 
"Streets" means all of the areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes and all uses appurtenant thereto, and shall include, but not limited to, roadways, parkways, medians, alleys, sidewalks, curb and other public ways. 
"Vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 670 as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 2482 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 2481 § 2 (part), 1998: prior code § 4370)  
9.40.020 - Solicitation of and solicitation for employment on streets prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to persons offering to provide temporary services, and prospective employers of such persons, to engage in the solicitation of and the solicitation for employment on any street. 
B.  This section shall not apply to the day worker center designated as such by resolution of the City Council and conspicuously signed and posted in both English and Spanish language where solicitation of and solicitation for employment is permitted. 
(Ord. 2482 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 2481 § 2 (part), 1998: prior code § 4371)  
9.40.030 - Solicitation of and solicitation for employment within private parking areas prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to persons offering to provide temporary services, and prospective employers of such persons, to engage in the solicitation of or the solicitation for employment on any private parking area. 
B.  This section shall not be operative unless the owner, the owner's agent, or the person in lawful possession of a private parking area has caused signs to be permanently posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such private parking area, not less than eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, and not to exceed six (6) square feet in total sign face area. The content of such notice shall be in substantially the following form, in both English and Spanish languages: 
IT IS A MISDEMEANOR TO ENGAGE IN THE SOLICITATION FOR EMPLOYMENT OTHER THAN TO PERFORM THE EMPLOYMENT ON OR FOR THE OWNER OR OCCUPANTS OF THE PREMISES. 
(Ord. 2482 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 2481 § 2 (part), 1998: prior code § 4372)  
9.40.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of up to six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty of separate offenses for each and every day a violation of this chapter is committed by such person except at the designated day worker center. 
(Ord. 2482 § 2 (part), 1998: Ord. 2481 § 2 (part), 1998: prior code § 4373)  
Chapter 9.44 - REGULATION OF EPHEDRINE PURCHASES 
Sections: 
 
9.44.010 - Legislative purpose. 
A.  The City Council of the city finds that there is a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare in that the manufacture, processing, transportation, possession and sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous and that chemicals, compounds, substances, byproducts and wastes which are associated with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and injurious to the health and welfare and safety of the citizens of El Monte. 
B.  The City Council of the city finds that there has been a dramatic increase of sales, reports of sales, thefts and possession of over-the-counter drugs which contain substances known as ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, ephedrine hydrochloride, and pseudoephedrine sulfate along with other substances and products associated with the manufacture of methamphetamine and that retailers are regularly victimized by those persons who steal these substances, drugs and products on a regular basis. 
C.  The City Council of the city finds that the general public does not normally purchase the described products in multiple quantities and it is not the City Council's intent to restrain legitimate businesses or customers from selling or purchasing the described products. 
D.  No provision of this chapter shall hinder or supersede any other applicable state or federal statute. 
(Ord. 2491 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 4915)  
9.44.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
"Count" means the number of pills, tablets, capsules, or individual units of a substance contained within an individual package, box or container. 
"Customer" means any person who purchases or acquires the products described in this section, or persons who are present for the purchase or acquisition of the products described in this section. 
"Ephedrine" means any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal that contains ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine sulfate, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine or ephedrine. 
"Retailer" means any single geographic location of any retail business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate who furnishes, distributes, sells, or gives away products described in this section. 
"Sell" means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, or supply whether for monetary gain or not. 
(Ord. 2491 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 4916)  
9.44.030 - Limitations on sales. 
A.  No retailer shall sell to a single customer, more than two (2) packages of a product containing ephedrine in counts of twenty-four (24) or less per transaction, or more than one package per transaction if the count is in excess of twenty-four (24) per package, or if the total weight or the amount of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine contained in the packages exceed a weight of three thousand (3,000) milligrams or three (3) grams. 
B.  No customer shall purchase or acquire, more than two (2) packages of a product containing ephedrine in counts of twenty-four (24) or less per transaction, or more than one package per transaction if the count is in excess of twenty-four (24) per package, or if the total weight or the amount of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine contained in the packages exceed a weight of three thousand (3,000) milligrams or three (3) grams. 
(Ord. 2491 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 4917)  
9.44.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2491 § 1 (part), 1998: prior code § 4918)  
Chapter 9.48 - CAMPING 
Sections: 
 
9.48.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context requires otherwise, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and applications of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Camp" means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia. 
"Camp facilities" include, but are not limited to, tents, huts or temporary shelters. 
"Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
"Park" means the land owned by the city or other governmental entity and dedicated for use as a park. 
"Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed; to put aside for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
"Street" means a street as defined in Vehicle Code Section 590. 
(Ord. 2515 § 1 (part), 2000: prior code § 4209.1)  
9.48.020 - Unlawful camping. 
It is unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas except as otherwise provided: 
A.  Any street; 
B.  Any public parking lot; 
C.  Any park; 
D.  Any public area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. 2515 § 1 (part), 2000: prior code § 4209.2)  
9.48.030 - Storage of personal property in public places. 
It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by the City Council: 
A.  Any park; 
B.  Any street; 
C.  Any public parking lots; 
D.  Any public area improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. 2515 § 1 (part), 2000: prior code § 4209.3)  
Chapter 9.52 - PROXIMITY OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS TO CHILDREN'S FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2848, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2015, amended Ch. 9.52 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.52, §§ 9.52.010—9.52.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2680, § 1(part), 2006, and Ord. No. 2752, § 1, adopted March 23, 2010. 
 
9.52.010 - Definitions. 
(a)  "Child safety zone" means any park or recreation facility where children attend or normally congregate. 
(b)  "Child" or "children" means any person(s) younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  "Park or recreation facility" shall have the same meaning ascribed by El Monte Municipal Code Section 12.48.020. 
(d)  "Loitering" shall mean and refer to the acts as defined in Subdivision (d) of California Penal Code Section 653b. 
(e)  "Registered sex offender" means any person who is required to register under Section 290 of the California Penal Code, regardless of whether or not that person is on parole or probation. For purposes of this chapter, "registered sex offender" includes those person(s) who have failed to register pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2848, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
9.52.020 - Prohibition. 
Any registered sex offender is prohibited from loitering in a child safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 2848, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
9.52.030 - Enforcement. 
Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each offense shall be punished by a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which a violation occurs. In addition, the city may enforce the violation by means of a civil enforcement process through a restraining order, or a preliminary or permanent injunction, or by any other means available by law. 
(Ord. No. 2848, § 2, 1-27-2015)  
Chapter 9.54 - PROHIBITION OF LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF SOLICITING ACTS OF PROSTITUTION 
Sections: 
 
9.54.010 - Definitions. 
For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Act of prostitution" means to engage in sexual relations or any lewd act between persons for hire or monetary reward, but does not include sexual conduct engaged in as a part of any legitimate stage performance, play, or other legal entertainment open to the public. 
"Beckoning" means stopping or attempting to stop passersby, bicyclists or motor vehicles of any kind by an act of calling out, hailing, signaling, waving the arms or other bodily gestures. 
"Known prostitute, pimp or panderer" means a person who, within five (5) years prior to the date of his or her arrest for violation of this chapter, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted in any court of the state of California of any offense relating to or involving prostitution, pimping or pandering as defined in the Penal Code of the state of California or the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Lewd act" means conduct where the genitals, buttocks, or breast (male and/or female, natural and/or artificial) of either the prostitute or the customer come in contact with some part of the body of the other person for purpose of sexual arousal or gratification of either the prostitute or the customer. For purposes of this chapter, contact with the genitals, buttocks or breast (male and/or female, natural and/or artificial) includes contact through the clothing of either or both parties' as well as skin-to-skin contact. 
"Loiter" means to delay or linger without a lawful purpose for being on the property and for the purpose of committing a crime as opportunity may be discovered. 
"Place open to public view" means any area generally visible to the public, including all public property as well as private property, whether generally open to the public or not, which is generally visible from any area which is open to the public, including but not limited to vacant lots, front yards and driveways of private property and motor vehicles (whether in motion or not). This definition shall apply during all hours of the day and night, regardless of lighting conditions or inclement weather. 
"Public place" means any area generally visible to the public, including without limitation streets, sidewalks, parkways, bridges, alleys, parks, plazas, driveways, parking lots, and buildings open to the public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the driveways, doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the ground enclosing them. 
"Solicit" means to ask with earnestness, to excite to action, to appeal to, or to invite. 
(Ord. 2711 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.54.020 - Loitering for the purpose of soliciting acts of prostitution. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, or about any public place or place open to public view in a manner and under circumstances which openly displays the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another person to engage in acts of prostitution. 
B.  Circumstances to be Considered. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this chapter unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this chapter if it appears that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether a person has violated this chapter based upon the knowledge and personal observations of the arresting officer, are the following: 
1.  The person is a known prostitute, pimp or panderer; 
2.  The person repeatedly engages in the act of beckoning or behaves in a manner as to raise reasonable suspicion that he or she is seeking to engage in, is about to engage in, or is engaged in soliciting an act of prostitution. The wearing of distinctive clothing is one of the factors which can be considered in determining that there is reasonable suspicion of the intent to engage in solicitation of an act of prostitution; 
3.  The person repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles by hailing the drivers, waving arms, or making any other bodily gestures, or engages or attempts to engage the drivers or passengers of the motor vehicles in conversation, indicative of soliciting for prostitution; 
4.  The person is in the company of, or inside or near a vehicle registered to, a known prostitute, pimp, or panderer or a person known to the arresting officer to have been convicted within the last two years of soliciting an act of prostitution; 
5.  The person is currently subject to an order of a court or probation officer prohibiting the person from being in an area of high prostitution activity, or prohibiting the person from being in the company of known prostitutes, pimps, or panderers; 
6.  The person has previously been convicted of violating this chapter; 
7.  The person attempts to evade officers or to conceal himself or herself from the observation of the arresting officer. 
C.  The list of circumstances set forth in subsection B is not exclusive. The circumstances set forth in subsection B should be considered particularly salient if they occur in an area that is known for high prostitution activity. Any other relevant circumstances may be considered in determining whether a person has the requisite intent. 
(Ord. 2711 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.54.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.010(A) of this code. 
B.  A violation of this chapter shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance and all remedies provided under this code or the laws of the state of California for the abatement of, or prosecution for, public nuisances shall be available to the city. 
(Ord. 2711 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 9.56 - SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT SPEED CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED 
Sections: 
 
9.56.010 - Definitions. 
For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed" means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c). 
Preparations. "Preparations" for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed include, but are not limited to, situations where: (1) a group of motor vehicles or persons has arrived at a predetermined location for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) one or more persons has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words or physical barrier for the purpose of conducting the event; (4) two (2) or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (5) one or more drivers is racing his or her engine or spinning his or her tires in preparation for the event; or, (6) an individual is stationed near one or more motor vehicles as a race starter. 
Present. A person is "present" at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed if that person is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the location of the event, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet where preparations are being made for the event. 
"Spectator" means any person who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. A "spectator" includes any person at the location of the event without regard to whether the person arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. 
(Ord. 2713 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.56.020 - Spectator prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Be knowingly present as a spectator at any illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed conducted on a public street or highway; or 
B.  Be knowingly present as a spectator where preparations are being made for any such event. 
(Ord. 2713 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.56.030 - Admissible evidence. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of this chapter, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
1.  That the person charged has previously participated in an illegal speed contest or speed exhibition; 
2.  That the person charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal speed contest or speed exhibition; 
3.  That the person charged has previously attended an illegal speed contest or speed exhibition; 
4.  That the person charged was previously present at a location where preparations were being made for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed or where a speed exhibition or speed contest was in progress; 
5.  Evidence of these prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present or attend a speed contest or speed exhibition if the prior act or acts occurred within three (3) years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that a speed contest was taking place. 
(Ord. 2713 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.56.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.010(A) of this code. 
(Ord. 2713 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE ADOPTED 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Adoption of Uniform Traffic Ordinance. 
With the exception of the deletions in Section 10.04.020, and as amended in Section 10.04.030, there is adopted by reference the following code for the city, in Section 10.04.030: The Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 1964 Edition, adopted and published by the League of California Cities, and all of the provisions of said Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 1964 Edition, adopted and published by the League of California Cities, except Sections 1.11, 2.7, 2.8, 10.11, 11.1, 11.8, all of Article XIII consisting of Sections 13 through 13.4, all of Article XIV consisting of Sections 14 through 14.12, and Sections 16, 16.1 and 16.2, are incorporated herein, and is adopted as the traffic ordinance of the city of El Monte. Three (3) copies of said Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 1964 Edition, are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the city for use and examination by the public and attached as an appendix to the end of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 3200)  
10.04.020 - Deletions. 
Sections 1.11, 2.7, 2.8, 10.11, 11.1, 11.8 all of Article XIII consisting of Sections 13 through 13.4 all of Article XIV consisting of Sections 14 through 14.12, and Sections 16, 16.1 and 16.2 of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, as adopted by Section 10.04.010, are deleted therefrom and repealed. 
(Prior code § 3201)  
10.04.030 - Amendments. 
The Uniform Traffic Ordinance, as adopted by Section 10.04.010, is amended as follows: 
 Section 1.2. Central Traffic District. All streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: Area bounded by Valley Boulevard on the North, Ramona Boulevard on the South, and Santa Anita Avenue on the West. 
 Section 1.4. Council. The Council of the City of El Monte. 
 Section 1.7. Holidays. Within the meaning of this Chapter, holidays are the first day of January, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, the ninth day of September, the twenty-fifth day of December, and Thanksgiving Day. If the first day of January, the fourth day of July, the ninth day of September or the twenty-fifth day of December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. If it falls upon a Saturday, the Friday preceding is a holiday. 
 Section 2.4. Traffic Division to Submit Annual Traffic Safety Report. The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City Council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this City as follows: 
 1. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
 2. The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
 Section 2.5. City Traffic Engineer. The office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The City Engineer shall ex-officio be the City Traffic Engineer and he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this Ordinance and in the traffic ordinance of the City. Whenever the City Traffic Engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he or she may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. 
 Section 3.8. When Vehicles May Be Removed From Public Property. Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the El Monte Police Department or any Parking Control Officer of the City may remove or cause to be removed: 
 (a) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours. 
 (b) Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
 (c) Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. 
 (d) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing contrary to the provisions of this title upon any streets specified in Section 10.12.010 of this Title when signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
 (e) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing in a fire lane or access road way for fire apparatus in violation of Section 10.16.060 of this Title or Section 22500.1 of the California Vehicle Code when such fire lane or access roadway is posted with signs or other distinctive markings giving notice of such removal. 
 (f) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a City-owned parking facility in violation of this Title when signs are posted on the parking facility giving notice of such removal. 
 (g) No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day on or in any parking lot or facility owned by the city of El Monte. Violators will be subject to a fine and the vehicle may be towed away at the vehicle owner's expense. The City of El Monte shall post "No Parking" signs in the areas subject to this subsection. ;b1;  Section 10.5. Displaying Vehicle For Sale. No person shall place or park a vehicle on any public street which bears more than one sign advertising that the vehicle is for sale. No sign permitted by this Section shall be larger than twelve (12) inches by twenty (20) inches in size nor shall any such sign be placed on the exterior of the vehicle. No person shall place or park a vehicle on any public street on which the words "For Sale" or similar words advertising that such vehicle is for sale or painted on the windows or exterior body of the vehicle. 
 Section 10.5(b). Displaying Vehicle For Sale. 
 A. No person shall place or park a vehicle on any public or private parking lot or any private property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle thereon for sale, lease, hire, or rental unless the property is duly licensed, permitted, and zoned by the city to transact that type of business at that location. 
 B. Subsection A shall not apply to residentially zoned private property if the registered owner of the vehicle displayed for sale thereon lawfully resides at the residence where the vehicle is parked provided that the vehicle is in compliance with all other laws and regulations and that no more than one vehicle shall be displayed for sale thereon at any one time. 
 C. Any vehicle remaining displayed in violation of subsections A or B of this section for five (5) consecutive twenty-four (24) hour periods or longer is declared to be a public nuisance under Chapter 8.44 of this Code and shall be abated under the provisions of Chapter 8.44 of this Code. 
 Section 10.6. Repairing or Greasing Vehicles. No person shall construct or caused to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street and/or public property in the City of El Monte. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street and/or public property. 
 Section 11. Twenty Minute Parking. Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays. 
 When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. 
 Section 11.2. One Hour Parking. When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. 
 Section 11.3. Two Hour Parking. The Community Development Director or his designee is hereby authorized to maintain by appropriate signs all two-hour parking zones and to designate the days of the week and times of the day that the two-hour parking restriction is applicable. When said signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop stand or park such vehicle for more than two hours during the period indicated in the signs. 
 Section 12.1, subsection (a), part 3 of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance is amended by the addition thereto of subpart "c" to read as follows: 
 c. When such is located at or in a recreational facility as defined in Section 12.48.020 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2578 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2577 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2535 § 1, 2001; amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 3202—3202.7)  
10.04.040 - Additions. 
The Uniform Traffic Ordinance, as adopted by Section 10.04.010, is amended by the additions as follows: 
 Section 3.9. Notices of Parking Violations. Any full-time regular employee of the El Monte Police Department or part-time employee of the El Monte Police Department, when authorized by the Chief of Police pursuant to the authority of Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California, may issue notices of parking violation pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
 Section 10.14. Parking of Trailers or Semi-trailers. No person shall park any trailer or semi-trailer upon any highway, street, alley, public way or public place unless the trailer or semi-trailer is at all times while so park attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semi-trailer in a normal manner upon the highway, street, alley, public way or public place. 
 This section shall not apply to trailers or semi-trailers while in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor shall it apply to any trailer or semi-trailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to void stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semi-trailer on that portion of the highway, street, alley, public way or public place ordinarily used for vehicular parking. 
 Section 9.2. When Pedestrians Cannot Cross City Streets. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk when there are signs posted prohibiting pedestrian crossing. 
(Ord. 2519 § 1, 2000; amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 3203—3203.2) 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 1, 1-5-2010)  
Chapter 10.08 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Prima facie speed limits. 
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Section 22357 of the Vehicle Code, the City Council does determine and declare prima facie speed limits for vehicles as specified in the following subsections. 
Aerojet Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon Aerojet Avenue between Telstar Avenue and Flair Drive. 
Arden Drive. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon all of Arden Drive in the city. 
Asher Street. A prima facie speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour is established upon Asher Street between Santa Anita Avenue and Peck Road. 
Baldwin Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of forty (40) miles per hour is established upon all of Baldwin Avenue in the city. 
Durfee Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon that portion of Durfee Avenue in the city situated between Exline Street and Ramona Boulevard and that portion situated between Valley Boulevard and the southerly boundary of the city. 
Exline Street. A prima facie speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour is established upon Exline Street between La Madera Avenue and Gilman Road. 
Fletcher Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon Fletcher Avenue between Telstar Avenue and Flair Drive. 
Garvey Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon all of Garvey Avenue in the city. 
Loftus Street. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established on that portion of Loftus Street in the city between Baldwin Avenue and the westerly city limits. 
Lower Azusa Road. A prima fade speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon all of Lower Azusa Road in the city. 
Merced Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon that portion of Merced Avenue in the city situated Southerly of Garvey Avenue. 
Peck Road. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon all of Peck Road in the city. 
Ramona Boulevard. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon Ramona Boulevard between the intersection of Valley Boulevard and Ramona Boulevard and the intersection of the easterly municipal boundary and Ramona Boulevard. 
Rio Hondo Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon Rio Hondo Avenue between Telstar Avenue and Flair Drive. 
Santa Anita Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established on all of Santa Anita Avenue within the city. 
Santa Anita Avenue Between Lower Azusa Road and Valley Boulevard. Notwithstanding the provisions of "Santa Anita Avenue" in this section, a prima facie speed limit of forty (40) miles per hour is established upon Santa Anita Avenue between Lower Azusa Road and Valley Boulevard. 
Telstar Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established on that portion of Telstar Avenue in the city between Flair Drive and Rio Hondo. 
Tyler Avenue. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon Tyler Avenue between Garvey Avenue and the southerly city limits. 
Valley Boulevard. A prima facie speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is established upon all of Valley Boulevard in the city. 
Valley Mall. A prima facie speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour is established upon the Valley Mall between Santa Anita Avenue and Ramona Boulevard. 
(Prior code §§ 3227—3227.12)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRUCK ROUTES 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Truck traffic routes. 
The streets and parts of streets within the city specified in the following subsections are declared to be truck routes for use by commercial vehicles weighing more than six thousand (6,000) pounds, laden or unladen, and the Director of Public Works is authorized and directed to so designate said streets and parts of streets by appropriate signs at each end of the streets or portions of the streets described in the following subsections, and at such other locations as he or she may deem necessary or advisable in order to give adequate notice specifying such streets or portions of streets as truck routes: 
That portion of Durfee Avenue from the southerly city limits of the City of El Monte to Garvey Avenue; 
Lower Azusa Road from the easterly boundary of the city to the westerly boundary of the city; 
That portion of Meeker Road from Valley Boulevard to Peck Road; 
All of Tyler Avenue within the city; 
All of Santa Anita Avenue within the city; 
That portion of Arden Drive from Valley Boulevard to Lower Azusa Road; 
Baldwin Avenue from Lower Azusa Road to the San Bernardino Freeway; 
Rosemead Boulevard Service Road from Flair Drive southerly to its southerly terminus; 
That portion of Garvey Avenue from the westerly boundary of the city to the San Bernardino Freeway; 
That portion of Asher Street from Santa Anita Avenue to Peck Road; 
San Bernardino Freeway from Rosemead Boulevard to the easterly boundary of the city; 
That portion of Brockway Street from Santa Anita Avenue to Meeker Road; 
Ramona Boulevard from Santa Anita Avenue to Valley Boulevard; 
That portion of Ramona Boulevard from Valley Boulevard to the San Gabriel River; 
All of Valley Boulevard within the city; 
That portion of Whitmore Street from Rosemead Boulevard to the Rio Hondo Channel; 
Flair Drive from Rosemead Boulevard Service Road to Baldwin Avenue; 
Peck Road from the northerly boundary of the city to the southerly boundary of the city. 
(Prior code §§ 3229—3229.22)  
10.12.020 - Weight and parking limit, removal and impounding. 
A.  When the truck traffic routes thus established are designated by appropriate signs, no person shall drive or operate any commercial vehicle or any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five (5) tons on any street other than upon the streets or portions of streets thus established as truck traffic routes; provided further that no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle having a maximum width in excess of eighty (80) inches upon any street, improved or unimproved parkway, or other improved or unimproved property dedicated to public use, or portion thereof for a period of time exceeding one hour and any vehicle including, but not limited to, detached truck trailers found in violation of this section shall be removed from the public street, improved or unimproved property dedicated to a public use and impounded until such time as they are claimed by the registered owner or his designed representative. Said cost of removal and impounding shall be borne by the registered owner. 
B.  Exception. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not prohibit any commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the usual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been issued therefor. 
C.  Exception. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state; 
2.  Public and private school buses; 
3.  Any vehicle used by a municipality, public agency or public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility or public way; 
4.  Emergency vehicles; 
5.  Totally unladen panel or pickup type of commercial vehicles of a rated capacity of less than one and one-half tons when used for the personal transportation of the operator thereof; 
6.  House cars as defined in Section 362 of the California Vehicle Code and passenger vehicles as defined in Section 465 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 2514 § 1, 2000: prior code §§ 3230—3230.2)  
Chapter 10.16 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Adoption and amendment of penalty schedules. 
A.  By way of a City Council resolution approved by no less than a majority of the City Council quorum, the City Council may establish and from time to time update, amend or modify a schedule of civil penalties, fines and forfeitures for parking-related offenses under the California Vehicle Code and the El Monte Municipal Code, including those parking-related offenses set forth under Title 10 (Vehicles and Traffic). 
B.  Included within the penalty schedule authorized under subsection (A), above, the City Council may specify the applicable deadlines and time periods for paying citation penalties; for contesting the issuance of citations; for the assessment of late penalties; or for the assessment of any other penalties set forth under the approved schedule. 
C.  Included within the penalty schedule authorized under subsection (A), above, the City Council may specify the location where all accrued penalties must be submitted; the location for submitting written requests contesting the issuance of citations; and any other communications between the person issued a citation; the City of El Monte; and any agent(s) acting on behalf of the city. The City Council through the approved penalty schedule may also provide direction with regard to the allocation of net penalty receipts for purposes of meeting up-front administrative costs associated with the processing, collection and appeal of parking citations. 
(Prior code § 3200.2) 
(Ord. No. 2746, § 2, 6-16-2009)  
10.16.020 - Public street sweeping—No parking hours. 
No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle on any public street during the hours of five a.m. to seven a.m.; seven a.m. to twelve noon or between the hours of twelve noon and five p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, as applicable, where public street parking regulation signs are posted giving notice of such parking restrictions. The civil fine or penalty for violation of this section is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus the sum of five dollars ($5.00) as authorized under AR 2142 (Statutes of 1992, Chapter 1168). 
A.  On Tuesdays between the hours of nine a.m. and one p.m. on the north side of Klingerman Avenue between Peck Road and Tyler Avenue, on the east side of Haber Avenue between Klingerman Avenue and Bonwood Road, and on the north side of Bonwood Road between its east end west of Peck Road/Mountain View Road and its west end east of Tyler Avenue. 
B.  On Wednesdays between the hours of nine a.m. and one p.m. on the south side of Klingerman Avenue between Peck Road and Tyler Avenue, on the west side of Haber Avenue between Klingerman Avenue and Bonwood Road, and on the south side of Bonwood Road between its east end west of Peck Road/Mountain View Road and its west end east of Tyler Avenue. 
(Ord. 2701 § 6, 2007; prior code §§ 3204—3204.2)  
10.16.030 - Vehicle storage in streets. 
No person engaged in the business of vehicle repair, sales, renting, leasing or other vehicle related business shall place or park on any public street any vehicle which such person or business possesses for purposes of repair, sale, rent, lease or other vehicle related business purpose. 
(Prior code § 3205)  
10.16.040 - Application of Vehicle Code Section 22651.9 to certain violations of Section 10.04.030 (Section 10.5) occurring within the preceding thirty days. 
A.  The provisions of Vehicle Code Section 22651.9 are declared to be applicable as provided in this section to the enforcement of Section 10.04.030 (Section 10.5) by any other employee of the city who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations of the city. The removal of a vehicle from a public street or from public lands as authorized by this section is cumulative with the civil fine imposed for a violation of Section 10.04.030 (Section 10.5). 
B.  All public streets and all public lands in the city are subject to the application of Vehicle Code Section 22651.9 and this section. 
C.  No vehicle may be removed from any public street or from any public lands identified in subsection B of this section for a violation of Section 10.04.030 (Section 10.5) unless all of the conditions precedent for the removal of such a vehicle as provided under Vehicle Code Section 22651.9(a)(1)—(3) have first been satisfied. 
D.  A notice of the storage of each vehicle removed from any public street or public lands shall be mailed or personally delivered to the registered owner and to the legal owner of the vehicle within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, following its removal, and such notice shall also include all of the other information required by Vehicle Code Section 22852. 
E.  The Hearing Officer of the city designated to consider appeals or exceptions to the issuance of vehicle parking civil citations under the program established pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 40200, et seq., shall serve as the Hearing Officer to conduct the "post storage" hearing as may be required in a particular case, in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22852 for any vehicle which is removed from a public street or public lands under this section. 
(Prior code § 3205.5)  
10.16.050 - Unregistered vehicles restricted. 
No person shall park or leave standing upon any public street any vehicle which does not display evidence of current vehicle registration issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles in lieu of license plates pursuant to Section 5205 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 3206)  
10.16.060 - No parking in fire lanes. 
A.  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle or material of any kind in or on a fire lane or access roadway for fire apparatus where such fire lane or access roadway is designated or distinctively marked as such pursuant to Section 10.207 of the Uniform Fire Code or Section 22500.1 of the California Vehicle Code. 
B.  Fire Lanes on Private Property. Where the Fire Chief recommends and the City Council designates a fire lane or access roadway for fire apparatus as such on private property pursuant to Section 10.207 of the Uniform Fire Code or Section 22500.1 of the California Vehicle Code, the owner, tenant, and/or other person or persons charged with responsibility for or control of such private property shall install and maintain signs and/or other markings thereon designating the fire lane or access roadway as such as directed by the Fire Chief in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 10.207 of the Uniform Fire Code and/or Section 22500.1 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code §§ 3219, 3219.1)  
10.16.070 - Parking vehicles for sale of merchandise. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon any street from which such vehicle any merchandise is sold, except as licensed under Title 5 of this code. 
(Prior code § 3220)  
10.16.080 - Parking in designated space. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a marked parking space posted for the use by designated city employees, unless authorized to do so by the City Manager or his or her designee. 
B.  No person shall occupy, block, or otherwise impede access to a marked parking space posted for the use by designated city employees, unless authorized to do so by the City Manager or his or her designee. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall apply to all marked parking spaces posted for the use by designated city employees that are located on land owned, leased, used, or operated by the city, including public highways, city-owned off-street parking facilities, and privately owned off-street parking facilities where specific parking spaces have been set aside by the property owner, or the owner's agent, for the exclusive use by designated city employees. 
D.  For the purposes of this section, the term "designated city employees" shall include all full-time and part-time employees of the city, all active volunteers working for the city, all elected officials of the city, and all public or private contractors working for the city, that are authorized by the City Manager or his or her designee to park a vehicle in a designated parking space. 
E.  Only the City Manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to designate and mark a parking space for the use by designated city employees. 
(Ord. 2664 § 1, 2006)  
Chapter 10.20 - PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Street parking. 
The Director of Public Services may recommend to the City Council and the City Council shall indicate by resolution which street parking spaces shall be designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 9105 or 22511.5. Whenever the City Council so designates a parking space, it shall be marked by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space. In addition to the blue paint, the space may also be marked by signs or other suitable means. 
(Prior code § 3300)  
10.20.020 - Off-street parking. 
Any person or public agency owning or operating an off-street parking facility may designate stalls or spaces in such facility for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 9105 or 22511.5. Such designation shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background or the space is outlined in blue marking and there is on the ground in the space a similar profile view depicting a wheelchair with occupant. 
(Prior code § 3301)  
10.20.030 - Removal of vehicles. 
The owner, person, or public agency in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility, after notifying the El Monte Police Department or El Monte Parking Control Authority with regard to any off-street parking facility it owns or operates may cause the removal from a stall or space designated for physically handicapped persons in such facility to the nearest public garage of any vehicle not displaying one of the distinguishing license plates or placards issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 9105 or 22511.5 if there is posted immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the following: "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued to physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Information concerning towed vehicles may be obtained by telephoning the El Monte Police Department or the Parking Control Authority—575-2111 or 575-2231." The sign shall also make reference to this section as follows: "10.20.040 EMMC." 
(Prior code § 3302)  
10.20.040 - Violation an infraction. 
It is unlawful and punishable as an infraction for the operator of any vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate or placard issued to disabled persons pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or to disabled veterans pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 9105 to stop, stand, park or to leave standing such vehicle in any parking space properly designated for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3303)  
Chapter 10.24 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Operation of motorized vehicles. 
No person shall drive or operate any type of motorized vehicle, as defined by Section 415 of the California Vehicle Code, upon public or private property unless such person has obtained and has in his or her possession the Written permission to operate a motorized vehicle thereon signed by the owner or person in lawful possession of such public or private property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  An emergency vehicle; 
B.  A commercial vehicle while operated in the conduct of usual business; 
C.  A motorized vehicle being operated on property devoted to the parking or operation of motorized vehicles where the general public is either expressly or impliedly invited to use such property for such purpose; 
D.  A motorized vehicle operated on property developed and actually used for residential purposes and where such vehicle is operated thereon with the express or implied invitation of the owner or person in lawful possession thereof; 
E.  A motorized vehicle operated on a public street, as defined by Sections 590 and 591 of the California Vehicle Code; 
F.  A motorized vehicle operated on a private road regulated pursuant to Section 21107 or Section 21108 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 3220.1)  
10.24.020 - Parking on public or private property. 
No person shall deposit, park, or leave any vehicle or material of any kind in or on a private driveway or on private property, or in or on any public property other than in or on a public street or alley or public parking lot in accordance with the provisions of this chapter without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such private driveway or such public or private property. 
(Prior code § 3220.2)  
10.24.030 - Certain alley closed. 
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle, as defined by the Vehicle Code, in or upon any portion of the first alley east of Granada Avenue between Valley Boulevard and the first alley north of Valley Boulevard. 
(Prior code § 3220.3)  
10.24.040 - Riding on handlebars prohibited. 
No operator of any motorcycle when upon a street shall carry any other person upon the handlebars or tank of any such vehicle. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 3233)  
10.24.050 - Speed—Trains. 
No person shall drive or propel any locomotive engine, railroad train, box motor car, or any train or vehicle operated on rails, or any car driven or propelled by steam, over any street crossing within the corporate limits of the city at a greater rate of speed than sixty-five (65) miles per hour. 
(Prior code § 3239)  
Chapter 10.28 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Bicycle defined. 
Any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches. 
(Prior code § 3400)  
10.28.020 - Traffic laws applying to bicycles. 
A.  Every person riding or operating a bicycle shall be subject to all provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state and to all provisions of this code regulating vehicles or vehicular traffic except as to special regulations of said Vehicle Code or of this code which, by their nature, can have no application. 
B.  Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the lawful order, signal or direction of a Traffic or Police Officer and shall also obey the instructions of official traffic signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a Police Officer. 
C.  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or "U" turn is permitted, no operator of a bicycle shall disobey the direction of such signs, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Prior code § 3401)  
10.28.030 - Sidewalk riding prohibited. 
A.  No person shall ride or propel any bicycle upon or across any public sidewalk within a business district of the city except in such cases and in such places as motor vehicles may lawfully be operated thereon. 
(Prior code § 3402)  
10.28.040 - Licensing and registration of private and commercial bicycles. 
A.  No person shall own, ride, propel, or be in possession of any bicycle which is not registered and identified as provided in this chapter, or which does not bear a license plate as required by and issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that bicycles in the possession of persons engaged in the business of buying or selling new or used bicycles need not be licensed or registered while in their possession. Such bicycles shall be licensed and registered if they are rented, leased, loaned or sold on conditional sales contract to other persons, or are used or ridden by persons other than for the purpose of demonstration. 
B.  Time for Licensing and Registering. Any person buying a bicycle within the city, or bringing a bicycle into the city, or owning, using or possessing a bicycle in the city, shall, personally or by agent, within ten (10) days after such bicycle is thus purchased, brought into, owned, used or possessed in the city, and in any event before such bicycle is ridden or propelled within the city, make application for the registration thereof and cause the same to be sufficiently identified and licensed as provided in this chapter. 
C.  Application for License and Registration. Application for such license and registration shall be made to the Chief of Police at the Police Department of the city. At the time such application is made, the applicant must have with him or her the bicycle concerning which application is made and shall present satisfactory proof of ownership of such vehicle. 
D.  Inspection of Bicycles. The Chief of Police shall cause inspection to be made of the bicycle for which application is thus made, and shall refuse to register and issue a license for the same if it is unsafe or unfit mechanically. 
E.  Procedure for Registration and Licensing. The Chief of Police, after the inspection of the bicycle as hereinabove provided, shall unless he or she finds the same to be an unsafe or unfit mechanical condition: 
1.  Issue a license indicium prescribed by the State of California, Department of Motor Vehicles; 
2.  Affix the same or cause the same to be affixed to such bicycle frame in a conspicuous place; 
3.  Cause the same to be registered by completing three (3) cards containing the description of the bicycle, including the serial number of the bicycle, the make, type, and model of the bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee as well as the indicium number and any identifying number stamped upon or otherwise affixed by him or her to such bicycle, and any other or further information deemed by him or her to be necessary or advisable; 
4.  Issue one of such cards to the applicant and retain the other two (2) for use by the Police Department. 
F.  Registration Fees. There shall be no fee charged to the applicant for each application for registration of a bicycle or for each application for a renewal of registration for any reason. In the event any license indicium and registration card, or either of them, is or becomes lost, stolen, mutilated or illegible, the owner of the bicycle for which the same were or was issued shall immediately make application for a new license and registration card in the same manner as in the case of a first application. Upon re-registering a bicycle, the Chief of Police shall make new registration cards and shall issue a new registration card to the applicant and issue and affix to the bicycle a new indicium number and may destroy the old registration cards. 
G.  Expiration of License. The first license issued after December 31, 1974, shall expire on December 31, 1978. Thereafter, all licenses will be issued for a three (3) year period. 
H.  Registration File. The Chief of Police shall install and maintain a complete filing system containing a record of all applications for the registration of bicycles and containing all of the information required on the application. 
I.  Maintenance of Licenses. Every license plate issued pursuant to this chapter shall, by the owner of the bicycle for which such license has been issued, be kept free from dirt or foreign material and in a condition to be clearly legible, and shall remain affixed to the bicycle for which it was issued so long as such bicycle is owned by such person in the city. 
(Prior code §§ 3403—3403.9)  
10.28.050 - Reports of bicycle sales. 
Every person in the city who sells or trades any bicycle licensed or registered in accordance with the terms of this chapter, or which was required to have been thus licensed or registered, shall within ten (10) days after such transfer of ownership report such transfer to the Chief of Police and surrender to him or her the registration card concerning such bicycle, if one were issued to him or her. Such report of sale and surrender of registration card may be made by the purchaser of such bicycle by surrendering to the Police Department the registration card of such former owner endorsed on the reverse side thereof. 
(Prior code § 3404)  
10.28.060 - Rental agencies. 
A rental agency shall not rent or offer for rent any bicycle unless it is registered and licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided for in this chapter, and such bicycle must be equipped with the lamps and other equipment required by this code, or by the laws of the state. 
(Prior code § 3405)  
10.28.070 - Removal, mutilation and destruction of license plates. 
No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any identifying number stamped or otherwise affixed to any bicycle, or remove, destroy, alter or mutilate any license plate or registration card issued or affixed pursuant to this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the Chief of Police from stamping or otherwise affixing numbers, letters, names or symbols on or to any bicycle on which no serial or other identifying number of symbol can be found, for identification purposes, nor prohibit him or her from stamping any other or additional numbers, names, letters or symbols as may be necessary upon the registration or re-registration of any bicycle. 
(Prior code § 3406)  
10.28.080 - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb, or upon a sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Prior code § 3407)  
10.28.090 - Bicycle paths. 
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Prior code § 3408)  
10.28.100 - Minors under eighteen. 
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall buy, sell, or trade any bicycle frame, or other parts thereof, without the written consent of his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Prior code § 3409)  
10.28.110 - Duties of parents and guardians. 
No parent shall cause or permit their child or ward to violate any portion of the provisions outlined in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3410)  
10.28.120 - Found bicycles. 
It shall be the duty of any person finding any bicycle, frame, or part thereof, to immediately notify the Police Department of its location, and to turn the same over to such agency. 
(Prior code § 3411)  
10.28.130 - Change of address. 
Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter changes his or her home address, he or she shall within ten (10) days notify the Police Department. 
(Prior code § 3412)  
Chapter 10.32 - SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Use of coasters, rollerskates and similar devices restricted. 
No person upon rollerskates or riding in or by means of a coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any street. 
(Prior code § 3232)  
10.32.020 - Skateboard defined. 
"Skateboard" means any board or object that is mounted on roller skate type wheels and which lacks a hand-held steering mechanism and which is intended to be ridden by standing or sitting thereon. 
(Prior code § 3420)  
10.32.030 - Skateboard restricted. 
No person shall propel or ride a skateboard upon or cross any public sidewalk within a business district of the city. 
(Prior code § 3421)  
10.32.040 - Youth safety helmets required for skateboarders and rollerskates. 
A.  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall ride upon a skateboard or wear as an item of footwear or recreational safety equipment and/or ride upon rollerskates or rollerblades or any other similar item of equipment, upon or across any public sidewalk or street unless that person is also wearing a properly fitted and fastened safety helmet upon his/her head. 
B.  The words "rollerskates" and "rollerblades" as used in this section mean and include any and all boot, shoe or metal frames having wheels or roller bearings mounted under the shoe-like apparatus that is worn by the user and provides a means of mobility to the user. The configuration of the wheels on the shoe-like apparatus may vary so that the design of the wheels would not remove the shoe-like apparatus from the definition. The word "skateboard" as used in this section has the same meaning as found in Section 10.32.020 and includes any contrivance on which rollerskate or rollerblade wheels are attached and on which a person may stand, kneel or lay while riding with or without the rider being attached to the skateboard by means of a shoe-like apparatus. 
C.  The words "safety helmet" as used in this section means and includes all head gear which has been designed and tested for protection to satisfy the standards set by either the American National Standards Institute ANSI Z 90.4 (bicycle helmet standard), the Snell Memorial Foundation label standard for protective headgear for use in bicycling or the American Society standard for testing materials (ASTM F-1447 standard). The manufacturers' certification label of the applicable safety standards must be conspicuously attached to the safety helmet. 
D.  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section shall be guilty of committing an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The parent or legal guardian of the unemancipated minor whose conduct violates subsection A of this section shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the amount of the fine imposed pursuant to this subsection D of this section. 
E.  The provisions of subsection D of this section shall take effect on July 1, 1997. 
(Prior code § 3422)  
Chapter 10.36 - VEHICULAR CRUISING 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Adoption of Vehicle Code Section 21100(k). 
California Vehicle Code Section 21100(k) is adopted herein in its entirety and incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.36.020 - Cruising prohibited. 
It is unlawful for anyone to engage in cruising upon any of the following streets or highways in the City of El Monte: 
A.  Valley Mall between Santa Anita Avenue and Ramona Boulevard; 
B.  Valley Boulevard between Baldwin Avenue and Durfee Avenue; 
C.  Garvey Avenue between Durfee Avenue and Sastre Avenue; 
D.  Peck Road between Magnolia Avenue and Bryant Road; 
E.  Ramona Boulevard between Santa Anita Avenue and Cogswell Road. 
The list of streets and highways as stated above hereinafter may be modified by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.36.030 - Cruising defined. 
A person engages in cruising when, as the operator of a motor vehicle driven upon a portion of a street or highway subject to controls upon cruising, he or she drives past a traffic control point a second or subsequent time within any four (4) hour period after the vehicle that he or she is operating has at least once been driven past the traffic control point on the same street within the four (4) hour period. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.36.040 - Traffic control point defined. 
A traffic control point means a location utilized as an observation point in order to monitor traffic for potential violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.36.050 - Establishment of traffic control points. 
A.  The police officer on duty upon any of the streets designated in Section 10.36.020 which is adversely impacted by traffic congestion may, having determined that such street is so affected, establish in his or her discretion one or more traffic control points upon such impacted streets to regulate vehicular cruising. 
B.  Every traffic control point shall be evidenced by the placement of signs prohibiting cruising and briefly reciting the provisions of this chapter and California Vehicle Code § 21100(k) at the beginning and at the end of the street or highway or portion of street or highway subject to cruising controls. Any police officer on duty in the impacted area is authorized and empowered to post any signs required to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.36.060 - Written warning regarding cruising. 
No operator of a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter unless a written warning notice was placed upon that vehicle or handed to the driver or any occupant thereof. The written notice will warn the driver and other occupants of the vehicle that driving that vehicle past a traffic control point within four (4) hours of its initial passage past the control point will be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.36.070 - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of cruising as defined herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each successive time the vehicle is driven past the control point following receipt of the written notice described in Section 10.36.060 shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter, and no additional notice to the driver of such vehicle shall be required prior to the issuance of subsequent citations. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
10.36.080 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code; 
B.  Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, district, state or federal agency; 
C.  Any vehicle licensed for public transportation or commercial vehicles which are then being driven solely for business purposes; or 
D.  Any person operating a motor vehicle or passenger therein whose residence or place of employment is either located upon property immediately contiguous to or is directly accessed from any street or highway subject to cruising controls and such person displays satisfactory proof of such residence or place of employment at the traffic point. 
(Ord. 2570 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Appendix - 1964 Edition 
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
(Enacted by Ord. 1353, Adopted Feb. 23, 1965) 
CITY OF EL MONTE 
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Sections: 
UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
CITY OF EL MONTE  
ARTICLE I - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 1. - Definitions of Words and Phrases. 
The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall for the purpose of this ordinance have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article.  
Section 1.1. - Motor Vehicle Code Definitions to be Used. 
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply.  
Section 1.2. - Central Traffic District. 
All streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: Area bounded by Valley Boulevard on the North, Ramona Boulevard on the South, and Santa Anita Avenue on the West.  
Section 1.3. - Coach. 
Any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.  
Section 1.4. - Council. 
The Council of the City of El Monte.  
Section 1.5. - Curb. 
The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights of way of public utility companies.  
Section 1.6. - Divisional Island. 
A raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.  
Section 1.7. - Holidays. 
Within the meaning of this Ordinance, holidays are the first day of January, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, the ninth day of September, the twenty-fifth day of December, and Thanksgiving Day. If the first day of January, the fourth day of July, the ninth day of September or the twenty-fifth day of December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. If it falls upon a Saturday, the Friday preceding is a holiday.  
Section 1.8. - Loading Zone. 
The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.  
Section 1.9. - Official Time Standard. 
Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city.  
Section 1.10. - Parkway. 
That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.  
Section 1.12. - Passenger Loading Zone. 
The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.  
Section 1.13. - Pedestrian. 
Any person afoot.  
Section 1.14. - Police Officer. 
Every officer of the Police Department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.  
Section 1.15. - Stop. 
When required, means complete cessation of movement.  
Section 1.16. - Vehicle Code. 
The Vehicle Code of the State of California.  
ARTICLE II - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 
 
Section 2. - Police Administration. 
There is hereby established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police.  
Section 2.1. - Duty of Traffic Division. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this ordinance and the traffic ordinances of this city.  
Section 2.2. - Traffic Accident Studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.  
Section 2.3. - Traffic Accident Reports. 
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer.  
Section 2.4. - Traffic Division to Submit Annual Traffic Safety Report. 
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City Council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
1.  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
2.  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
3.  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities.  
Section 2.5. - City Traffic Engineer. 
The office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The City Engineer shall ex-officio be the City Traffic Engineer and he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this Ordinance and in the traffic ordinances of the City. Whenever the City Traffic Engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained.  
Section 2.6. - Powers and Duties of City Traffic Engineer—Delegation. 
It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this ordinance a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him.  
ARTICLE III - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Section 3. - Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials. 
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this ordinance or the Vehicle Code.  
Section 3.1. - Persons Other Than Officials Shall Not Direct Traffic. 
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer.  
Section 3.2. - Obedience to Police or Authorized Officers. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with, or to perform any act forbidden by, any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or by law.  
Section 3.3. - Traffic Regulations Apply to Persons Riding Bicycles or Animals. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this ordinance, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application.  
Section 3.4. - Obstruction or Interference with Police or Authorized Officers. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this ordinance shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this ordinance, constitute such interference or obstruction.  
Section 3.5. - Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States. Government, this state, any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this ordinance except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance or by the Vehicle Code.  
Section 3.6. - Exemption of Certain Vehicles. 
(a) The provisions of this ordinance regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
(b)  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willfull disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  The provisions of this ordinance regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.  
Section 3.7. - Report of Damage to Certain Property. 
(a) The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the Police Department of this city. 
(b)  Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. 
(c)  The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subdivision (a) within twenty-four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report.  
Section 3.8. - When Vehicles May be Removed from Streets. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the El Monte Police Department or any Parking Control Officer of the City may remove or cause to be removed: 
(a)  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours. 
(b)  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
(c)  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. 
(d)  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing contrary to the provisions of Section 10.16.070 of the El Monte Municipal Code upon any streets specified in Section 10.12.010 of the El Monte Municipal Code when signs are posted giving notice of such removal.  
Section 3.9. - Notices of Violations. 
Any full time regular employee of the El Monte Police Department or any Parking Control Officer of the City, when authorized so to do by the Chief of Police, may issue notices of violations pursuant to Section 41103 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California.  
ARTICLE IV - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Section 4. - Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices. 
(a) The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this ordinance or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council.  
Section 4.1. - Traffic Control Signs Required for Enforcement Purposes. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this ordinance for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws.  
Section 4.2. - Obedience to Traffic Control Devices. 
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this ordinance unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.  
Section 4.3. - Installation of Traffic Signals. 
(a) The city traffic engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works. 
(c)  Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection.  
Section 4.4. - Lane Marking. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway.  
Section 4.5. - Distinctive Roadway Markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code.  
Section 4.6. - Authority to Remove, Relocate and Discontinue Traffic Control Devices. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this ordinance whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain.  
Section 4.7. - Traffic Control Devices: Hours of Operation. 
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this ordinance.  
Section 4.8. - Unauthorized Painting of Curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto.  
ARTICLE V - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Section 5. - Authority to Place Turning Markers. Intersections. Multiple Lanes. 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.  
Section 5.1. - Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.  
Section 5.2. - Signal Controlled Intersections—Right Turns. 
(a) No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign-posted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic.  
ARTICLE VI - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Section 6. - The City Traffic Engineer to Sign One-Way Streets and Alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.  
ARTICLE VII - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 
 
Section 7. - The City Traffic Engineer to Erect Stop Signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code.  
Section 7.1. - Stop at Through Street or Stop Sign. 
(a) Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the Council. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the Council.  
Section 7.2. - Emerging from Alley, Driveway or Building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway.  
ARTICLE VIII - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
Section 8. - Driving Through Funeral Procession. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department.  
Section 8.1. - Clinging to Moving Vehicle. 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom.  
Section 8.2. - Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways. 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
For the purpose of this section a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton.  
Section 8.3. - Riding or Driving on Sidewalk. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that said sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city traffic engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.  
Section 8.4. - New Pavement and Markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone-marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.  
Section 8.5. - Obedience to Barriers and Signs. 
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city.  
Section 8.6. - No Entrance Into Intersection That Would Obstruct Traffic. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.  
Section 8.7. - Limited Access. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.  
Section 8.8. - Restrictions on Use of Freeways. 
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by State law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions.  
ARTICLE IX - PEDESTRIANS REGULATIONS 
 
Section 9. - Traffic Engineer to Establish Marked Crosswalks. 
(a) The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows: 
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside said district where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in (b) of this section. 
(b)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated.  
Section 9.1. - When Pedestrians Must Use Crosswalks. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district.  
ARTICLE X - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OR IN CERTAIN PLACES 
 
Section 10. - Application of Regulations. 
(a) The provisions of this ordinance prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this ordinance imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.  
Section 10.1. - Stopping or Standing in Parkways Prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway.  
Section 10.2. - Traffic Engineer to Maintain No Stopping Zones and No Parking Areas. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this ordinance. 
When said curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance.  
Section 10.3. - No Parking Areas. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, of traffic sign or signal: 
(a)  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings. 
(b)  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(c)  In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(d)  In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(e)  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track. 
(f)  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property. 
(g)  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. 
(h)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(i)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection (in the central traffic district or) in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop. 
(j)  Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device.  
Section 10.4. - Use of Streets for Storage of Vehicles Prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours.  
Section 10.5. - Displaying Vehicle For Sale. 
No person shall place or park a vehicle on any public street which bears more than one (1) sign advertising that the vehicle is for sale. No sign permitted by this Section shall be larger than twelve (12) inches by twenty (20) inches in size nor shall any such sign be placed on the exterior of the vehicle. No person shall place or park a vehicle on any public street on which the words "For Sale" or similar words advertising that such vehicle is for sale are painted on the windows or exterior body of the vehicle. 
(Added by Ord. 2156, 8/12/86.)  
Section 10.6. - Repairing or Greasing Vehicles on Public Streets. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street.  
Section 10.7. - Washing or Polishing Vehicles. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service.  
Section 10.8. - Parking Adjacent to Schools. 
(a) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.  
Section 10.9. - Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets. 
(a) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking.  
Section 10.10. - Parking on Grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding 3% (within any business or residence district) without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means.  
Section 10.12. - Emergency Parking Signs. 
(a) Whenever the city traffic engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(b)  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park, or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.  
Section 10.13. - Display of Warning Devices When Commercial Vehicle Disabled. 
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of 4, 000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within this city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of 200 feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of, and 100 feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway.  
Section 10.14. - Parking of Trailers or Semi-trailers. 
No person shall park any trailer or semi-trailer upon any highway, street, alley, public way or public place unless the trailer or semi-trailer is at all times while so parked attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semi-trailer in a normal manner upon the highway, street, alley, public way or public place. 
This Section shall not apply to trailers or semi-trailers while in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor shall it apply to any trailer or semi-trailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semi-trailer on that portion of the highway, street, alley, public way or public place ordinarily used for vehicular parking.  
ARTICLE XI - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Section 11. - Twenty Minute Parking. 
Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. 
(Amended by Ord. 2053, 6/14/83.)  
Section 11.2. - One Hour Parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Amended by Ord. 2053, 6/14/83.)  
Section 11.3. - Two Hour Parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(Amended by Ord. 2053, 6/14/83.)  
Section 11.4. - Parking Parallel on One-Way Streets. 
(a) Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(b)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic thereby.  
Section 11.5. - Diagonal Parking. 
On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except: 
(a)  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; 
(b)  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six (6) inches of said curb. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 11.4 of this ordinance shall be complied with.  
Section 11.6. - Parking Space Markings. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible.  
Section 11.7. - No Stopping Zones. 
The city traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is prohibited. 
During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no stopping zones.  
ARTICLE XII - STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 
 
Section 12. - Authority to Establish Loading Zones. 
(a) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district. 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(b)  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(c)  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
(d)  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones.  
Section 12.1. - Curb Markings to Indicate No Stopping and Parking Regulations. 
(a) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this ordinance, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth. 
1.  Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday(s and holidays) for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
3.  White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mall in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three (3) minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday(s and holidays) and except as follows: 
A.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
B.  When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
C.  When such is located at or in a recreational facility as defined in Section 2723 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Added by Ord. 2148, 6/24/86.) 
4.  When the city traffic engineer as authorized under this ordinance has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
Section 12.2. Effect of Permission to Load or Unload. (a) Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.  
Section 12.3. - Standing for Loading or Unloading Only. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 12.2.  
Section 12.4. - Standing in Passenger Loading Zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 12.2.  
Section 12.5. - Standing in Any Alley. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley.  
Section 12.6. - Coach Zones to be Established. 
(a) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(b)  Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.  
ARTICLE XV - TRAINS 
 
Section 15. - Railway Gates. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.  
Section 15.1. - Trains not to Block Crossings. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident.  
ARTICLE XVI - SPECIAL SPEED ZONES 
 
Section 16.3. - Regulation of Speed by Traffic Signals. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - DATUM PLANE 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - City datum plane. 
The official bench mark or datum monument within the city shall be the top of that certain boat spike head, set in the top of a cement concrete monument, flush with the surface of the ground, 3.3 feet northerly and 2.3 feet westerly of that certain pump house of the city located in the northeasterly corner of the city park on the southerly side of Mildred Street and the westerly side of Tyler Avenue, the location of the spike head being more particularly described as follows: A point in Lot "A" of Tract No. 10623 in the city of El Monte, county of Los Angeles, state of California, as per map recorded in Book 164, pages 15 and 16 of Maps in the office of the County Recorder of such county, distant southerly 44.50 feet, along a line drawn at right angles from a point in the northerly line of Lot "C" of Tract No. 10623, such northerly line being the centerline of Mildred Street, fifty (50) feet wide, the last mentioned point being distant westerly measured along the northerly line and easterly prolongation thereof 128.90 feet from the intersection of the easterly prolongation of such northerly line with the centerline of Tyler Avenue, formerly Tyler Street, eighty (80) feet wide, as shown upon map of Tract No. 10623; and the elevation of such official bench mark is established as 271.444 feet above sea level, or the city datum plane. 
(Prior code § 7100)  
Chapter 12.07 - PARADES AND BLOCK PARTIES 
Sections: 
 
12.07.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings stated in this section: 
"Applicant" means any person who applies for a parade or block party permit pursuant to this chapter. 
"Block party" means any organized function or activity designed to utilize an entire street or streets for a specific purpose. 
"City" and "city of El Monte" both mean the city of El Monte, California, a municipal corporation located in the county of Los Angeles. 
"City Council" means the five (5) member legislative body of the city of El Monte, as defined under Chapter 2.04 (City Council) of Title 2 (Administration and Personnel) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Expressive activity" means conduct, the sole or principal object of which is the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or auditory means of opinion, views or ideas. Expressive activity includes, but is not limited to, public oratory and the noncommercial distribution of literature. 
"License and Treasury Division" means the License and Treasury Division of the El Monte Administrative Services Department located at El Monte City Hall East, 11333 Valley Boulevard, El Monte, California 91731. 
"Parade" means any parade, march, procession, ceremony, exhibition, or pageant of any kind, consisting of people, animals or vehicles or combination thereof, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations and controls. 
"Permit Committee" means the El Monte Permit Committee organized pursuant to Section 5.12.010 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Permittee" means any person who has been issued a parade permit pursuant to this chapter. 
"Person" means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the activity of a parade or block party without a parade or block party permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.030 - Application for permit. 
A.  Any person desiring to conduct a parade or block party shall apply to the Permit Committee for a permit at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the proposed parade or block party. The City Manager or designee may, for good cause shown, consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade or block party which is filed less than thirty (30) days prior to the date such parade or block party is to be conducted. The application for such permit shall be on a form provided by the Permit Committee, shall be verified, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct a parade or block party; 
2.  If the parade or block party is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the responsible officer of such organization; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the parade or block party chairman, or the individual(s) otherwise responsible for the supervision of the parade or block party (such individual(s) shall be present during the entire parade or block party); 
4.  The date upon which the parade or block party is to be held; 
5.  The proposed starting time for such parade or block party and its proposed ending time; 
6.  The proposed route to be traveled, including the starting point and termination point; 
7.  The estimated number of persons, animals, and vehicles taking part in the parade or block party, including the type of animals and a description of the vehicles; 
8.  Whether such parade or block party will occupy all or only one-half of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
9.  The location by streets to be utilized of assembly and disassembly points for the parade or block party; 
10.  The time at which units of the parade or block party will begin assembly in the assembly area; 
11.  The maximum length of the components of the parade or block party; 
12.  Such additional information as the Permit Committee shall deem reasonably necessary in determining whether or not the permit shall issue under the standards set forth below. 
B.  Parade or block party permit applications shall be considered filed when they are personally delivered along with all supporting materials to the License and Treasury Division. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.040 - Indemnity and insurance. 
A.  Each permit shall expressly provide that the permittee agrees to defend, protect, indemnify and hold free and harmless the city of El Monte, its officers, employees and agents from and against any and all claims, damages, expenses, loss or liability of any kind or nature whatsoever (including damage to property and injury to, or death of persons) arising out of, or resulting from the alleged acts or omissions of the permittee, its officers, agents or employees in connection with the permitted parade or block party; and the permit shall expressly provide that the permittee shall, at the permittee's own cost, risk and expense, defend any and all claims or legal actions that may be commenced or filed against the city of El Monte, its officers, employees or agents, and that the permittee shall pay any settlement entered into and shall satisfy any judgment that may be rendered against the city of El Monte, its officers, employees or agents as a result of the alleged acts or omissions of the permittee or the permittee's officers, agents or employees in connection with the uses, events or activities authorized under the parade or block party permit. 
B.  As a condition precedent to the issuance of a parade or block party permit, the applicant shall procure general liability insurance from an insurance carrier licensed to do business in the state of California and having a financing rating in Best's Insurance Guide of at least "B." Such insurance shall provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with the parade or block party. Such insurance shall be in the amount of at least two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit, and shall name the city of El Monte and its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. Also, such insurance shall be primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to the city of El Monte and shall include a severability of interest (cross-liability) clause. Evidence in the form of certificates of insurance and endorsements shall be submitted to the Permit Committee upon the submission of the parade or block party permit application. Such insurance shall be maintained and effective at least until the completion of the parade or block party. 
C.  If the Permit Committee finds, after consultation with the city's Risk Manager, that a particular parade or block party does not present a substantial or significant public liability or property damage exposure for the city of El Monte as proposed or that the parade or block party does not present a substantial or significant public liability or property damage exposure for the city of El Monte with the addition of certain mitigating conditions, the Permit Committee may give a written waiver of the insurance requirements of this section. 
D.  The insurance requirement set forth under this section shall not be construed to apply to parades or block parties involving expressive activity which enjoys protection under the United States or California constitutions, except that such parades or block parties shall be required to either: (1) agree to indemnify, protect, defend and hold harmless the city of El Monte, its officers and employees against all claims, damages, expenses, loss or liability of any kind or nature whatsoever arising out of, or resulting from, the alleged acts or omissions of the permittee, its officers, agents or employees in connection with the permitted parade or block party; (2) agree to redesign and/or reschedule the parade or block party as proposed to respond to specific risks, hazards and dangers to the public health and safety identified by the Permit Committee as being reasonably foreseeable consequences of the permitted parade or block party; or (3) provide insurance coverage, as required by subsection B of this section. 
E.  A claim for exclusion and alternative treatment under subsection D of this section shall be filed with and at the same time as an application for a parade or block party permit, and an agreement or proof of insurance, as applicable, shall be provided prior to permit issuance. The Permit Committee may require such proof and documentation as it may deem reasonably necessary to verify the constitutionally protected status of the parade or block party and the applicability of subsection D of this section. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.050 - Notification. 
Upon receipt of the application, the Permit Committee shall transmit notice and a copy of such application to the following: 
A.  The City Manager; 
B.  The Chief of Police; 
C.  The Fire Chief of Los Angeles County or his or her designee; 
D.  The Code Enforcement Supervisor for the city of El Monte; 
E.  The Deputy City Manager for Community Services; 
F.  The Public Works Maintenance Division; 
G.  The City Engineer; and 
H.  Any public transportation and/or emergency service provider potentially affected by the closure of public streets. 
Each of the foregoing may review and provide a written report to the Permit Committee within five (5) business days after the filing of the parade or block party permit application. Immediately upon the grant of a permit, the Permit Committee shall transmit a copy thereof to each of the departments and organizations in this section. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.060 - Issuance of permit. 
A.  The Permit Committee (or, in the case of an appeal, the City Council, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, whichever the case may be) shall issue a permit for a parade or block party upon a finding that: 
1.  The conduct of the parade or block party will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to its route; 
2.  The conduct of the parade or block party will not require a diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the rest of the city; 
3.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the parade or block party or at assembly points of the parade or block party will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas in the vicinity of the parade or block party, its assembly area or other areas of the city; 
4.  The conduct of the parade or block party will not unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire or ambulances responding to emergency calls; 
5.  The conduct of the parade or block party is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
6.  The parade or block party is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
7.  The parade or block party is not proposed for a time and location for which another parade or block party permit or other traffic-generating event has been previously issued; 
8.  The parade or block party is not proposed for a time and location so close in time and/or location in relation to another permitted parade or block party or traffic-generating event as to cause undue traffic congestion or unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas in the vicinity of the proposed parade or block party and the other parade or block party or traffic-generating event; 
9.  The area proposed for the parade or block party or for the set-up and dispersal of the parade or block party is capable of physically accommodating the estimated number of parade or block party participants, as reflected in the application submitted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter; 
10.  The conduct of the parade or block party will not unduly obstruct or interfere with any construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place upon or contiguous to any portion of the proposed route. 
B.  The Permit Committee (or, in the case of an appeal, the City Council, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, whichever the case may be) shall deny an application for a parade or block party permit where: 
1.  The Permit Committee, the City Council, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee: (a) makes any finding(s) contrary to the findings required for approval under subsection A of this section, and (b) further finds that such negative findings cannot be sufficiently mitigated by the addition of supplemental conditions; or 
2.  The information contained in the parade or block party permit application is found to be false in any material respect. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.070 - Notice of decision. 
A.  The Permit Committee shall render its decision to approve or deny a parade or block party permit application within fifteen (15) calendar days after the filing of such application. 
B.  Unless the applicant, or the applicant's representative, is present at the Permit Committee meeting in which the Permit Committee's decision is rendered, the Permit Committee shall notify the applicant of its decision by certified mail, return receipt requested and by facsimile, provided the applicant has provided the Permit Committee with a fax number. The presence of the applicant or a designated representative of the applicant at the meeting in which the Permit Committee's decision is rendered shall constitute actual notice of the decision. Where mailed notice and, if possible, fax notice, is to be given, such notice shall be deposited in the mail and faxed to the applicant within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the decision is rendered. 
C.  If a parade or block party permit application is approved as proposed or is approved subject to conditions, the applicant shall acknowledge acceptance by filing a written notice of acceptance and by countersigning the permit where indicated. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.080 - Alternative date, time or route. 
A.  If a parade or block party permit application is denied because the proposed date, time and/or route is found by the Permit Committee to conflict with any of the approval requirements set forth under Section 12.07.060 of this chapter, the Permit Committee may suggest an alternative date(s), time(s), or route(s) and such other conditions found to mitigate any other negative findings of the Permit Committee. 
B.  If the applicant wishes to accept an alternative proposal, the applicant shall file a notice of acceptance with the Permit Committee within eight (8) business days (excluding Fridays) after the Permit Committee's decision to deny the application is rendered. Once the applicant has filed a notice of acceptance; countersigned the permit where indicated; and otherwise complied with any other requirements of this chapter, the permit shall be issued. 
C.  If a notice of acceptance is not filed within the time period provided or if the applicant appeals the Permit Committee's denial, the applicant shall be deemed to have rejected the alternative proposal suggested by the Permit Committee. The Permit Committee's denial of the application shall, thereafter, constitute the Permit Committee's final disposition of the matter. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.090 - Appeals. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the Permit Committee's approval or denial of a parade or block party permit application may appeal such decision to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal. Such notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within eight (8) business days (excluding Fridays) from the date of the Permit Committee's decision. A hearing on the appeal shall be conducted at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting held not less than seventy-two (72) hours from the filing date of the notice of appeal. Regular meetings of the City Council are scheduled in accordance with Section 2.04.010 of the El Monte Municipal Code, usually the first and third Tuesday of each month. Notices of appeal and all other supporting materials shall be filed in person with the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  If the appeal relates to a Permit Committee approval, the notice of appeal shall identify with reasonable specificity those findings and/or permit conditions objected to and the reasons for the objections. If the appeal relates to a Permit Committee denial, the appeal shall identify those findings of the Permit Committee objected to and state the reasons for the objections. 
C.  At the hearing on the appeal, the City Council shall hear oral and written testimony, including the oral and written testimony of the appellant; receive and consider any relevant information, testimony and documents; and act on the appeal. The City Council shall issue a permit for the parade or block party as proposed if it makes the same findings as are otherwise required of the Permit Committee under Section 12.07.060 of this chapter. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
D.  If there is insufficient time for a timely filed appeal to be heard by the City Council prior to the proposed date of a parade or block party, the applicant may, at its option, make a written request that the City Clerk schedule the appeal before the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall hold a hearing on the appeal no later than the second business day after the filing of the appeal, and shall render his or her decision no later than the next business day after hearing the appeal. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall issue a permit for the parade or block party if he or she makes the same findings otherwise required of the Permit Committee under Section 12.07.060 of this chapter. If the appeal is heard before the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, such decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.100 - Contents of permit. 
Each parade or block party permit issued shall specify the following information: 
A.  The date of the parade or block party; 
B.  The authorized parade route or block party; 
C.  The assembly area and the time of assembly; 
D.  The starting time and ending time of the parade procession or block party; 
E.  The estimated number of persons expected to participate in the parade or block party; 
F.  The minimum and maximum speeds to be maintained by vehicles in the parade or block party, if any; 
G.  The maximum length of components of the parade or block party in miles or fraction thereof; 
H.  The maximum interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade or block party; 
I.  The specific portions of streets that are to be maintained between units of the parade or block party; 
J.  The disassembly area and time therefore; 
K.  Such other information, as the issuing body shall find necessary for the enforcement of this chapter; 
L.  Such other standard conditions, as may be required under this chapter; 
M.  Such other additional conditions, as the issuing body finds necessary to mitigate any negative finding made under Section 12.07.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.110 - Conduct and duties of permittee. 
A.  Each permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms, conditions and provisions of the parade or block party permit and with all applicable laws of the state of California and the city of El Monte. Each permittee shall ensure that the person(s) in charge of the parade or block party (i.e., parade or block party officials) will at all times carry a copy of such permit on his or her person during the conduct of the parade or block party. 
B.  Each permittee shall designate one supervising official to be in overall charge of the parade or block party, and one official to be in charge of the parades or block parties' assembly area. The permittee shall also station one parade or block party official at each entrance of the assembly area, if applicable, and shall also assign at least one parade or block party official for every fifteen (15) parade or block party participants to oversee and direct the safe and orderly movement of the parade or block party procession. 
C.  If applicable, each permittee shall assign a minimum of two (2) parade or block party officials to the reviewing area to ensure that event units do not spend longer than two (2) minutes at this location. 
D.  Each permittee shall designate one parade or block party official to be in overall charge of the disassembly area. The permittee shall also station one parade or block party official at each entrance of the disassembly area, if applicable, and at least one parade or block party official for every fifteen (15) parade or block party participants to oversee and control the proper and safe disassembly of the parade or block party participants and any animals or vehicles participating in the parade or block party. 
E.  The permittee shall ensure that each designated parade or block party official is readily distinguishable through some visible means of identification. 
F.  The permittee shall ensure that each parade or block party official is provided with specific instructions describing their duties and responsibilities. 
G.  The permittee shall be responsible for ensuring that any and all vehicles in the parade or block party procession are operated in a safe manner consistent with operational and mechanical requirements of the California Vehicle Code ("CVC"). The use of altered suspensions, occupancy loads and/or modified power sources shall be prohibited. Approval of minor vehicle modifications may be sought and obtained from the appropriate public safety agency (e.g., the California Highway Patrol, the Los Angeles County Fire Department or the El Monte Police Department). 
H.  Any signs with supports shall have supports, which are made of wood, blunt at each end, not exceeding forty (40) inches in length, be one-fourth inch or less in thickness and two (2) inches or less in width. 
I.  Use of amplification devices shall be prohibited unless specifically allowed via conditions on the permit. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.120 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to funeral processions or to governmental agencies acting within the normal scope of their authorized functions. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.130 - Revocation of permit. 
A.  The Permit Committee shall revoke a permit authorizing a parade or block party if it finds that there are grounds for denying the permit, which were first disclosed or otherwise made known to the Permit Committee after issuance of the permit and such facts were not discoverable by the exercise of due diligence by the Permit Committee prior to the issuance of the permit. 
B.  The Permit Committee, the City Manager or the Chief of Police may revoke a permit authorizing an event if it is determined that the event is being conducted in violation of the terms of the permit or that event participants have violated any applicable law or regulation; provided, that this subsection shall not authorize the revocation of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others unless there are insufficient resources available to provide necessary police protection; and provided, further, that the Permit Committee shall not revoke a permit pursuant to this subsection unless and until it advises the permittee of such violation and provides a reasonable opportunity to correct such violation. 
C.  When the Permit Committee finds grounds to revoke a permit prior to the date of the parade or block party, it shall immediately serve a written notice of such decision on the permittee and shall provide copies of the notice to the City Manager, the City Attorney and all other city officials charged with carrying out any responsibilities under this chapter. However, where the Permit Committee, the City Manager or the Chief of Police learns of the facts justifying revocation within twenty-four (24) hours of the parade or block party, the decision to revoke the permit shall be announced at the site of the parade or block party. Thereafter, the Permit Committee shall deliver written notice of such action to the permittee, the City Manager and the City Attorney. 
D.  The permittee shall have a right to a hearing before the City Council at its first regularly scheduled meeting on or after the day following the filing of a notice appealing the revocation, provided that the parade or block party is scheduled at least forty-eight (48) hours after the notice of appeal is filed. The hearing on an appeal of a revocation shall be conducted in the same manner as an ordinary appeal under Section 12.07.090 of this chapter. 
E.  Any notification of action by the Permit Committee taken pursuant to this section, whether oral or written, shall describe with particularity the facts and reasons for the decision. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.140 - Emergency suspensions. 
The Permit Committee, City Manager or the Chief of Police shall temporarily suspend a parade or block party authorized by a permit whenever there is a fire or other life-threatening emergency that requires the parade or block party to be temporarily suspended to protect public safety. When an event is temporarily suspended pursuant to this section, the Permit Committee, City Manager or the Chief of Police shall notify in writing the permittee within twenty-four (24) hours after the suspension, describing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the suspension. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.150 - Interference. 
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or block party conducted under permit from the Permit Committee in violation of any terms of such permit, nor shall any person knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade or block party without the consent of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with the parades or block parties progress or orderly conduct. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.160 - Reimbursement of costs. 
A.  As a condition precedent to the issuance of a parade or block party permit, the permittee shall make a deposit in an amount designated by the Permit Committee with the city for the reimbursement of the estimated costs incurred by the city for traffic control and other functions related to the event. If the city's actual expenses should later prove to be more than the amount deposited, the difference shall be paid to the city by the permittee. If the city's actual expenses should prove to be less than the amount deposited, the excess of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. 
B.  The reimbursement requirement set forth under this section shall not be construed to apply to parades or block parties involving expressive activity which enjoys protection under the United States or California constitutions. A claim for exclusion under this section shall be filed with and at the same time as an application for a parade or block party permit. The Permit Committee may require such proof and documentation, as it may deem reasonably necessary to verify the constitutionally protected status of the parade or block party and the applicability of this section. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
12.07.170 - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a parade or block party permit by the permittee or any participant in a parade or block party is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2656 § 2 (part), 2005: Ord. 2632 § 2 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 12.08 - STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Improvements. 
No person shall make any improvement in any street, alley or city easement unless a permit from the City Engineer is first secured and unless the permit fees specified in this chapter are first paid to the city. The term "improvement" as used in this chapter means and includes the grading or regrading, the placing of base material in, and the paving or repaving of any street or alley; the construction or reconstruction of any sidewalk, driveway approach, curb, curb and gutter, alley gutter or cross-gutter; the planting of any tree; the installation or repair of any sanitary sewer line or appurtenant facilities; and the installation or repair of any storm drain line or appurtenant facilities. 
(Prior code § 7200)  
12.08.020 - Permits. 
Every permit granted by the City Engineer for the making of any such improvement shall be deemed to have been granted subject to the terms of this chapter and the permit therefor shall not be transferable. Before any such permit shall become effective for any purpose, there shall have been paid to the city the permit fees computed by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 12.08.030 of this chapter. Every such improvement shall be made under the direction of and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, and all such work shall, during its progress and on its completion, conform to the lines and levels which may from time to time be given by the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 7201)  
12.08.030 - Permit fees. 
To cover the cost of supervision by the City Engineering Department for the inspection of construction or reconstruction of any such improvement, the following permit fees shall be paid: 
A.  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first one hundred (100) lineal feet or fraction thereof of sidewalk and ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional one hundred (100) lineal feet or fraction thereof of sidewalk; 
B.  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first one hundred (100) lineal feet or fraction thereof of curb and gutter or either thereof, and ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional one hundred (100) lineal feet or fraction thereof of curb and gutter or either thereof; 
C.  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for each driveway approach; 
D.  For all other improvements, the permit fee shall be five (5) percent of the estimated cost of such improvements. The estimated cost of improvements shall be an amount approved by the City Engineer. In no event shall the minimum permit fee be less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Prior code § 7201.1)  
12.08.040 - Plan checking fees. 
To cover the cost of checking and approving construction plans for any such improvements submitted to the City Engineer for approval, a plan check charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per sheet shall be paid to the city. 
(Prior code § 7201.1.1)  
12.08.050 - Licensed contractor. 
Permits to make improvements in streets, alleys and easements will be issued only to contractors duly licensed therefor by the state. 
(Prior code § 7201.3)  
12.08.060 - Commencement of work. 
The City Engineer shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice in advance of the time of commencement of the work of making any such permitted improvements in order that an inspector may be assigned to inspect the same. In case the services of such City Engineer are required for laying out any portion of the work, forty-eight (48) hours' notice in advance shall be given to the City Engineer of the time when such services shall be required. No such work shall be commenced until after such notice has been given and the necessary engineering work completed. 
(Prior code § 7202)  
12.08.070 - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to cause such improvements made to be duly inspected and supervised during the progress of the work, and otherwise to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7203)  
12.08.080 - Plans, specifications and standards. 
All improvements constructed or installed for which a permit is required by this chapter shall be constructed or installed in accordance with plans signed by the City Engineer which conforms with the "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 1994 Edition" except as to Section 300-1.3.2(c) thereof which shall be amended to read as follows: 
 300-1.3.2(c) CONCRETE CURB, GUTTERS, CROSS GUTTERS, DRIVEWAYS AND ALLEY INTERSECTIONS. Concrete shall be removed to neatly sawed edges with saw cuts made to a minimum depth of 1 ½ inches. Concrete sidewalk or driveway to be removed, or replaced after a utility cut, shall be removed to the nearest construction joint, expansion joint, score line or edge. Curb and gutter to be removed shall be sawed to a depth of 1 ½ inches on a neat line at right angles to the curb face. 
(Prior code § 7209)  
12.08.090 - Concurrent improvement. 
A.  No structure shall hereafter be erected, nor shall any alteration of or addition to an existing structure hereafter made where the reasonable value of such alteration or addition, as determined by the Building Official for the purpose of establishing the applicable permit fee due under the Building, Plumbing and Electrical Codes, is one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more, unless concurrently with such construction, addition or alteration curbs and gutters, driveway approaches and sidewalks be constructed, and parkway trees be planted where the parkway area exceeds seven (7) feet in width, in accordance with the plans and specifications described in Section 12.08.080 adjacent to the entire width of the lot or parcel of property for which any such permit is issued, or unless all existing curbs and gutters, driveway approaches, sidewalks and parkway areas be made to conform to the plans and specifications described in Section 12.08.080 if they do not already so conform. Whenever parkway trees are required, the planting thereof shall be of the type and size and at the locations and in the manner specified by the Director of Public Works. Except as to property which abuts any select system street specified in Section 12.16.010 of this title or which abuts any portion of Denholm Street, on any portion of Parkway Drive, on the portion of Elliott Avenue southerly of Mountain View Road, on Meeker Avenue between Peck Road and Garvey Avenue, on Montecito Drive between Tyler Avenue and Peck Road, on Arden Way between Lower Azusa Road and Arden Drive, on Merced Avenue between Garvey Avenue and Rio Hondo Parkway, on Rio Hondo Parkway from Merced Avenue to Mildred Street, or on Mildred Street from Rio Hondo Parkway to Hoyt Avenue, sidewalks and parkway trees shall not be deemed to be required by this section with respect to any property classified in any residential zone if upon completion of the work covered by the permit for which application has been made, such property shall contain less than three (3) dwelling units. 
B.  Exception. Where the construction, alteration or addition consists solely of the installation or replacement of mechanical equipment, the provisions of the preceding section shall not apply. 
C.  Deposit. When in the opinion of the City Engineer the installation of curbs and gutters will create a drainage or maintenance problem if installed prior to the similar improvement of other properties in the immediate vicinity, property may be improved notwithstanding subsection A of this section if, prior to such improvement, there is deposited in cash with the city by or on behalf of the property owner the amount estimated by the City Engineer to pay the cost of driveway approach and curb and gutter installation at a future date. All sums thus deposited shall be used to defray the cost of such installation, and when thus installed the portion of such deposit exceeding the cost of such driveway approaches and curbs and gutters shall be refunded without interest to the person making the deposit. Any sums thus deposited and not used within ten (10) years after the date of such deposit shall, upon written request of the depositor, be returned without interest to the depositor. Whenever sidewalks are required to be constructed by subsection A of this section and curbs and gutters have been installed adjacent to the property for which sidewalks are thus required, all sidewalks required by said subsection A of this section shall be installed concurrent with the other improvement of the property. 
D.  Covenant in Lieu of Deposit. In lieu of making the deposits specified in subsection C of this section, the property owner may execute a covenant, in recordable form approved by the City Attorney, which covenant by its terms shall obligate such property owner, his heirs, successors and assigns, to construct all improvements required by subsection A of this section whenever fifty (50) percent of the front footage on the same side of the street within the same block has been similarly improved, or whenever the owners of more than sixty (60) percent of the front footage of the same block on the same side of the street have by written petition filed with the City Clerk requested the installation of such improvements. Any property owner who executes and files with the city a covenant pursuant to this section shall first satisfy the city that he or she is the owner of such property and that he or she has the full legal right to execute such a binding covenant. 
E.  In Dedication Area. When dedication is required by the provisions of Section 12.16.010 of this title, improvements existing in the street prior to its widening shall not be required to be reconstructed by the applicant when the street is widened. The cost of such reconstruction in the widened portion of the street shall be borne by the city. 
(Prior code §§ 7209.1—7209.4)  
12.08.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
If a person shall commence any work in a street, alley or easement for which a permit is required by this chapter before all required permits shall have been obtained, he or she shall pay, in addition to the permit fees required to be paid in accordance with Section 12.08.030, an additional penalty in an amount equal to the permit fee for the work which was unlawfully commenced. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty otherwise provided by this code or other law. 
(Prior code § 7201.2)  
Chapter 12.12 - STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Obstruction of streets. 
A.  No person shall place upon any street any vehicle, sign, boxes, goods, building materials or any other article except as expressly permitted by this chapter or by other sections of this code. 
B.  Except as expressly permitted by this chapter or by any section of this code, and except as to shade or ornamental trees planted or maintained in a parkway under authorization of the Director of Public Works, no person shall cause or permit any building, structure, sign, boxes, goods, building materials, refuse, or any portion of a tree, bush or plant to be or to remain in, on or above any public street or alley right-of-way. 
(Prior code §§ 3231—3231.1)  
Chapter 12.16 - SELECT SYSTEM STREETS 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Select system street as used in this chapter. 
The select system street shall mean the following streets: 
Alloway Street; 
Arden Drive, north of Valley Boulevard; 
Baldwin Avenue; 
Bryant Road between Peck Road and Tyler Avenue; 
Cedar Avenue between Lower Azusa Road and Bryant Road; 
Central Avenue, south of Garvey Avenue; 
Cogswell Road, between Garvey Avenue and Hemlock Street; 
Cypress Avenue, south of Bryant Road; 
Denholm Drive between Durfee Avenue and Parkway Drive; 
Durfee Avenue, south of Ramona Boulevard; 
Elliott Avenue between Mountain View Road and Parkway Drive; 
El Monte Avenue, north of Lower Azusa Road; 
Exline Street, west of Durfee Avenue; 
Garvey Avenue; 
Hemlock Street between Peck and Cogswell Road; 
Hoyt Avenue; 
Lambert Road between Tyler Avenue and Cogswell Road; 
Lansdale Street, east of Mountain View Road; 
Lower Azusa Road; 
Meeker Avenue, between Valley Boulevard and Peck Road; 
Merced Avenue, south of Garvey Avenue; 
Mountain View Road; 
Parkway Drive; 
Peck Road; 
Potrero Street, south of Garvey Avenue; 
Ramona Boulevard; 
Santa Anita Avenue; 
Stewart Street, east of Peck Road; 
Tyler Avenue; 
Valley Boulevard. 
(Prior code § 7210)  
12.16.020 - Select system street dedication. 
A.  Except as to lots in Zone R-1a, R-1b, R-1c or R-2, no building permit shall be issued for and no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or moved onto any lot which abuts a select system street unless right-of-way between such lot and the center of the select system street which abuts has been dedicated for the full width of such lot to the future property line as shown on the city zoning map Z-1 described in Section 17.30.020 of this code. 
B.  Exceptions. The maximum area of land required to be so dedicated shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of any such lot as the same was of record on July 1, 1967, in the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office. In no event shall such required dedication reduce the lot to a width of less than fifty (50) feet nor to an area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
C.  No dedication shall be required with respect to those portions of a lot occupied by a main building which was existing on July 1, 1967, unless the building permit applied for provides that such main building is to be removed prior to the occupancy of the building or structure for which the building permit was applied for. 
D.  Dedication shall not be required when the building permit is for any of the following construction: 
1.  One single-family dwelling with customary accessory buildings when erected on a vacant lot. 
2.  Additions and accessory buildings incidental to a residential building legally existing on the lot, provided no additional dwelling units or guest rooms are created. 
3.  Construction of additions and accessory buildings incidental to other than a residential building existing on the lot on July 1, 1967, for which the value of such construction on the building permit is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Prior code §§ 7210.1—7210.4)  
12.16.030 - Dedication procedure. 
Any person required to dedicate land by the provisions of this chapter shall make an irrevocable offer to dedicate such land for public street purposes in the form approved by the City Attorney properly executed by all parties of interest including beneficiaries and trustees in deeds of trust as shown by a current preliminary title report prepared by a title company and furnished at applicant's expense. Such offer shall, by its terms, be binding on the owner, his or her heirs, assigns or successors in interest, and shall continue in effect until such offer is rejected by the City Council. The offer shall be accompanied by tender of a grant deed to the city for street purposes which deed may be accepted at any time by the city. For purposes of this chapter, dedication shall be considered as satisfactorily assured when the offer to dedicate in the form approved by the City Attorney and accompanied by tender of grant deed as required by this section, has been accepted for recordation by the Director of Public Works. After such time the building permit applied for may be issued in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7210.5)  
12.16.040 - Computation of required yards. 
No building or structure shall be erected or moved onto any area required to be dedicated by this chapter, nor within any required front yard or required streetside sideyard measured from the front property line or streetside property sideline which would result from the dedication of property in accordance with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7210.6)  
Chapter 12.20 - EXCAVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Excavations. 
A.  No person shall make any excavation in or under the surface of any street for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel or for any other purpose, without first obtaining from the City Engineer a written permit to make such excavation and make a deposit to cover the cost of inspection of restoring such street to its original condition, all as hereinafter in this chapter provided. The person intending to make any such excavation shall file with the City Engineer a written application for a permit for such excavation, and shall pay to the City Engineer such sum or sums as are required by this chapter to be paid. Such application shall contain the name and residence or business address of the person making such application and shall state in detail the location and area of each excavation intended to be made. If required by the City Engineer, such application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of each proposed excavation, the purpose for which the same is to be used and such other details as said City Engineer may require to be shown upon such plat; provided however, that the filing of a plat shall not be required when excavations are made for service connections for the location of trouble in conduits or pipes or for making repairs thereto. If the City Engineer shall require a plat as hereinbefore mentioned, the plat shall be filed in the office of the said City Engineer as a public record. 
B.  No person shall make any excavation or install or maintain any tank, pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel in or under the surface of any street at any location other than that described in the application and shown on the plat filed by such person as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code §§ 7300, 7301)  
12.20.020 - Pavement restoration fees. 
Any person intending to make any excavation in any street shall pay to the City Engineer the following sums for work performed by the city pursuant to such excavation: 
A.  Asphalt pavement: $4.00 per sq. ft. with a $250.00 minimum; 
B.  Concrete pavement and driveway approach: $6.50 per sq. ft. with a $300.00 minimum; 
C.  Curb and gutter: $25.00 per lineal ft. with a $250.00 minimum; 
D.  Sidewalk: $5.00 per sq. ft. with a $200.00 minimum. 
(Prior code § 7302)  
12.20.030 - Utility companies. 
Utility companies making street excavations in streets may elect to replace such excavations with permanent paving using their own employees or contractor or they may pay to the city the appropriate pavement restoration fees and the city will place the required permanent paving. If a utility company elects to replace their excavations with permanent paving, such permanent paving shall be in place within forty-five (45) calendar days from the time that temporary paving is placed over the excavation. If the temporary paving is not replaced with permanent paving within this required time, the city will remove the temporary paving and place the required permanent paving. If the city performs this work, the applicable utility company will be billed for the work performed in accordance with the appropriate pavement restoration fees plus an administrative charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each excavation cut where permanent paving is required to be placed by the city. Payment for any charge required by this section will be billed in accordance with Section 12.20.230. 
(Prior code § 7302.1)  
12.20.040 - Permit. 
Upon the presentation to said City Engineer the payment of all sums required under any of the provisions of this chapter and upon the filing of a plat when such plat is required, the City Engineer shall issue a written permit to make such excavation, provided, however, that whenever a permit for any excavation in any street has been issued the City Engineer may refuse to issue other permits for excavations in such street until such excavation is made and refilled, if in his judgment such additional excavations shall interfere with the public use of such street for travel thereon. Said permit shall specify the person to whom the same is issued; the street and the particular portion or portions thereof to be excavated and the extent of such excavation. No permit shall be transferable. Every such permit for any "house," "lateral connections" or "public utility service connection or facility" excavations mentioned in this chapter shall become and be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within ten (10) days from the date of issuance of such permit and the work to be done pursuant thereto shall be done and the excavation refilled in the manner required by this chapter within three (3) working days after the work of such excavation is commenced and nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to allow a longer period of time therefor. No "house," "lateral connection" or "public utility connection or facility" excavation shall be left unfilled over Saturday and Sunday. Every such permit for any "main" excavation mentioned in this chapter shall become and be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of the issuance of such permit, and the work to be done pursuant thereto shall be done and the excavation refilled in the manner required by this chapter within five (5) working days for the first one hundred (100) feet of said "main" excavation and one additional working day for each additional one hundred (100) feet or fraction thereof of said "main" excavation after the work has commenced. Provided, however, that the City Engineer may grant a reasonable extension of time for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for the performance of such work and the refilling of any excavation under this chapter whenever the City Engineer shall deem that good cause exists therefor and provided further, that if any such extension of time be granted such permit shall become and be void unless all such work shall be done and such excavation refilled in the manner required by this chapter prior to the expiration of such extension of time. 
(Prior code § 7303)  
12.20.050 - Refilling. 
All excavations shall be refilled in the following manner: In streets which have not been macadamized, paved or oiled and where water is available and where in the opinion of said City Engineer the material excavated can be properly settled by the use of water, the trench may be filled to within not less than one foot from the surface and shall then be thoroughly flooded and the material settled by poling or with shovels. If required by the City Engineer the filling shall be settled at not more than two (2) intermediate depths to be determined by the said City Engineer before it is brought to within one foot of the surface. After the material has been allowed to settle, the trench shall be filled to the surface again, flooded and then allowed to settle. It shall then be filled four (4) inches above the surface of the street and all trenches running parallel to the street shall be thoroughly rolled by the person refilling such excavation, with a roller weighing not less than five (5) tons. If the street where such excavation is made has been macadamized, paved or oiled the macadam, pavement or oiled surface removed therefrom shall be kept separate from all other materials. The trench shall be refilled in the manner hereinbefore provided, two (2) inches above the surface of such macadamized, paved or oiled street, and all trenches running parallel to the street shall then be rolled by the person refilling such excavation with a roller weighing not less than five (5) tons. When such refilling is in proper condition, temporary pavement shall be placed as set forth in Section 12.20.060. In all cases where a pipe not exceeding four (4) inches in diameter is placed in an excavation, all the material removed from such excavation shall be replaced therein. Any surplus material not required in refilling trenches shall be promptly removed by the person to whom the permit was granted. 
(Prior code § 7304)  
12.20.060 - Temporary pavement. 
All excavations for "main," "house," "lateral connection" or "public utility service connection or facility," after having been properly refilled as hereinabove specified, shall be paved with a minimum of two (2) inches of temporary asphalt paving material. 
(Prior code § 7305)  
12.20.070 - Tunnels. 
Tunnels will be permitted in all excavations in any street between curbs, provided, however, that all such tunnels shall be entirely cut down before same are refilled. No tunnel shall exceed four (4) feet in length. 
(Prior code § 7306)  
12.20.080 - Trenching. 
Except as allowed by the City Engineer, the trench for any "main" excavation at the end of each day shall not be excavated more than one hundred (100) feet in advance of "main" laying, nor left unfilled for more than one hundred (100) feet where main has been laid. No "house," "lateral connection" or "public utility service connection or facility" excavation shall be left unfilled over Saturday and Sunday. 
(Prior code § 7307)  
12.20.090 - Crossings. 
It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation in any street to maintain safe crossings for vehicle traffic at all street intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. If any such excavation is made across any street at least one safe crossing shall be maintained at all times for vehicles and pedestrians. Free access must be provided to all fire hydrants. All excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the public traffic. All gutters shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the further depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersection street an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. 
(Prior code § 7308)  
12.20.100 - Lights. 
It shall also be the duty of every person making an excavation in any street to place and maintain barriers at each end of such excavation and at such places as may be necessary along the excavation to prevent accidents, and also to place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation and at distances of not less than one hundred (100) feet along the line thereof, from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled and the excavation has been paved with a temporary asphalt paving material, and no person shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any requirement contained in this section. 
(Prior code § 7309)  
12.20.110 - Funds. 
That the City Engineer shall deposit at least once each week in the City Treasury all moneys received by him or her pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7310)  
12.20.120 - Depths. 
No person shall install any service pipe or main pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure, except manholes, culverts and catch basins, in any street at a distance of less than two (2) feet below the established grade of such public street, or if the grade has not been established, less than two (2) feet below the surface of such street. 
(Prior code § 7311)  
12.20.130 - Maps. 
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes, conduits, ducts, or tunnels under the surface of any street for supplying or conveying gas, electricity, water, steam, heat, ammonia, or oil, in, to or from the city or to or from its inhabitants or for any other person, shall within ninety (90) days after the adoption of this code file in the office of the City Engineer a map or set of maps each drawn to a scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to one inch, which said map or set of maps shall show in detail the exact location, size, description and date of installation, if known, of all mains, laterals, services and service pipes, and all valves, pressure regulators, traps, manholes, handholes, transformer chambers, or other appliances installed beneath the surface of the streets in the city belonging to, used by or under the control of such person or in which such person has any interest. Every such person shall also file, within fifteen (15) days after the first day of January of each and every year after January 1, 1950, a corrected map or set of maps, each drawn to a scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to one inch, showing the complete installation of all such pipes and other appliances, including all installations made during the previous year, to and including the last day of such year. Each such map shall be accompanied by an affidavit endorsed thereon, subscribed and sworn to by such person or by a member of such firm or by the president or secretary of such corporation, to the effect that the same correctly exhibits the details required by this chapter to be shown thereon. 
(Prior code § 7312)  
12.20.140 - Abandonment. 
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located under the surface of any street has been abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein, shall within thirty (30) days after such abandonment file in the office of the City Engineer a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure so abandoned. Each map or set of maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall show in detail the location of all such pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels or other structures abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps. 
(Prior code § 7313)  
12.20.150 - Failure to file maps. 
No person shall fail to file any map or set of maps at the time and in all respects as required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7314)  
12.20.160 - Inspection, supervision, permit and fees. 
A.  The conduct of excavation work or activity in public streets and rights-of-way shall be subject to the inspection, supervision and approval of the City Engineer in accordance with this chapter. The City Engineer may designate an inspector for the supervision of such work. No person may conduct such work without first obtaining a permit as issued therefor by the city in conformance with this chapter. 
B.  Each person who proposes to conduct excavation activity in public streets and rights-of-way shall pay a fee to the city in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each one hundred (100) linear feet of excavation or portion thereof. 
C.  If the excavation activity is on a major arterial or connector identified below, the person proposing to do the work shall pay a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each one hundred (100) of linear feet of excavation or portion thereof. The arterials and collectors to which this fee applies are: 
1.  Valley Boulevard; 
2.  Santa Anita Avenue; 
3.  Tyler Avenue; 
4.  Ramona Boulevard; 
5.  Arden Drive; 
6.  Maxson Road; 
7.  Cogswell Road; 
8.  Garvey Avenue; 
9.  Baldwin Avenue; 
10.  Peck Road; 
11.  Durfee Avenue; 
12.  Lower Azusa Road. 
D.  Each person proposing to make an excavation consisting of one or a series of intermittent excavations shall pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee per excavation provided the cut does not exceed ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet area. 
E.  Each person proposing to make an excavation for any "house," "lateral connection" or "public utility service connection or facility" shall also pay to the city a separate fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) for inspection, supervision and approval of each such excavation by the city. 
F.  Each person proposing to make an excavation for any "main" when such excavation consists of a series of intermittent excavations shall pay to the city a separate fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) for the first such intermittent excavation and a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional such intermittent excavation on the same main for the inspection, supervision and approval of each such excavation by the city. 
(Ord. 2508 § 1, 1999: prior code § 7315)  
12.20.170 - Exhibition of permit. 
Any person engaged in the making or refilling of any excavation in any street shall at all times while such work is in progress keep at the place where such excavation is located the original permit, or the number thereof, for such excavation and must on demand exhibit the same to the City Engineer or to any of his or her deputies or to any police officer. 
(Prior code § 7316)  
12.20.180 - Filing of plans. 
Before a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a detailed plan of such excavation, showing the proposed location thereof, and all appurtenances thereto, shall be or shall have been filed in the office of the City Engineer. 
(Prior code § 7317)  
12.20.190 - Special permits. 
The Council may in its discretion issue permits for the making of excavations under alleys for the purpose of installing and maintaining oil storage tanks as provided by this section. Every tank installed, constructed or maintained pursuant to any such permit shall be so constructed that the top thereof shall not be less than four (4) feet below the surface of the alley in which such tank is so installed, constructed or maintained. No such tank shall be of a size sufficient to contain more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons and shall be used only for the storage of crude petroleum or distillate for use as fuel in buildings. Any such permit may be revoked at any time by said Council and upon such revocation any tank so installed, constructed or maintained pursuant to any such permit shall be at once removed from such alley by the person owning, having charge of or using such tank. If at any time it becomes necessary to construct any sewer, water main, or other pipe line or conduit, or other public work of any kind along or in such alley, such tank or such portion thereof as may be necessary shall be removed so as to permit the construction of such sewer, water main, or other pipe line or conduit or other public work. If any such permit be revoked, or if it becomes necessary to remove any such tank or any portion thereof for the purpose of allowing the construction of a sewer, water main, or other pipe line or conduit or other public work, and the person owning, having charge of, or using such tank shall fail, refuse or neglect to remove the same within twenty (20) days after service of notice by the City Engineer so to do, the said City Engineer shall remove such tank, or so much thereof as may be necessary for such purpose, and the city shall have the right to recover the cost of such removal from such person. Before any such permit is issued a detailed plan of such tank and all appurtenances thereto shall be filed in the office of the City Engineer, which plan shall show the proposed location of such tank in such alley. 
(Prior code § 7318)  
12.20.200 - Exceptions. 
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any work done or to be done along, in or upon any street pursuant to any law of the state providing for the improvement thereof, provided however, that the provisions contained in the sections of this chapter pertaining to crossings and lights shall apply to all such work and to all excavations to be made along, in or upon any street. 
(Prior code § 7319)  
12.20.210 - Emergency work. 
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe or conduit in any street, alley or other public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of said city are closed; provided that the person making such excavation shall obtain a permit therefor within four (4) hours after the offices of the said city are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. 
(Prior code § 7320)  
12.20.220 - Rights of use. 
Every permit for an excavation in or under the surface of any street shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that portion of such street for any purpose for which such street may lawfully be used. 
(Prior code § 7321)  
12.20.230 - Payment by utilities. 
All permit fees required by this chapter may, with the consent of the City Engineer, be paid by public utilities companies upon presentation of statement from the city at the end of each month instead of at the time of issuance of such permits. 
(Prior code § 7322)  
12.20.240 - Restriction on excavations. 
A.  Prohibition. No excavation and no cutting shall be permitted in any public right-of-way for five (5) years after completion of surface paving or repaving. 
B.  Exceptions. The City Engineer may in its discretion grant exceptions to the prohibition of this section under the following circumstances. In granting exceptions, the City Engineer may lengthen and enlarge the required area of restoration up to the full-width of the roadway, and impose other reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate to protect the public interest. 
1.  Emergency that threatens life or serious property damage. 
2.  Work that is mandated by a federal, state, or county agency. 
3.  No other reasonable means of providing service exists, as determined by the City Engineer. 
4.  Other situation the City Engineer deems to be in the public interest. 
C.  The City Engineer shall develop and maintain a Master Pavement List and make it available at the Engineering Division public counter and the City Clerk's Office. The Master Pavement List shall identify those segments of public right-of-way that are subject to the prohibition of this Section 12.20.240 and the corresponding starting and ending dates of the prohibition. 
D.  Rules and procedures. The City Engineer may promulgate pavement restoration guidelines and other rules and procedures that are consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2873, § 2, 2-2-2016)  
Chapter 12.24 - PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Creation. 
There is hereby established a parking and business improvement area within the meaning of, and pursuant to, the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1965 (Streets and Highways Code Sections 36000 through 36081). For purposes of this chapter, the term "said area" shall be a reference to the parking and business improvement area established under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6700) 
(Ord. No. 2915, § 3, 6-20-2017)  
12.24.020 - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of said area are specifically described as follows: 
All that property in the city of El Monte, county of Los Angeles, state of California, bounded and described as follows: 
 Beginning at the point of intersection of the southwesterly line of the Southern Pacific Railroad Right of Way, 100 feet wide, with the northwesterly line of Cypress Avenue (formerly Central Avenue), 60 feet wide; thence southwesterly along said northwesterly line to the northerly line of the Pacific Electric Railroad Right of Way, 80 feet wide; thence westerly along said northerly line to the southwesterly line of Monte Vista Street; thence southeasterly along said southwesterly line of Monte Vista Street to the northeasterly line of Valley Boulevard; thence southwesterly in a direct line to a point that is south 41º 41' 04? west 15.00 feet and south 47º 56' 47? east 15.00 feet and south 42º 03' 14? west 9.90 feet from the most northerly point of the northwesterly line of that certain parcel of land, described in Indenture to the City of El Monte, recorded in Book 6703 Page 151 of Official Records in the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office; thence south 42º 03' 14? west 44.25 feet to the northerly line of Ramona Boulevard (formerly Columbia Street); thence westerly along said northerly line of Ramona Boulevard 130.46 feet; thence northerly in a direct line to a point in the southerly line of said Pacific Electric Railroad Right of Way that is westerly 45.59 feet from the southwesterly line of Valley Boulevard (formerly San Bernardino Road and 66 feet wide); thence easterly along said last mentioned southerly line to the southwesterly line of Valley Boulevard, 76 feet wide; thence northwesterly along said last mentioned southwesterly line to the northerly line of said Pacific Electric Railroad Right of Way as it existed on October 18, 1965; thence westerly along said last mentioned northerly line to the southeasterly line of the Rio Hondo Flood Control Channel Right of Way; thence northeasterly along said last mentioned southeasterly line to a line parallel with and southwesterly 50 feet at right angles to the center line of the Southern Pacific Railroad Right of Way, 100 feet wide; thence southeasterly along said parallel line to said point of beginning. 
(Prior code § 6701)  
12.24.030 - Delineation. 
For purposes of graphic illustration, the boundaries of said area as described in Section 12.24.020 are delineated on the following map of the area: 
MAP DELINEATING BOUNDARIES OF PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA 
  
(Prior code § 6701.1)  
12.24.040 - Uses and purpose. 
The uses and purpose to which the additional revenue emanating from said area pursuant to and as a result of this chapter shall be put are any one or more of the following: 
A.  The acquisition, construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the area; 
B.  Decoration of any public place in the area; 
C.  Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public places in the area; 
D.  Furnishing of music in any public place in the area; 
E.  The general promotion of retail trade activities in the area. 
F.  Administrative, management or other operational costs and expenditures (collectively, "administrative costs") incurred by any vendor with whom the city contracts with for the purposes of implementing, managing and/or overseeing the various activities and undertakings for which tax revenues generated under this chapter may be used. The foregoing notwithstanding, effective as of October 1, 2017, no more than twenty (20) percent of any single disbursement of tax revenues by the city may be applied to pay for administrative costs, without the prior approval of the City Council by resolution. For purposes of this subsection F., the term "vendor" means any person, organization or other legal entity. 
1.  Disbursements of tax revenues generated pursuant to this chapter to a vendor shall be made pursuant to the terms of a written agreement approved by the City Council or as part of a City Council-approved program for the disbursement and receipt of such funds. Disbursements under the terms of any such written agreement or program shall be made on a quarterly basis, except as otherwise authorized by the City Council under the terms of the written agreement or the City Council approved program. 
2.  As a condition to the receipt of tax revenue funds generated under this chapter, a vendor shall, at a minimum, be required to provide the city with a quarterly report detailing the vendors use of all tax revenues disbursed to the vendor during the prior fiscal year quarter, including, but not limited to, all tax revenues used to pay administrative costs. Each quarterly report shall include supporting documentation, including but not limited to true and correct copies of receipts, invoices and such other records and information as the city may request. The city also reserves the right to inspect all records of the vendor to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
3.  Each quarterly report shall be due to the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the end of each fiscal year quarter. If the deadline for submitting a quarterly report falls on a day in which the city is closed for business, the deadline shall be extended to the next city business day. For purposes of this chapter the term "fiscal year" means the period of time commencing on July 1 of a calendar year and ending on June 30 of the calendar year immediately following. 
4.  In the event a vendor to timely submit any quarterly report required under this subsection F. or fail to include records or information required by the city or this chapter, the city, may immediately suspend any pending or future disbursements of tax revenues, immediately terminate any written agreement with the vendor and/or immediately exclude the vendor from participation in any city-approved program. City shall also be entitled to pursue such other remedies as may be available to it under the terms of its written agreement or the city-approved program or at law or in equity, including the recovery of any tax revenues use for any purpose not authorized under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6702) 
(Ord. No. 2915, § 4, 6-20-2017)  
12.24.050 - Business classification and rate of levy. 
The initial rate of increase or the additional levy of the general business license tax imposed upon the businesses within said area and the breakdown by class of business, are fixed, levied, determined and established as follows: 
Classification of Businesses 	Amount of Additional Tax 
Class A: 	No additional tax 
Automobile dealers 	
Business of manufacturing 	
Business of selling at wholesale only 	
Carnivals 	
Kleig lights 	
Shoe shine stands 	
Occupants of commercial office buildings, except occupants who conduct retail sales therein, when the owners of the office building or the property on which it is located provide parking as required by the El Monte Municipal Code for the occupants and maintain the parking at their own expense. 	
Class B: 	An additional tax equal to one-half of the city business license tax otherwise applicable to such business. 
Pawnbrokers 	
Public dances—Annual 	
Class C: 	An additional tax equal to the city business license tax applicable to each such respective business. 
Amusement machines and music boxes 	
Circuses, sideshows 	
Custom dressmaking and sewing 	
Entertainment 	
Ice sales 	
Medical, dental and optical laboratories 	
Newspaper and magazine agencies 	
Pool rooms 	
Public dance—Per day 	
Retail sale of newspapers, magazines, tobacco and items incidental thereto 	
Undertaking establishments 	
Vending machines 	
Class D: 	An additional tax in an amount two (2) times the city business license tax applicable to each such respective business. 
Advertising agencies 	
Attorneys 	
Apartment houses, hotels, motels, motor courts, tourist courts, trailer parks, bungalow courts, auto camps 	
Automotive repair 	
Barbershops 	
Business equipment consultants (No retail sales) 	
Chiropractors 	
Commercial office supplies 	
Concessionaires operating wholly within an establishment charging a fee for admission. 	
Contractors and engineers 	
Medical and dental doctors 	
Optometrists 	
Printers 	
Psychoanalysts 	
Public bookkeeping, accounting 	
Public utilities, including gas, electrical and telephone 	
Real estate brokers 	
Repair and service only of radios and television sets 	
Veterinarians 	
All other professions licensed and regulated by the state and not specifically otherwise classified herein 	
Class E: 	An additional tax in an amount equal to three (3) times the city business license tax applicable to each such respective business. 
Cleaners and cleaners' agents and agencies 	
Closing out sales 	
Laundromats and self-service laundries and cleaners 	
Laundry agents and agencies 	
Rental agents and agencies 	
Rental leasing companies 	
Retail drugs and pharmacies (State License C and D only) 	
Shoe repair shops 	
Tailors, tailor shops, clothing alterations 	
Class F: 	An additional tax in an amount equal to four (4) times the city business license tax applicable to each such respective business. 
Beauty parlors and shops 	
Newspaper publishers 	
Service stations 	
Theatres 	
Class G: 	An additional tax in an amount equal to five (5) times the city business license tax applicable to each such respective business. 
All other businesses not included within class A, B, C, D, E or F, including the following: 	
Bars 	
Cafes 	
Massage parlors 1 	
Personal and real estate loan agents and agencies 	
Photo studios 	
Restaurants 	
Retail drugs and pharmacies (State License A and B only) 	
Secondhand dealers and stores 	
Trade schools 	
Trading stamp agencies and redemption centers 	
All other businesses involving retail sales, professional and semi-professional occupations 	
 
1. For purposes of this Section 12.24.050, the term "massage parlor" shall mean and refer to all businesses which fall within the definition of the term "massage establishment" as set forth under Chapter 5.56 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6703) 
(Ord. No. 2779, § 5, 10-18-2011)  
12.24.060 - Multiple businesses. 
Whenever a business is susceptible to more than one business classification under Title 5 of this code or under any of the classifications hereinabove set forth, the highest business license applicable under the El Monte Municipal Code and the classification hereinbefore set forth which produces the greatest additional tax shall be used and applied to such business. 
(Prior code § 6704)  
12.24.070 - Payment of tax. 
The additional tax levied shall be due and payable and shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner that the business license tax imposed by Chapter 5.08 of this title is due and payable in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6705)  
12.24.080 - Applicability of general business license provisions. 
The provisions of Sections 5.04.040, 5.04.080A and B, 5.04.100A—C and E, 5.04.110, 5.04.140, 5.04.170, 5.04.180, 5.04.190, 5.04.200, 5.40.220, 5.04.230, 5.04.240, 5.04.250, 5.04.260, 5.04.330, 5.04.350, 5.04.360 and 5.04.370 of this code shall be applicable to all businesses in the area described in Section 12.24.020 and subject to the additional levy of the general business license tax imposed by Section 12.24.050. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 6705.2)  
12.24.090 - Payment prerequisite to license. 
No business license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the additional business license tax imposed by this chapter is paid together with the business license payable pursuant to and imposed by Chapter 5.08 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6706)  
12.24.100 - Refusal to pay tax. 
No person shall fail or refuse to pay the additional business license tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6707)  
Chapter 12.28 - ENCROACHMENTS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
12.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Advertising bench" means and includes any bench on or upon which any kind of advertising matter is placed, maintained or displayed. 
"Bench" means and includes any seat, bench or other device located upon public property for the use or accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation. 
"Encroachment" means and includes, but is not limited to, any bench, signs, or newsrack, or any other real or personal property installed, constructed, placed, or maintained on public property for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes in any twenty-four (24) hour period without a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this code or permission granted by the City Council. 
"Newsrack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale or distribution of any written or printed material, including but not limited to newspapers, news periodicals or other news publications. 
"Public property" means and includes property owned by the city and property in, on, upon or across which the city has an easement for public street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, planting, access, ingress, egress or other purposes. 
"Sign" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 17.12.030 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of Chapter 17 (Zoning) of the El Monte Municipal Code and includes all subcategories of signs set forth under Chapter 17.12. 
(Ord. 2701 § 4, 2007; prior code §§ 6351.1—6351.1.7) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 25, 9-24-2013)  
12.28.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall construct, install, maintain or otherwise place an encroachment upon any public street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way without first obtaining an encroachment permit issued pursuant to Chapter 5.12. (Business Permits Generally) or Section 8.20.267 (Trash Bin Encroachment Permits) of the El Monte Municipal Code, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. 2701 § 5, 2007: prior code § 6351.2)  
12.28.030 - Multiple locations—Permit required. 
An application for an encroachment permit required by this chapter may include all locations for which a permit is requested, and a single permit may be issued for all locations specified in such application and approved pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.1)  
12.28.040 - Permit application. 
In addition to the requirements specified in or imposed under Chapter 5.12 of this code, each application for a permit for any public property encroachment shall be accompanied by an application fee specified in Section 5.12.270(A)(11) of this code and shall contain the information specified in subsections A through E of this section. Section 12.28.280 of this code shall govern news rack applications. 
A.  Owner. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, who must be the owner of the encroachment for which application is made; 
B.  Location. The proposed location of each encroachment for which permit application is made, together with the name and address of the owner or tenant of the property abutting such proposed location; 
C.  Description. A description of the encroachment showing its type, general dimensions and materials of construction; 
D.  Advertising. A statement by the applicant whether or not it is proposed to place advertising matter in the encroachment for which permit application is made, and the general nature of the advertising matter proposed to be placed thereon. All advertising matter placed on the encroachments shall at all times be subject to the continuing approval of the permit committee; 
E.  Compliance. A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with the provisions of this chapter, that he or she approves the same, and if granted the permit applied for that he or she will observe, abide by and be bound by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001: prior code §§ 6351.2.4—6351.2.4.5)  
12.28.050 - Permit—Governmental exemption. 
No fee shall be payable pursuant to this chapter for any application filed by any agency or instrumentality of government. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.5)  
12.28.060 - Permit—Issuance. 
A.  No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the applicant shall post and maintain with the Clerk a surety bond or policy of public liability insurance, approved by the City Attorney and conditioned as hereinafter provided. 
B.  Exception. Unless expressly required by the encroachment permit, no bond or insurance shall be required for any street sign. 
C.  Noncancellable. Such bond or policy shall likewise provide that it is noncancellable upon less than fifteen (15) days' notice in writing to the Clerk. 
D.  Insurance shall be provided which names the city as an additional insured in accordance with Section 3.24.160 of this code. 
E.  In addition to the above-mentioned requirements, the applicant shall comply with the provisions of Section 12.28.450 of this code. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, no encroachment permit may be issued under this chapter for the display, placement or posting of any sign upon any public street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way where such display, placement or posting is prohibited under Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of the El Monte Municipal Code or otherwise inconsistent with the restrictions and requirements of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation). Similarly, no encroachment permit may be issued under this chapter authorizing any person to attach or affix a sign to any "public utilities, equipment and improvements" as defined under Section 17.12.030 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) where the attachment or affixing of such a sign would is prohibited or otherwise inconsistent with the restrictions and requirements set forth under Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation). 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001; prior code §§ 6351.2.9—6351.2.9.4) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 26, 9-24-2013)  
12.28.070 - Permit—Temporary. 
Each permit issued under this chapter shall be temporary only, and shall be revocable by the Permit Committee if applicant fails to install the encroachment at the location specified within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.13)  
12.28.080 - Permit—Revocable for cause. 
A.  Every permit issued under this chapter may, at any time, without notice to the permittee, be revoked by the Council upon its determination, based on evidence presented, that the encroachment constitutes a public hazard by reason of its location or maintenance, that any provision of this chapter or any condition imposed in the issuance of the permit is being violated, or that any ground exists upon which the permit would have or should have been denied in the first instance. The provisions of this section are cumulative to any similar provisions specified in Chapter 5.12 of this code. 
B.  Revocable upon Complaint. Every permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Council after a hearing held upon at least three (3) days' notice in writing to the permittee mailed to his address shown upon his or her permit application, upon the complaint or objection made by the owner, tenant or person in lawful possession of the property abutting the location upon which an encroachment is placed or maintained under this chapter. The provisions of this section are cumulative to any similar provisions specified in Chapter 5.12 of this code. 
C.  Refund on Revocation. Upon revocation of a permit under the preceding subsection B of this section, the applicable business license fee shall be refunded at the rate of one-fourth of the annual license fee for each full quarter of a year remaining of the annual license period. Upon revocation for cause, such refund shall be made as the Council shall determine in its order of revocation. All orders and determinations made by the Council pursuant to this chapter shall be final. 
(Prior code §§ 6351.2.14—6351.2.16)  
12.28.090 - Permit—Reapplication. 
If an encroachment permit is denied or revoked as to a given location, no permit for an encroachment of the same type may be issued with respect to such location unless the Council determines that the conditions warranting or the reasons for such denial or revocation no longer exist or do not pertain to the encroachment for which a permit is sought. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.17)  
12.28.100 - Permit—Nontransferable. 
Whenever an encroachment for which a permit has been issued is sold, or title or control thereof is transferred, a new permit must be obtained by the new owner for its location and maintenance. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.18)  
12.28.110 - Encroachments—Location. 
No person shall locate or maintain any obstruction at a point or location other than that specified in the permit for each encroachment issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.21)  
12.28.120 - Encroachments—Removal. 
A.  Every encroachment constructed, placed, installed or maintained without a permit when required by this code or so constructed, placed, installed or maintained in violation of any condition of such permit may be removed by the Street Superintendent. Any trash bin which constitutes a public hazard may be removed by the Street Superintendent. 
B.  After the revocation of any permit, or upon the expiration of any permit without a renewal thereof, the Street Superintendent may, and if so ordered by the Council shall, remove and store such encroachment for which a permit was revoked, or thus expired. 
C.  Recovery. A permittee may recover an encroachment thus removed and stored if, within sixty (60) days after the removal, he or she pays to the city the actual cost of such removal and storage. In the event that actual costs may not be readily determined, reasonable costs shall be as set by the Public Works Director. 
D.  Disposition. After sixty (60) days since such removal, the Street Superintendent may sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of such encroachment at his or her discretion. 
E.  Subsections A—D of this section shall not apply to news rack applications. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001; prior code §§ 6351.2.22—6351.2.23.2)  
12.28.130 - Remedies cumulative. 
All acts done pursuant to Section 12.28.120 shall be at the sole risk of the permittee or owner of the encroachment. Remedies thus specified shall be in addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by law or provided for the violation of any section of this chapter or code. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.24)  
12.28.140 - Exemption. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any encroachment placed upon public property by or at the direction of the City Council, or by or at the direction of any officer or employee of the city in the course of his or her employment and in the proper discharge of his or her duties or any encroachment permitted or authorized by any other provision of this code. 
B.  Other Encroachments. Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the City Council from permitting any other type of encroachment to be placed upon public property upon such terms and conditions as the City Council may prescribe in each instance. 
(Prior code §§ 6352—6352.1)  
Article II. - Street Benches 
 
12.28.150 - Street benches—Number limited. 
Permits shall not be issued for more than two (2) benches at any one location. Should more than two (2) applications be made for benches at the same location, such applications shall be given priority in the order of their receipt. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.12)  
12.28.160 - Street benches—New location. 
If an officially established bus stop or passenger loading zone is changed from a location for which a permit for a bench has been issued under this chapter, such bench may be removed to the new location of such bus stop or passenger loading zone. In such case an amended permit application shall be filed and processed in the same manner as initial permit applications, but no additional or further fees shall be payable by reason of such amended permit application. 
(Prior code § 6351.2.19)  
12.28.170 - Street benches—Advertising matter. 
A.  No advertising matter or sign whatever shall be displayed upon any bench except the front and rear surfaces of the backrest and not more than seventy-five (75) percent of each surface shall be so used. No pictures or representations in irregular contour shall appear on any such bench. 
B.  No advertising or sign on any bench shall display the words, "Stop," "Look," "Drive-In," "Danger," or any word, phrase, symbol or character calculated to interfere with, mislead or distract traffic. 
C.  Maintenance. Each permittee shall maintain each bench at all times in a safe condition, and shall inspect each bench at frequent intervals. 
D.  Sidewalk Location. No bench shall be placed or maintained upon any sidewalk less than eighteen (18) inches nor more than thirty (30) inches from the face of the adjacent curb, and other than parallel with such curb. 
E.  Dimensions. No bench shall be more than forty-two (42) inches high nor more than two (2) feet, six (6) inches wide, nor more than seven (7) feet long overall. 
F.  Identification. Each bench shall have displayed thereon, in a conspicuous place and manner, the name of the permittee and the permit number assigned thereto. 
(Prior code §§ 6351.2.20—6351.2.20.5)  
Article III. - Newsracks 
 
12.28.240 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, health, safety and aesthetics by regulating the placement, design, appearance and servicing of publication vending machines so as to protect against: 
A.  The dangers of impairing the vision of motorists and pedestrians, particularly small children; 
B.  The dangers of unreasonably impeding the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; 
C.  Poorly designed and constructed publication vending machines which are inadequately secured to the underlying foundation, being knocked down, thrown and windblown into public streets; 
D.  Neglectful servicing of publication vending machines resulting in a visual blight on the city's parkways and sidewalks and detracting from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements; 
E.  Unduly restricting access to the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mail boxes or locations used for public transportation services; or 
F.  Unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage suits. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.250 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include singular number words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
"Affected party" means any person having any proprietary interest in any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device. 
"Applicant" or "permittee" means the publisher or distributor, or custodian, clerk, employee, officer or other person who, as an agent of the publisher or distributor, has applied for (applicant) or been granted (permittee) a placement permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Blinder rack" means a device attached to a publication vending machine which shields from view the lower two-thirds of any material contained in the publication vending machine. 
"Director" means the City Engineer of the city of El Monte, or the official exercising the duties of that office as it now exists, or the designee of such official. 
"Harmful matter" or "material harmful to minors" means matter, taken as a whole, which, to the average person applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient interest and is matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational or scientific value for minors. 
"Minor" means any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Parkway" means that area between the property line and the curb of any street and, where there is no curb, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway which is not a sidewalk and is not open to vehicular traffic. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership or other local entity. 
"Publication vending machine" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed or used for printed material, including, but not limited to, newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records. 
"Roadway" means that portion of the street generally used for public use for public vehicular traffic. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of the street provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
"Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.260 - Location restrictions. 
A.  No person shall install, use or maintain any publication news rack, newsstand and or similar device which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway or which rests wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway. 
B.  No person shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine on public property in the city without following the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Subject to amortization periods set forth in Section 12.28.475, newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall only be installed or maintained on those portions of Garvey Avenue, Peck Road, Valley Boulevard, and Durfee Avenue within the mixed/multiuse (MMU), C-2/2D, C-3/3D, or C-4/4C zones. News racks, newsstands and/or similar devices are prohibited in all other zones and portions of Garvey Avenue, Peck Road, Valley Boulevard, and Durfee Avenue. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2896, §§ 2, 3, 10-4-2016)  
12.28.270 - Compliance with business permit and business licensing requirements. 
A.  No person shall install or maintain any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device which rests, either wholly or in part, upon, along or over any sidewalk without first complying with the business licensing provisions of Chapter 5.04, the business permit requirements of Chapter 5.12, and other requirements set out in this chapter. 
B.  The director may revoke the registration of any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device if the Director, in his or her sole discretion, determines such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device must be removed from its approved location in order to effectuate or accommodate any change in the street, sidewalk, roadway or parkway, in any public or private infrastructure contained therein, including, without limitation, any utility lines, or in or on any building or structure in the vicinity of such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.280 - Placement permit—Application and issuance. 
A.  Every application for a permit must contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant; 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device if different from the applicant; 
3.  The exact location of each news rack, newsstand and/or similar device to be installed and/or maintained. A plan drawn to a scale of one inch=five (5) feet will be required. Said plan will show the location of the proposed news racks along with all existing and proposed improvements. A vicinity map should be submitted with this plan; 
4.  Applicants who are publishers or owners of adjudicated publications and newspapers of general circulation pursuant to of the California Government Code and who wish to be considered as such for purposes of this chapter, must provide proof of such adjudication at the time of application for registration; 
5.  Any additional information which is necessary for the proper disposition of the application in accordance with the regulations of this chapter; 
6.  Written statement agreeing to hold harmless and indemnify the city for any damage or injury arising out of the placement, installation and/or maintenance of any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device on any sidewalk in accordance with Section 12.28.450; 
7.  Applicant shall comply with the insurance requirements of Section 3.24.160 of this code except for subsection (B) therein. Subject to further review by the Permit Committee, applicant shall be insured in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The city, its officers, employees, agents, and volunteers shall be included on the certificate of insurance as additionally insured; 
8.  A complete description of the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device to be installed, including manufacturer name, model, dimensions, color, and any unusual, distinctive or unique attributes; 
9.  Photographs, depiction, rendering or drawing of the actual or similar news rack, newsstand and/or similar device to be installed is required; and 
10.  Payment of permit fees and licensing fees pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Title 5 of this code. 
B.  If the proposed news rack, newsstand and/or similar device will contain harmful matter, the application shall contain a separate written attachment containing all of the following: 
1.  A summary of Penal Code Sections 313.1 and 313.4 as they exist on the date of registration; 
2.  A detailed description of how the news rack, newsstand and/or similar devise will be "adult supervised" and what precautions will be put into place to prevent access to the news rack, newsstand and/or similar devise by minors; 
3.  If tokens or special cards will be used to access the news rack, newsstand and/or similar devise, a list of locations at which the tokens or cards will be made available. The list of locations shall include the name of the residence or business location, the address, the telephone number and the name of the contact person at the location who shall be responsible for selling, distributing or giving out the tokens or cards; and 
4.  Any application that complies with the requirements of this code and any other applicable county, state or federal law shall be approved. 
C.  The Permit Committee shall review all applications for registration and shall determine whether the applicant complies with all requirements and standards as set forth in this chapter. The Permit Committee may approve or authorize an alternative location for placement of the proposed news rack, newsstand and/or similar device consistent with the requirements set forth in this chapter. The Permit Committee shall be guided therein solely by the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter and Section 5.12.120. Such application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one location is proposed by the applicant, and in any event, when denial is solely as to location, the applicant shall be without prejudice to amend such application to state a different location or locations. 
D.  Within sixty (60) days after submission, the Permit Committee shall either approve the application and issue the requested permit, or, if the application does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter, shall reject such application and shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons for such rejection. 
E.  In lieu of filing a new application for the purpose of deleting an approved location, adding a new location, or changing an approved location to another location, an applicant may file an amendment to an application theretofore filed by him or her during the current calendar year, specifying an approved location to be deleted, the new location to be added, or an approved location to be changed to another location; no additional fee shall be required for the filing of any such amendment, but such amendment shall be processed and subject to approval the same as a new application. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.290 - Permittee's obligation. 
No permittee shall locate or maintain any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device at a point or location other than that specified within the permit for the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.300 - Installation without permit. 
A.  Installation Without Permit. Any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device installed without a permit or which fails to comply with the provisions of Section 12.28.370 shall be removed by the news rack operator, distributor or entity responsible for the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device. The Director may order the removal and storage of any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device at the offender's expense if the offender fails to do so within ten (10) calendar days after notice. Where the owner and/or address of the owner is unknown, tagging of the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall constitute sufficient notice of violation. 
B.  Notice of Violation. Notice shall indicate the nature of the violation; date of tagging; deadline for removal of news rack; notice of impoundment; location of impounded news rack; and deadline for recovery of impounded news rack(s). 
C.  Claim of Compliance Required. No affected party who is cited under this section may request a hearing unless said party claims full compliance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
D.  Request for Hearing. An affected party which makes a claim under subsection (C) of this section may file a written request with the Director for the purpose of demonstrating that a violation, as specified on the tag attached to a machine pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, has not in fact occurred. Said written request must be filed with the Director no later than eight (8) days after the date indicated by the tag and any failure to comply with this deadline shall terminate the affected party's right to request a hearing. 
E.  Hearing. Within five (5) working days after the date on which the request for hearing is received, the Director shall set a hearing date and shall notify the affected party by first-class mail of the date, time and place of said hearing. Unless agreed to otherwise, said hearing shall occur not less than five (5) and not more than ten (10) working days from the date of the mailing of the notice. 
F.  Appeal. The appeals process shall be governed by Section 12.28.430 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.310 - Design and construction requirements. 
Any publication vending machine which rests in whole or in part upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Each machine shall have display case(s) with a plastic window; 
B.  Each machine shall be constructed of sturdy, corrosive-resistant metallic materials. The mount, cabinet, tray, body, and frame of a news rack, newsstand and/or similar devices shall not be constructed of any plastic materials unless otherwise authorized under subsection P of this section; 
C.  No news rack, newsstand and/or similar device, itself, shall exceed fifty-four (54) inches in height, thirty (30) inches in width and twenty (20) inches in thickness; 
D.  News racks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be painted olive green unless otherwise authorized under subsection P of this section; 
E.  New racks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be limited to the following models and makes unless otherwise authorized under subsection P of this section: 
1.  National Newsvend Models: 
a.  M-20, M-30, M-33, M-34 and M-84; 
b.  F-153, F-301, F-841, and F-901; 
c.  M-10 is permitted so long as the news rack is mounted and securely fastened to the ground or permanent structure in a manner as prescribed by the Permit Committee; 
2.  K-Jack Engineering Models: 
a.  KJ-50, KJ-100, and KJ-150 are permitted so long as these news rack are mounted and securely fastened to the ground or permanent structure in a manner as prescribed by the Permit Committee; 
b.  KJ-825, KJ-850, KJ-860, KJ-940, and KJ-2000; 
F.  News racks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall only be permitted on a sidewalk and shall be placed such that they are along the edge of the sidewalk which is furthest away from the curb and facing the street, parallel to the street or adjacent to the wall of a building, parallel to the wall, facing the street. News racks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be placed no more than three (3) inches from the edge of the sidewalk or wall of a building; 
G.  All news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices must be mounted and/or securely fastened to the ground or permanent structure in a manner as prescribed by the Permit Committee; 
H.  Unless expressly authorized in writing by the Director, no news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the owner of the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device, including, but not limited to, other news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices owned by another, nor shall any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device be chained or attached to loose objects including, but not limited to, bricks, rocks, cinder blocks, pipes or other such objects; 
I.  Stacking of news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be permitted to the extent allowed in accordance with the size and weight restrictions provided in this chapter, however, in no event shall the aggregate height of such stacked news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices exceed sixty-four (64) inches above the surface or platform upon which they rest; 
J.  No news rack, newsstand and/or similar device, or group of attached news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices allowed under subsections I of this section, shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred seventy-five (175) pounds when empty; 
K.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C of this section, no news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within five (5) feet of any marked crosswalk; 
2.  Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; 
3.  Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant, fire or police call box, or other emergency facility; 
4.  Within five (5) feet of any driveway; 
5.  Within five (5) feet ahead of, and twenty-five (25) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop; 
6.  Within six (6) feet of any bus bench or bus shelter; 
7.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet; 
8.  Within three (3) feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees or three (3) feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes; 
9.  At any location whereby the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device obstructs motorists' vision of regulatory or advisory traffic and parking signage or any other location whereby the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device obstructs motorists' vision of pedestrians; 
10.  Within fifty (50) feet of any other news rack, newsstand and/or similar device containing the same publication except where there are less than four (4) news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices in any location, in which case additional/duplicate news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices containing the same publication shall be permitted for each available space up to the maximum of four (4) at any one location. The Permit Committee in assigning such additional/duplicate news rack, newsstand and/or similar device at a location where there exists more than one news rack, newsstand and/or similar device containing the same publication, shall be guided solely by the criteria set forth under subsection N of this section; 
11.  Within five (5) feet of any underground or above ground utility structure; 
12.  Where placement unreasonably interferes with the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, mailboxes or government use; 
13.  Within five hundred (500) feet of an elementary school, junior high or high school site; 
14.  With five (5) feet of a curb painted blue, pursuant to the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 21458; 
15.  Where placement unreasonably obstructs, interferes with or impedes access to or the use of abutting property, including, but not limited to, residences, places of business or legally parked or stopped vehicles; and 
16.  No news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall interfere with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. 
L.  No news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper, publication or news periodical sold therein. 
M.  Each news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. 
N.  No more than four (4) news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be located on any street within a space of three hundred fifty (350) feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided. As used herein, "block" shall mean one side of a street between two (2) consecutive intersecting streets. In determining which news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be authorized, the Permit Committee shall be guided solely by the following criteria: 
1.  First priority shall be given to applicants who are able to provide verification that they are publishers or owners of adjudicated publications or newspapers of general circulation in Los Angeles County, pursuant to the procedures set forth in the California Government Code; 
2.  Second priority shall be given to news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five (5) or more days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation in Los Angeles County; 
3.  Third priority shall be given to news racks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five (5) days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation in Los Angeles County; and 
4.  Fourth priority shall be all other publications. In the event there is a conflict between publications within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient news rack spaces remaining to accommodate the conflicting publications after first filling as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria set forth above, then the Permit Committee shall assign the remaining space or spaces at random by placing the names of all applicants for the remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall be drawn, one at a time, until the particular location's remaining number of unfilled news rack, newsstand and/or similar device spaces have been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public and conducted at a time and date designated by the Director. 
O.  Each machine shall conform to the Director's as well as the Permit Committee's rules and regulations, including, without limitation, reasonable design standards. 
P.  In the event that applicant does not comply with the standards set out in subsections B, D and E of this section, the Director may recommend issuance of a permit to the Permit Committee. The director shall base his or her decision on health, safety, public welfare, and aesthetic considerations. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2896, §§ 4, 5, 10-4-2016)  
12.28.320 - Display of harmful matter in newsracks—Blinder racks, adult supervision. 
A.  Any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device which contains material harmful to minors shall have a blinder rack attached in such a manner as to shield from view the lower two-thirds of the material contained in the machine from viewing by the public in accordance with Penal Code Section 313.1(d). 
B.  Harmful matter shall not be exhibited, displayed, sold or offered for sale in any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device located in a public place without adult supervision, other than a public place from which minors are excluded. A news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be considered to be "supervised by an adult" if permittee has complied with the provisions of Penal Code Section 313.1(h). 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.330 - Placement Standards—Generally. 
Any publication vending machine which rests in whole or in part upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.340 - Placement standards. 
No publication vending machine shall be bolted or otherwise attached to property not owned by the owner of such machine or to any permanently fixed object, unless the owner of such machine has first obtained the written permission of the owner of the object to which the machine is affixed in the public right-of-way during the term of the permit; provided, that the installation if made in conformance with the terms of the permit and of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.350 - Placement standards—Joining machines together. 
News racks, newsstands and/or other similar device may not be bolted or welded to one another. Applicant may only join its news racks, newsstands and/or other similar devices through the use multiple place permanent mounts or similar mount designs. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.360 - Maintenance standards. 
Any publication vending machine which rests in whole or in part upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  No machine shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes, except that each machine may have attached to it a single sign panel no wider than the machine and no more than twelve inches in height upon which advertising or other information may be displayed; 
B.  Each machine shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times; 
C.  No machine shall be abandoned. A machine shall be deemed to be abandoned when no new publication has been placed in such machine for a period of sixty (60) days; and 
D.  Any person removing or owner of vending machine causing the removal of a machine shall be responsible of any resulting condition, including the filling in of any holes left in the sidewalk or parkway, such work to be done to the satisfaction of the Director at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.370 - Information to be attached to machines. 
Every person or owner of vending machine who places or maintains a publication vending machine, which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway within the city, shall have his/her or its name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen by anyone using the machine, and shall comply fully with the provisions of Section 17570 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California as it existed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section or as it may be hereafter amended. The permit shall not be effective unless permittee complies with this section. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.380 - Notice of violations. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 12.28.300 of this chapter, any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be tagged with a notice of violation and a letter shall be sent to the last known address of the owner stating the violation, date of tagging, notice of intention to remove the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device if the violation is not corrected within thirty (30) calendar days, and procedure for obtaining a pre-removal hearing before the Director, if desired. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, in the case of violations of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachments of news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices to property other than that owned by the owner, to fixed objects, to each other, or upon unauthorized locations, the Director may, at his or her discretion, and as an alternative to tagging, move, align or remove such attachment, or otherwise relocate such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device in order to restore it to a legal condition. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.390 - Impounding of news racks, newsstands and/or similar devices. 
The Director shall cause any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device to be impounded: 
A.  Where its installation, use or maintenance immediately endangers the safety of persons or property and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; or 
B.  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; or 
C.  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably interferes with the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mail boxes or other objects legally permitted and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; or 
D.  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably obstructs, interferes with or impedes access to or the use of abutting property, including, but not limited to, residences, places of business or legally parked or stopped vehicles and it is impractical to move such machine to another legally permitted location; or 
E.  Where its installation, use or maintenance unreasonably interferes with the public's use and enjoyment of any publicly owned property or facility; or 
F.  When such machine has been abandoned; or 
G.  When such machine does not have a name, address and telephone number affixed in a place where such information may be easily seen and the owner of such publication vending machine cannot be otherwise identified; or 
H.  Where an owner of the vending machine has been noticed of the violation and the owner has neither caused the violation specified on said tag to be corrected nor requested a hearing within the time permitted; or 
I.  When a hearing and appeal, if filed, have resulted in a final determination that the violation(s) specified on the tag attached to such machine has in fact occurred and the custodian has failed to correct such violation(s) within ten (10) working days from the date of said determination; or 
J.  When a request for a hearing or appeal has been withdrawn. Such request shall be deemed withdrawn either by actual withdrawal or by failure of the owner to fully comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.400 - Impoundment. 
A.  If any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device has been tagged and remains in violation of the provisions stated on the tag past the thirty (30) calendar day correction period, and no hearing has been requested, said news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be removed by the Director or his or her designate and stored in a place of the Director's choosing. The Director shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a "notice of removal" to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device and the procedure for obtaining a post removal hearing before the Director, if desired. Any such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty-five (45) calendar days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage costs therefor. Upon failure of the owner to claim such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device and to pay the reasonable charges within forty-five (45) calendar days after the mailing of the written notice of removal, such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in and the city shall have the right to dispose of the impounded machine and its contents at its discretion. 
B.  Any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device in violation of the provisions of this chapter, which violation creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, which violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device, may be summarily removed and stored in a place of the Director's choosing so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The Director shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a "notice of removal" to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device, and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director, if desired. Any such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device removed and stored pursuant to this section shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty-five (45) calendar days after the mailing of written notice of removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage. 
C.  The Director may allow replacement of a news rack, newsstand and/or similar device removed pursuant to this section but only upon demonstration by the owner, and to the satisfaction of the Director, that the replacement will no longer cause, create or otherwise promote the reoccurrence of the danger for which the news rack, newsstand and/or similar device was removed and that the owner has complied with all requirements of this chapter. This authority shall be exercised within the discretion of the Director and shall not be construed to be mandatory. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.410 - Return of the impounded machine. 
A.  Any news racks, newsstands and/or other similar device, together with its contents, which has been impounded, shall be returned to the custodian: 
1.  Upon receipt of an impound fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00); or 
2.  Upon a determination, after a hearing by the Director, that the publication vending machine should not have been impounded and should be returned to the owner; or 
3.  Upon a decision by the Hearing Officer, on appeal pursuant to Section 12.28.430 of this chapter, that the publication vending machine should not have been impounded. 
B.  In the event a hearing has not been requested pursuant to Section 12.28.420 of this chapter within the time permitted following impoundment of any machine, an impound fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be imposed upon the owner of the vending machine. 
C.  In the event a hearing has not been requested pursuant to Section 12.28.420 of this chapter within the time permitted following impoundment of any machine and/or the appropriate impound fee has not been paid within forty-five (45) calendar days of impound or the hearing, as applicable, the impounded machine shall be considered abandoned and the city shall have the right to dispose of the impounded machine and its contents at its discretion. 
D.  Any permits issued to the owner shall be revoked upon impoundment of any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.420 - Hearings. 
A.  Request for Hearing. Except as provided in Section 12.28.300 of this chapter, any owner of a vending machine may file a written request with the Director for the purpose of demonstrating that a violation, as specified on the tag attached to a machine pursuant to Section 12.28.380 in this chapter, has not in fact occurred. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. Within five (5) working days after the date on which the request for hearing is received, the Director shall set a hearing date and shall notify the affected party by first-class mail of the date, time and place of said hearing. Unless agreed to otherwise, said hearing shall occur not less than five (5) and not more than ten (10) working days from the date of the mailing of the notice. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.430 - Appeal after hearing. 
A.  Any affected party aggrieved by a decision made by the Director under Sections 12.28.300 and 12.28.420 shall be appraised of their right to appeal to a Hearing Officer. 
B.  A letter of appeal that briefly states therein the basis for an appeal shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of notice of an adverse decision. 
C.  An appellant shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
D.  The Hearing Officer shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why the determination should not be upheld. In such case, the burden of proof shall rest upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial evidence to support the action taken. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a final and conclusive determination. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.440 - Penalties. 
Any person who knowingly, willingly or otherwise fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or who fails to bring any news rack, newsstand and/or similar device into compliance with any provision of this chapter, shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and any person convicted of such misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six months' imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.450 - Indemnification and release of liability. 
Every person who places or maintains a news rack, newsstand and/or similar device on a sidewalk in the city shall file a written statement with the Director whereby he or she agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any loss, liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use, or maintenance of such news rack, newsstand and/or similar device. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.460 - Authority of the Director to promulgate rules and regulations. 
The Director may promulgate rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, which he/she deems necessary to properly exercise his/her jurisdiction. All such rules and regulations shall be kept in the office of said Director and a copy thereof shall be furnished to any applicant upon request. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.470 - Authority of director to delegate duties. 
The Director may authorize any person or department in the employ of the city to assist or take over any of the duties or responsibilities assigned to the Director by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.28.475 - Amortization. 
A.  News racks, newsstands and/or similar devices lawfully permitted and placed as of the date of approval/second reading of Ordinance No. 2896 shall be made to conform with the street and zoning location restrictions set forth in Section 12.28.260 within eighteen (18) months after such date. 
B.  News racks, newsstands and/or similar devices lawfully permitted and placed as of the date of approval/second reading of this Ordinance No. 2896 shall be made to conform with the density restrictions set forth in Subsection N of Section 12.28.310 within twelve (12) months after such date. 
(Ord. No. 2896, § 6, 10-4-2016)  
12.28.480 - Applicability. 
A.  Effective immediately, the city may cause any news racks, newsstands and/or other similar devices to be impounded when such news racks, newsstands and/or other similar devices are installed and/or placed without a valid business permit and business license. 
B.  Effective February 1, 2002, no business permit and business license shall be reissued to any applicant for any news racks, newsstands and/or other similar device in the event that such news racks, newsstands and/or other similar device fails to comply with any and all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2538 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 12.32 - TRASHBIN ENCROACHMENT PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
12.32.010 - Trash bins. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed any trash bin as defined in Section 12.28.010 of this code in any city street, on any sidewalk, on any parkway, in any alley, or on any street shoulder area within the public right-of-way of a street or on any other public property in the city without first having obtained a permit to do so pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.32.020 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3231.2)  
12.32.020 - Trash bin encroachment permits. 
A.  No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any bin of any variety on any public street, sidewalk, parkway, alley, street shoulder or any other portion of the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this section. For purposes of this section, the aforementioned permit shall hereinafter be referred to as "trash bin encroachment permits." 
B.  Applications for a trash bin encroachment permit shall be submitted to the Environmental Services Division. Trash bin encroachment permits may only be issued in connection with: 
1.  Any covered project as defined under Section 8.20.260 of this chapter; 
2.  Renovation and repair projects performed at all varieties of premises (including but not limited to roof tear-offs); 
3.  Premises cleanouts (including but not limited to apartment cleanouts); 
4.  Warehouse cleanups; 
5.  Nuisance and/or weed abatement cleanups; and 
6.  Street/road maintenance cleanups. 
C.  As a standard condition to the issuance of a trash bin encroachment permit, any bin subject to such a permit shall be reflectorized and shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the bin owner/provider. In the event that any reasonably foreseeable risk of harm cannot be reasonably eliminated, the Environmental Services Division may deny an application for a trash bin encroachment permit. The Environmental Services Division may revoke any trash bin encroachment permit on the basis of the permittee's failure to comply with any conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 2701 §§ 2 (part), 3 (part), 2007: prior code § 3231.2.1)  
12.32.030 - Encroachment permit regulations. 
The Public Works Director may impose additional requirements on the applicant or require the placement of additional safety devices in, on or around any trash bin placed on public property in order to eliminate or mitigate any apparent risk of harm to persons or property. In the event that any apparent risk of harm cannot be reasonably eliminated or substantially mitigated, the Public Works Director may deny the application. A decision on each application shall be rendered by the Public Works Director within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the application. The Public Works Director may revoke any permit of which any condition or restriction is violated. 
(Prior code § 3231.2.2)  
12.32.040 - Appeal. 
The applicant or any interested person dissatisfied with a decision of the Public Works Director/Street Superintendent, or his or her designated representative, or aggrieved by the removal of any trash bin, may appeal in writing to the City Council by filing such written appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of notice of the decision of the Public Works Director/Street Superintendent or within ten (10) days of notice of removal. Each such appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall specify with particularity the ground or grounds upon which such appeal is based. The filing of an appeal pursuant hereto does not prohibit the Street Superintendent from removing any trash bin nor does it stay the revocation of any permit by the Public Works Director pending the hearing of such appeal by the City Council. The person filing an appeal may not place or maintain a trash bin encroachment without a valid and in effect permit to do so pending the hearing of the appeal by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 3231.2.3)  
12.32.050 - Appeal—Hearing by council. 
A.  Each appeal filed pursuant to Section 12.32.040 shall be heard by the City Council at its regular scheduled evening meeting held not less than fourteen (14) days after the filing of such appeal with the City Clerk; provided, however, that the City Council may continue the hearing on such appeal from time to time at its discretion. The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the Council hearing on any such appeal to the applicant, to the appellant if the appellant be other than the applicant, and to any other person who has in writing filed with the City Clerk a request for notice. 
B.  At the time for which hearing of any such appeal has thus been noticed, the City Council shall consider and review the application, the decision and/or recommendation of the Public Works Director/Street Superintendent and all other documents and material presented. In its decision on any such appeal the City Council may approve or disapprove in whole or in part the decision of the Public Works Director/Street Superintendent, may grant or deny the permit applied for, and may waive removal costs, storage costs and appeal filing fees if removal is found to be unwarranted. The Council in granting a permit may amend, add to or delete any or all of the conditions or restrictions imposed by the Public Works Director. The City Clerk shall mail to the applicant and appellant a copy of the Minutes of the City Council with reference to any such appeal within forty-eight (48) hours after the approval of such Council Minutes by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 3231.2.4)  
Chapter 12.36 - MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS 
Sections: 
 
12.36.010 - Municipal parking lots. 
The Director of Community Services may recommend to the City Council and the City Council shall indicate by resolution which City-owned parking lots shall be designated as municipal parking lots for the purpose of enforcement of parking restrictions pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 22519. Whenever the City Council so designates a municipal parking lot, it shall be posted with a sign or signs, as appropriate, giving notice thereof. Such designation shall be made by posting of a sign immediately adjacent to and visible from the entrance driveway of each municipal parking lot. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 3800)  
12.36.020 - Off-street parking. 
The city may, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit, restrict, or regulate the parking, stopping, or standing of vehicles on any off-street parking facility which it owns or operates. No such ordinance or resolution shall apply until signs giving notice thereof have been erected. Such signs shall contain the specific restriction(s), for example: no blocking of driveways, no double parking, no storage of vehicles, no consumption of alcoholic beverages in vehicles on municipal parking lots, park only in designated spaces, or, head-in parking only. 
(Prior code § 3801)  
12.36.030 - Enforcement of parking restrictions. 
Any person in violation of any of the provisions of Section 12.36.020, may be cited by any officer of the El Monte Police Department or designated civilian employee assigned to the Parking Control Authority of the Inspection Bureau, city of El Monte. 
(Prior code § 3802)  
12.36.040 - Removal of vehicles. 
Any sworn member of the El Monte Police Department or designated employee of the Parking Control Authority of the Inspection Bureau, city of El Monte, shall have the authority to cause the removal from a designated municipal parking lot to the nearest public garage of any vehicle illegally stored, abandoned, or creating a hazard to the public on any municipal parking lot if there is posted immediately adjacent to and visible from the entrance of such parking lot a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the following: "Unauthorized vehicles stored on this lot for an excess of 72 hours, or inoperable or abandoned vehicles left parked or standing on this lot in excess of five (5) days, or any vehicle creating a public hazard because it creates a health hazard or because it impedes the normal flow of traffic will be towed away at the owner's expense. Information concerning towed vehicles may be obtained by telephoning the Parking Control Authority at the El Monte Police Department (580-2110)." 
(Prior code § 3803)  
Chapter 12.40 - MUNICIPAL SWIMMING FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.40.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Attendant" means any person employed by the city for the purpose of assisting the pool manager. 
"Municipal swimming facilities" means and includes all and any part of the following: 
1.  Any pool heretofore or hereafter owned, operated, or maintained by the city for the purpose of swimming, wading, giving or receiving swimming or life-saving instructions or any other purpose similar or incidental to any of the foregoing; 
2.  All and any part of dressing rooms, shower rooms, locker rooms, restrooms, decks, bleachers, equipment rooms, storage rooms, or other rooms, buildings, equipment, facilities or area owned, operated or maintained by the city in connection with or for use with any municipal swimming pool; 
3.  All and any part of the area surrounding a municipal swimming pool contained within any fence, building, or other enclosure surrounding, in whole or in part, any such swimming pool. 
"Pool Manager" means the person employed by the city for the purpose of supervising and maintaining a swimming pool, and enforcing all ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to municipal swimming facilities. 
(Prior code §§ 3500—3503)  
12.40.020 - Administrative rules and regulations. 
The Administrative Officer of the city may make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations governing the use of municipal swimming facilities. Such rules and regulations may govern any of the following, but the following enumeration shall not be deemed to limit the power of the Administrative Officer in the making of such rules and regulations: 
A.  The admission price to be paid by individuals or groups for admittance to or use of municipal swimming facilities; 
B.  The hours and lengths of time municipal swimming facilities may be used; 
C.  The minimum age at which any person may enter or use any municipal swimming facility; 
D.  The conduct of persons using municipal swimming facilities; 
E.  The grounds for exclusion or ejection of any person from a municipal swimming facility; 
F.  Any other rule or regulation for the efficient, orderly, or proper conduct of a municipal swimming facility. 
(Prior code §§ 3504—3504.6)  
12.40.030 - Destruction prohibited. 
No person shall damage, destroy, deface, or injure any municipal swimming facility. 
(Prior code § 3506)  
12.40.040 - Animals prohibited. 
No person shall permit any animal to enter or remain in any portion of a municipal swimming facility. 
(Prior code § 3506.1)  
12.40.050 - Vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall operate or take any type of vehicle within or into any municipal swimming facility. 
(Prior code § 3506.2)  
12.40.060 - Unauthorized use prohibited. 
No person shall enter, be in, remain in, or loiter about any municipal swimming facility when neither the pool manager nor an attendant is present thereat, nor at any time other than the hours specified by the Administrative Officer. 
(Prior code § 3507)  
12.40.070 - Segregation. 
No person, other than a city employee when required by the performance of his official duties, shall enter, be in, or remain in, any portion of a municipal swimming facility designated by appropriate signs for use of the opposite sex. 
(Prior code § 3508)  
12.40.080 - Prohibited areas. 
A.  No person other than a city employee acting within the course of his or her employment shall enter, be in, or remain in, any portion of a municipal swimming facility which is posted with a legible sign stating any of the following: "Private," "Keep Out," "Restricted," or "No Admittance." 
B.  Exception. The Administrative Officer or Pool Manager may grant permission, to such persons and at such times as is necessary, to enter areas otherwise prohibited by this chapter, when such entry is necessary for the inspection, repair or maintenance of any portion of a municipal swimming facility. 
(Prior code §§ 3509, 3509.1)  
12.40.090 - Compliance. 
No person shall violate any rule or regulation made by the Administrative Officer pursuant to this chapter when such rule or regulation has been posted in a conspicuous place at the portion of the municipal swimming facility affected thereby. 
(Prior code § 3505)  
Chapter 12.44 - AIRPORT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.44.010 - Adopted. 
Ordinance No. 9979 of the county of Los Angeles, as the same has been amended and is in effect in said county on April 1, 1971, and being known as the "Airport Ordinance" of the county, is adopted by reference and made the "Airport Ordinance" of the city. 
(Prior code § 3700)  
12.44.020 - Deletions. 
Sections 7 and 107 of Ordinance 9979 of the county of Los Angeles as adopted by Section 12.44.010 are deleted therefrom and repealed. 
(Prior code § 3701)  
Chapter 12.48 - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES* 
Sections: 
 
12.48.010 - Use of recreational facilities and parks. 
The City Council ordains that the city's parks and recreational facilities are primarily intended for recreational and/or open space uses. The foregoing notwithstanding, the City Council finds that the public welfare and convenience may still be preserved and/or furthered by permitting certain nonopen space and nonrecreational uses, provided such subordinate uses do not unduly conflict with or undermine the primary purpose of these community assets and provided such subordinate uses are made subject to such reasonable time, place and manner restrictions as may be set forth in the city's written facilities use policy. 
(Ord. 2719 § 1, 2008) 
Editor's Note: This section replaces prior Section 12.48.010 (Declaration of legislative intent).  
12.48.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning set forth under this section as follows: 
"Authorized city employee" means any following persons acting within the course and scope of their employment: 
1.  Any El Monte Police Officer; 
2.  Any City Code Enforcement Officer, Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Supervisor within the meaning of Section 1.16.030 of the El Monte Municipal Code; 
3.  Any employee of the El Monte Community Services Division who is designated as an "authorized city employee" by the Deputy City Manager for Community Services; or 
4.  Any other employee of the city of El Monte who is designated as an "authorized city employee" by the City Manager. 
"Park or recreational facility" or "parks or recreational facilities" means any city-owned real property, building, structure or improvement designed and primarily intended for activities such as music, drama, dance, art, handicraft, science, literature, nature study, nature contacting, aquatic sports, athletics and the like, or any of them, and/or any informal play incorporating any such activities. "Parks or recreational facilities" generally include, but are not necessarily limited to playgrounds, sports fields, sports courts, recreation buildings, green spaces and other similar venues. City-owned real property that is leased by the city to a third party shall be excluded from the definition for "park or recreational facility" unless the terms of the lease expressly provides for such use. The following city-owned venues are deemed to fall within the definition of "parks or recreational facilities" as set forth herein: 
1.  Tony Arceo Memorial Park; 
2.  Fletcher Park; 
3.  Pioneer Park; 
4.  Rio Vista Veterans Memorial Park; 
5.  Lambert Park; 
6.  Zamora Park; 
7.  Mountain View Park; 
8.  Baldwin Avenue Mini Park; 
9.  The El Monte Aquatics Center; 
10.  The El Monte Historical Museum; 
11.  The Santa Fe Trail Historical Park; 
12.  Lashbrook Park; 
13.  Gibson Mariposa Park; 
14.  Any other real property that satisfies the definition, including any real property leased by the city from a third party or maintained by the city by agreement. 
"Person" means any natural person, individual, firm, association, organization, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, business trust, living trust, joint venture, the federal government of the United States, the state of California, the county of Los Angeles or any other public agency. 
(Ord. 2719 § 2, 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2778, § 4, 9-20-2011)  
12.48.030 - Park hours. 
A.  Unless an authorized city employee is present and on duty, no person, other than an authorized city employee, may enter upon, remain in, occupy, or visit any park or recreational facility between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m. or such alternative hours of operation as may be posted by the city. Any person who remains in, occupies or visits a park or recreational facility in violation of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  No person may remain on the premises of any park or recreational facility when asked to leave by an authorized city employee. Any person who remains on, or refuses to depart from, the premises of any park or recreational facility in violation of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2719 § 3, 2008)  
12.48.040 - Facilities use policy—Alcohol. 
A.  In the interest of safeguarding and/or furthering the public health, safety and welfare, the City Council may establish a facilities use policy for the use of any or all parks or recreational facilities in the city. The facilities use policy shall, among other things, set forth rules regulating the rental or use of any or all recreational facilities, the time and manner of application for such use, the charges to be paid for such use and other similar administrative matters. The facilities use policy shall be established, and may from time to time be amended, by City Council resolution. 
B.  Except as otherwise authorized under Chapter 9.12 (Alcoholic Beverages) of the El Monte Municipal Code, the sale, distribution, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages on upon any park or recreational facility is prohibited. 
(Ord. 2719 § 4, 2008)  
12.48.050 - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are prohibited within all parks or recreational facilities as defined in this chapter: 
A.  To throw upon, along or across any public highway, street, roadway or driveway any missile capable of causing personal injury or damage to personal property, or to throw such missile at or toward, or in the vicinity of any vehicle standing or moving along, upon or across any section, highway, street, roadway or driveway; 
B.  To take or otherwise transport, or have in possession therein, or to fire or discharge therein, any firearm, firecracker, rocket, torpedo, fireworks, gun or slingshot; 
C.  To pick, dig, move, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub or bloom, flower, or any portion thereof, growing therein; 
D.  To cut, break, injure, deface or destroy any structure, apparatus, equipment or property therein, building, monument, sign, fence or bench, or any portion thereof, or to make or place thereon, or any portion thereof, any mark, writing or printing, or to attach thereto any sign, card, display or other similar device; 
E.  To throw, place or dispose of any garbage, refuse or can in any place therein other than into a garbage can or other receptacle maintained therein for that purpose, or to throw, place or dispose of any waste paper or refuse in any place other than into an incinerator, or into some can or receptacle maintained therein for that purpose; 
F.  To bring or maintain therein any dog, unless such dog is kept at all times under a leash under full control of its owner or custodian or failure to dispose of any animal waste in any trash receptacle; 
G.  To disturb the peace or quiet therein by any undue loud or unusual noise, or by tooting, blowing or sounding any automobile siren, horn or signal, or any noisemaking device, or any tumultuous conduct, or to use any vulgar, profane or obscene language therein; 
H.  To solicit in any manner or for any commercial purpose therein, or to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise therein, or to distribute, or pass out any commercial handbill, advertising matter or commercial literature therein, unless such act is done pursuant to a permit authorized by the city; 
I.  To cook or prepare food using a portable barbeque (BBQ) device, other than those BBQ's provided by the city; 
J.  To create, start, or use an open fire; 
K.  To golf or engage in kite flying; 
L.  To set up, possess, use, or operate a moon bounce, or similar inflatable devices, without a city permit; 
M.  To use or operate any motorized bike, scooter, or other motorized two-wheel device. 
(Ord. 2719 § 5, 2008; Ord. 2682 § 4, 2006) 
Editor's Note: Ordinance 2719 amends the first part of the first sentence of Section 12.48.050 by replacing the phrase "parks and recreational facilities" with the phrase "parks or recreational facilities.  
12.48.060 - Permit for community events or special events. 
Any person who desires the exclusive or semi-exclusive use of all or any portion of a park or recreational facility for the conduct of a community event or special event must apply for a permit authorizing such use. The facilities use policy shall set forth and/or identify (A) those parks and/or recreational facilities which may be eligible for such use or the portion of any such parks or recreational facilities which may be eligible for such use; (B) the duration of such use; (C) the procedures for applying for a permit; (D) the requisite criteria for granting a permit; and (E) such other terms, conditions and responsibilities as may be reasonably be imposed upon any person seeking the exclusive or semi-exclusive use of an eligible park or recreational facility or eligible portion thereof. 
(Ord. 2719 § 6, 2008) 
Editor's Note: Ordinance 2719 repeals subsection B of prior Section 12.48.060 as well as portions of subsection A to prior Section 12.48.060 relating to the appeal processes for permits for the use of parks or facilities. The new Section 12.48.060 (Permits for Community Events or Special Events) now provides that such procedural matters be set forth in the City Council-approved Facilities Use Policy.  
12.48.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.24.010(A) of this code. 
(Ord. 2682 § 6, 2006)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Water supply. 
The Council declares that the water supply owned by the city is in excess of the amount required to supply the water required by the inhabitants thereof; that while and so long as such excess exists all or any part thereof may be sold outside the corporate limits of the city; but in no case shall a contract be made for a supply or any excess of water outside of the corporate boundaries for a period longer than one year; and in no case shall such a contract be made unless the Council declares by a separate ordinance that there exists an excess of water not required to supply the inhabitants of the city within the term of the contract; but water not required to supply the inhabitants of the city may be sold by the council outside the corporate limits, from month to month, during the existence of such excess. 
(Prior code § 7400)  
13.04.020 - Metered water rate commodity charges. 
A.  For purpose of this Chapter 13.04, the acronym "WQU" stands for "water quantity billing unit" which means a volume or unit measure of water containing one hundred (100) U.S. gallons. 
B.  In addition to any other water service related charges set forth under this chapter, each water consumer shall pay a metered water rate commodity charge to the Water Department for the amount of water delivered by the Water Department measured at the water meter installed at the water consumer's connection in accordance with a schedule of fees, rates and/or commodity charges set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, but only after first complying with the applicable notice, hearing and other procedural requirements of Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act (Government Code Section 53750 et seq.) as either or both may be subsequently amended from time to time. The most recent ordinance or resolution setting forth the schedule of fees, rates and/or charges shall be maintained by the Water Department and shall be posted on the Water Department website following its approval. The schedule of metered water rate commodity charges as most recently approved by the City Council are set over a period of five (5) years as approved by the City Council following a duly noticed majority protest public hearing held December 16, 2014. The most recent schedule of metered water rate commodity charges approved are set forth as follows: 
1.  The rates per WQU for each WQU supplied to the customer for WQUs supplied up to 125 WQUs and above 125 WQUs shall be as follows for each of the five (5) calendar years indicated in the table below, unless a lesser increased rate is approved by City Council resolution prior to the effective date of each rate increase: 
Metered Water Rate Commodity Charges 
Units 	Effective January 1, 2015 	Effective January 1, 2016 	Effective January 1, 2017 	Effective January 1, 2018 	Effective January 1, 2019 
0—125 	$0.195 	$0.214 	$0.234 	$0.256 	$0.280 
> 125 	$0.338 	$0.370 	$0.405 	$0.444 	$0.486 
 
C.  The rates set forth under subsection B, above, shall go into effect automatically unless prior to the effective date of each scheduled and pre-approved increase, the City Council acts to approve a lesser increase. If the City Council acts to approve a lesser increase for a given calendar year, such lesser increase shall be memorialized by resolution and such resolution shall be maintained by the Water Department and the City Clerk and shall be posted on the Water Department website. No annual increase to the metered water rate commodity charge may exceed the rates set forth for each calendar year set forth under subsection B, above. Following the 2019 calendar year, the metered water rate commodity charge levied in any subsequent calendar year may not be increased above the rate set forth for the 2019 calendar year, unless and until a new majority protest public hearing is conducted by the city in accordance with Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act (Government Code Section 53750 et seq.). 
(Ord. 2633A §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2553 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2540 § 1, 2001; prior code § 7401) 
(Ord. No. 2775, § 1, 7-19-2011; Ord. No. 2846, § 2, 11-12-2014) 
Editor's note— The schedule of metered water rate commodity charges set forth under subsection A of Section 13.040.020 are supported by that certain water rate study prepared by CDM Smith, Inc., working in association with Tuckfield Associates dated October 28, 2014. The Water Rate Study was accepted and approved by the City Council at its meeting of October 28, 2014 and affirmed at its meeting of December 16, 2014 following the close of a duly noticed majority protest hearing in which the City Clerk determined that the total number of affected real property parcels for which written protests were submitted was less than fifty (50) percent of the total number of affected parcels. The approval of the rates encompass the approval of five (5) successive automatic increases reflected in the table set forth under subsection B of Section 13.04.020 over a period of five (5) years (effective January 1, 2015), provided, however, that the City Council, by resolution, may elect to approve a lesser increase that what is authorized for each of the five (5) years.  
13.04.030 - Water service meter base charge. 
A.  In addition to any other water service related charges set forth under this chapter, each consumer of water shall also pay to the Water Department a monthly water service meter base charge in accordance with a schedule of charges set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, but only after first complying with the applicable notice, hearing and other procedural requirements of Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act (Government Code Section 53750 et seq.) as either or both may be subsequently amended over time. The most recent ordinance or resolution setting forth the schedule of fees, rates and/or charges shall be maintained by the Water Department and shall be posted on the Water Department website following its approval. The schedule of water service meter base charges as most recently approved by the City Council are set over a period of five (5) years as approved by the City Council following a duly noticed majority protest public hearing held December 16, 2014. The most recent schedule of water service meter base charges approved are set forth as follows: 
Water Service Meter Base Charge 
Meter 
Size 	Effective January 1, 2015 	Effective January 1, 2016 	Effective January 1, 2017 	Effective January 1, 2018 	Effective January 1, 2019 
5/8 " 	$17.33 	$18.98 	$20.78 	$22.75 	$24.91 
1" 	$37.58 	$41.15 	$45.06 	$49.34 	$54.03 
1.5" 	$75.15 	$82.29 	$90.11 	$98.67 	$108.04 
2" 	$120.43 	$131.87 	$144.40 	$158.12 	$173.14 
3" 	$225.41 	$246.82 	$270.27 	$295.94 	$324.06 
4" 	$375.70 	$411.39 	$450.47 	$493.27 	$540.13 
6" 	$751.37 	$822.75 	$900.92 	$986.50 	$1,080.22 
8" 	$1,202.18 	$1,316.38 	$1,441.44 	$1,578.37 	$1,728.32 
10" 	$1,728.14 	$1,892.32 	$2,072.09 	$2,268.93 	$2,484.48 
 
B.  The rates set forth under subsection A, above, shall go into effect automatically unless prior to the effective date of each scheduled and pre-approved increase, the City Council acts to approve a lesser increase. If the City Council acts to approve a lesser increase for a given calendar year, such lesser increase shall be memorialized by resolution and such resolution shall be maintained by the Water Department and the City Clerk and shall be posted on the Water Department website. No annual increase to the water service meter base charge may exceed the rates set forth for each calendar year set forth under subsection A, above. Following the 2019 calendar year, the water service meter base charge levied in any subsequent year may not be increased above the rate set forth for the 2019 calendar year, unless and until a new majority protest public hearing is conducted by the city in accordance with Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act (Government Code Section 53750 et seq.). 
(Ord. 2633A § 3, 2004: Ord. 2553 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2540 § 2, 2001; prior code § 7401.1) 
(Ord. No. 2775, § 2, 7-19-2011; Ord. No. 2846, § 3, 11-12-2014) 
Editor's note— The schedule of water service meter base charges set forth under subsection A of Section 13.040.030 are supported by that certain water rate study prepared by the Water Rate Study conducted by CDM Smith, Inc., working in association with Tuckfield Associates dated October 28, 2014. The Water Rate Study was accepted and approved by the City Council at its meeting of October 28, 2014 and affirmed at its meeting of December 16, 2014 following the close of a duly noticed majority protest hearing in which the City Clerk determined that the total number of affected real property parcels for which written protests were submitted was less than fifty (50) percent of the total number of affected parcels. The approval of the rates encompasses the approval of five (5) successive automatic increases reflected in the table set forth under subsection A of Section 13.04.030 over a period of five (5) years (effective January 1, 2015), provided, however, that the City Council, by resolution, may elect to approve a lesser increase that what is authorized for each of the five (5) years.  
13.04.040 - Fire protection water service charges. 
A.  In addition to any other water service related charges set forth under this Chapter, each water customer who is provided with water service for private fire protection facilities shall also pay to the Water Department a monthly fire protection water service charge in accordance with a schedule of charges set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, but only after first complying with the applicable notice, hearing and other procedural requirements of Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act (Government Code Section 53750 et seq.) as either or both may be subsequently amended over time. The most recent ordinance or resolution setting forth the schedule of fees, rates and/or charges shall be maintained by the Water Department and shall be posted on the Water Department website following its approval. The schedule of fire protection water service charges as most recently approved by the City Council are set over a period of five (5) years as approved by the City Council following a duly noticed majority protest public hearing held December 16, 2014. The most recent schedule of fire protection water service charges approved are set forth as follows: 
Fire Protection Water Service Charges 
Meter 
Size 	Effective January 1, 2015 	Effective January 1, 2016 	Effective January 1, 2017 	Effective January 1, 2018 	Effective January 1, 2019 
2" 	$37.61 	$41.19 	$45.10 	$49.38 	$54.08 
3" 	$70.46 	$77.16 	$84.49 	$92.51 	$101.30 
4" 	$117.44 	$128.60 	$140.81 	$154.19 	$168.84 
6" 	$223.93 	$245.20 	$268.49 	$294.00 	$321,93 
8" 	$375.80 	$411.51 	$450.60 	$493.41 	$540.28 
10" 	$542.03 	$593.52 	$649.90 	$711.64 	$779.25 
 
B.  The rates set forth under subsection A, above, shall go into effect automatically unless prior to the effective date of each scheduled and pre-approved increase, the City Council acts to approve a lesser increase. If the City Council acts to approve a lesser increase for a given calendar year, such lesser increase shall be memorialized by resolution and such resolution shall be maintained by the Water Department and the City Clerk and shall be posted on the Water Department website. No annual increase to the fire protection water service charge may exceed the rates set forth for each calendar year set forth under subsection A, above. Following the 2019 calendar year, the fire protection water service charge levied in any subsequent year may not be increased above the rate set forth for the 2019 calendar year, unless and until a new majority protest public hearing is conducted by the city in accordance with Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution and the Proposition 218 Omnibus Implementation Act (Government Code Section 53750 et seq.). 
(Prior code § 7402) 
(Ord. No. 2775, § 3, 7-19-2011; Ord. No. 2846, § 4, 11-12-2014) 
Editor's note— The schedule of fire protection water service charges set forth under subsection A of Section 13.040.040 are supported by that certain water rate study prepared by CDM Smith, Inc., working in association with Tuckfield Associates dated October 28, 2014 ("Water Rate Study"). The Water Rate Study was accepted and approved by the City Council at its meeting of October 28, 2014 and affirmed at its meeting of December 16, 2014 following the close of a duly noticed majority protest hearing in which the City Clerk determined that the total number of affected real property parcels for which written protests were submitted was less than fifty (50) percent of the total number of affected parcels. The approval of the rates encompasses the approval of five (5) successive automatic increases reflected in the table set forth under subsection A of Section 13.04.040 over a period of five (5) years (effective January 1, 2015), provided, however, that the City Council, by resolution, may elect to approve a lesser increase that what is authorized for each of the five (5) years.  
13.04.045 - Automatic pass through adjustments for purchased water costs. 
A.  The charges set forth under Section 13.04.020 through Section 13.04.040, above, may be automatically adjusted to reflect adopted increases or decreases in wholesale charges for water established by other public agencies, including but not limited to the Main San Gabriel Basin Watermaster, from which the city purchases water to the extent of such increases or decreases are not reflected in the schedule of charges then in effect. 
B.  Notice of any such adjustments for pass through costs shall be given in accordance with Government Code Section 53755 not less than thirty (30) days before the effective date of the adjustment by (1) including such notice in the monthly water billing statement to the relevant water customer and (2) mailing such notice to the record owner of the property as indicated on the last equalized assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 2846, § 5, 11-12-2014)  
13.04.050 - Billing and collections of water service commodity charges and water service meter base charges. 
A.  The charges set forth under Sections 13.04,020 through 13.04.040 of this chapter are billed to water customers on a bi-monthly basis in arrears For purposes of illustration only, charges applicable to the months of January and February of a given year will be billed by the city in the month of March of the same year and charges applicable to the months of March and April of a given year, as another example, will be billed by the city in the month of May of the same year and so on. Each water service bill issued by the city is due and payable as soon as it is tendered by the city to a water customer and shall become delinquent if not paid in full within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the bill is issued by the city. If a water service bill is becomes delinquent, a penalty in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the amount of the bill shall also be added to the balance due and payable to the Water Department and such adjusted amount shall be immediately due and payable by the water customer to the city. If a water service bill becomes delinquent, the Water Department shall also issue a shutoff notice to the water customer and the city shall also assess and include to the water customers outstanding account balance five dollars ($5.00) for the delivery cost of the shut-off notice. The foregoing notwithstanding, the issuance of a shut-off notice by the city shall not be pre-condition to the water customers ongoing duty to immediately pay all past due sums, plus interest, applicable processing fees and penalties. If the delinquent bill, plus all penalties and fees, is not paid in full by the lock-off date indicated in the shut-off notice and water service is disconnected by the city, an additional penalty amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be charged to the water customer. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, billings may be made and charges collected for service furnished to any consumer at such times as the City Council shall consider to be in the best interest of the Water Department and the water customer so billed. 
C.  If a water meter is "locked off" (i.e., shut off) by the Water Department due to nonpayment by the water customer, and the lock is damaged or removed, a ten dollar ($10.00) charge will be added to the water customer's account to replace the lock. If a lock is removed from a meter, the meter may be subject to immediate removal by the Water Department without further notice to prevent fraud, further damage or unauthorized use of water services. A fifty dollar ($50.00) charge will be added to the customer's account in the event of such removal by the city. In the event that a meter has been removed by the Water Department and thereafter the customer's premises is reconnected to the public water supply system without the prior approval of the Water Department, the city may impose a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day following the date of removal of the meter to the date of discovery of the illegal service connection in addition to all other civil and criminal penalties which may be imposed upon the customer under applicable law. The customer's account must be paid in full before a water meter which has been removed by the Water Department pursuant to this subsection will be reinstalled. 
D.  If a water customer account is closed, and the final billing is not paid within thirty (30) days after the closing date, the balance due on the closed and delinquent account (plus all penalties and fees) will be transferred to any other open Water Department account that is in the customer's name. An additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) charge shall be payable by the customer for the transfer of such a balance to an open account. 
E.  The owner of real property which is rented for occupancy to third parties shall be liable for nonpayment of a water service account otherwise payable to the Water Department by their tenant(s) as provided in this subsection. After a water shut-off order has been executed on a service connection as provided in this section, above, the Water Department shall not restore water service or authorize a change in the name in the customer account unless the owner of the property (or the new tenant on behalf of the owner) has first paid the delinquent amount to the Water Department, plus all penalties and fees. The charges imposed under Sections 13.04.020 through 13.04.040 are established under the authority of Division 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4 (Sanitation and Sewerage Systems) of the California Health and Safety Code (Health and Safety Code Section 5470 et seq.) To the fullest extent permitted by law, all delinquent sums owed to the city which are imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a lien upon the real property parcel corresponding to the delinquent water service account. Accordingly, the city, having complied with the procedural requirements of Government Code Section 53755(a)(3) and the procedural and approval requirements of Health and Safety Code Section 5473, may, pursuant to and in compliance to Health and Safety Code Section 5473a, collect all such delinquent sums on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from its general taxes. 
F.  A charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), or an amount equal to the actual cost to the Water Department, whichever is greater, shall be payable by each customer who requests maintenance work from the Water Department at a time other than regular business hours for Water Department field service personnel ("after hours charge"). Each customer who submits a request for maintenance work subject to an after hours charge, must first sign a Water Department form agreeing to pay the after hours charge within fourteen (14) days of the date of the performance of the work by the Water Department. If the after hours charge is not paid within fourteen (14) days, a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the after hour charge will be added to the amount due and shall be added to the customer's water account balance payable to the Water Department. 
G.  All backflow devices that are tested by the Water Department will be billed at the rate of cost plus ten (10) percent administration fee. This charge will be added to the customer's next bimonthly billing. 
H.  Every customer service connection to the public water supply system is equipped with a control valve at the meter which may be used when necessary to shut off the water supply for the entire premises. The control valve shall not be operated by the customer. Upon request, such control valve will be operated by the Water Department during regular business hours without charge to the customer two (2) times per year. Any additional request for such control valve operation will be billed to the customer at a rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each temporary disconnection/reconnection, except as provided in subsection C of this section. 
I.  Only employees or authorized agents of the Water Department may connect or disconnect the customer's service to or from the public water supply system. The customer shall pay the cost of any reinstallation or remedial work of the Water Department which is required to restore the public water supply system following any such made necessary by any unauthorized addition, modification or removal of such water service. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code § 7404) 
(Ord. No. 2846, § 6, 11-12-2014)  
13.04.060 - Deposits required. 
A.  On and after February 1, 1997, a cash deposit shall be required as a condition to the delivery of water service for all new applicants for service as follows: 
For service through 5/8 × ¾ × ¾ in meters 	
Residential 	$  50.00 
Commercial 	75.00 
For service through 1 inch meters 	
Residential 	75.00 
Commercial 	100.00 
For service through 1.5 inch meters 	150.00 
For service through 2 inch meters 	175.00 
For service through 3 inch meters 	200.00 
For service through 4 inch meters 	250.00 
For service through 6 inch meters 	350.00 
For service through 8 inch meters 	500.00 
For service through 10 inch meters 	550.00 
 
If the water service is located at a property with two (2) or more units, the deposit required will be equal to the number of units serviced by the meter multiplied by the rate for the size of the meter(s) at the property to a maximum deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
B.  Each customer who is shut-off from metered water service pursuant to Section 13.04.050(A) of this chapter shall as a condition of restoration of service, increase the water service deposit to equal their average Water Department bimonthly billing for the customer for the last six (6) cycles. If after one year, no other shut-off order has been executed on the customer, the amount of the deposit in excess of the applicable minimum balance specified in subsection A of this section will be applied as a credit to the next bimonthly billing statement. 
C.  Upon termination of service, the deposits, as specified in subsections 13.04.060A and B, if applicable, will first be applied towards the depositor's unpaid water account(s), then applied towards any other fees or charges due or payable to the city by the depositor by reason of any provision of the law or the El Monte Municipal Code. The balance of the deposits, if any, shall be returned to the original depositor after all fees or charges have first been paid to the city. All deposit refunds that are returned back to the city as undeliverable will be held for up to one year from the date of the warrant. After one year the warrant will be "void" and the deposit will be deposited to the water fund of the city. Thereafter, such deposit shall be refunded only upon written request, which is to be verified. In the event the request is made by someone other than the original depositor, satisfactory evidence of the person making the request to receive such deposit refund must be supplied. In no event shall interest be paid on any deposits refunded. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 7405—7405.1)  
13.04.070 - Installation of public water supply system service improvements and meters. 
Before water shall be supplied to any premises, the owner shall submit a written application to the Water Department to obtain such service and meter on a form provided by the Water Department. The Water Department will prepare an estimate of the cost of installing any improvements to the public water supply and/or water meter as necessary or appropriate in order to connect the customer to the public water supply system. As a condition to approving such an application and furnishing water to the premises, the Water Department shall require a payment of a water meter installation charge equal to the amount of the estimate, plus twenty (20) percent. In appropriate cases, and upon a finding as required Health and Safety Code Section 33445, the Agency may agree to assume a portion of the obligation of the owner to pay for such installation costs as the agency may, in its discretion, approve. For purposes of this chapter the capitalized term "agency" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Health and Safety Code Section 33003. Upon completion of the installation of the service and meter, the actual cost incurred by the Water Department will be confirmed and either the unused portion of the installation deposit will be refunded to the owner or the additional cost of installation in excess of the principal amount of the installation deposit billed to the owner. If the owner does not pay the Water Department the excess costs within thirty (30) calendar days, the delinquent balance will be billed to the owner, and the property as improved and benefitted by the improvements will be subject to a lien collection remedy which may be exercised by the Water Department in a manner authorized by law. 
(Prior code § 7406) 
(Ord. No. 2846, § 7, 11-12-2014)  
13.04.080 - Application for service. 
A.  Any person desiring water service at a location where a water meter is existing shall in person apply to the Water Records Office for water service at such property. Any owner of property in the city who has on file with the City Water Department a signed application for water service with respect to any property in the city may receive water service at other metered property in the city by requesting the same by telephone; provided, however, that if water service is thus rendered, pursuant to a telephonic request by a property owner, the owner of the property must, within ten (10) days after such commencement of service, file with the Water Records Office a signed application for water service for such property. If the owner has not made such written application within ten (10) days after service was thus commenced, the water meter shall be turned off and service discontinued to such property. 
B.  City Business License Required for Commercial Accounts. Any business or person desiring water service who is required under Title 5 of this code to have a city business license must first obtain a current city business license before an account will be activated and water service turned on. If a city business license is required and a current city business license is not maintained by the customer water service may be subject to turn off. (Amended during 1999 recodification; prior code §§ 7406.1, 7406.2)  
13.04.090 - Extension of mains. 
A.  Where the property is located in the area included in class "A" service as hereinbefore defined, and on a public street in which there exists no water main in front of the premises applied for, the Water Superintendent shall extend the nearest water main in the direction of said property, provided that in no instance shall an extension of any water main exceed one hundred (100) feet for any one applicant who has in all other respects complied with the requirements of this chapter, excepting that the Water Superintendent may estimate the cost of any extension in excess of the one hundred (100) feet provided by this chapter and upon payment by the applicant of the charges so estimated, same may be installed by the Water Department. 
B.  Whenever any tract or subdivision of land is hereafter laid out or made in the city by any person and any extension of water main or mains is required therein to serve the same, such person laying out or making said tract or subdivision shall pay one-half the cost of the installation of said water main or mains, plus the entire cost of all service connections; provided, that if the city determines that a main or mains larger than six (6) inches is required the city will pay that portion of the cost of such main or mains that is in excess of the cost of a six (6) inch main or mains, as the case may be. Such installation of water mains and service connections will ordinarily be made by the city, or the city may authorize the said person to make the installation, in which latter case said person making such installation shall submit to said city a verified statement showing in detail the cost of said installation. Upon the completion of such installation of any water main or mains said person making same shall execute to the city a good and sufficient bill of sale therefor and said water main or mains shall thereupon become the property of said city, provided further that any such water main or mains shall be of such quality and size as may be required by the Water Superintendent and shall be laid in accordance with the directions and under the supervision of the Water Superintendent. 
(Prior code §§ 7407, 7407.1)  
13.04.100 - Failure of meter to register. 
If a meter fails to register during any period or is known to register inaccurately, the consumer shall be charged with an average daily consumption at same season, as shown by the meter when in use and registering accurately. 
(Prior code § 7408)  
13.04.110 - Testing meters. 
Any consumer may demand that the meter through which water is being furnished, be examined and tested by the Water Department, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is accurately metering the volume of water which is being delivered through it. Such demand shall be made in writing to the Water Department, and shall be accompanied by a meter testing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Upon receipt of such demand, it shall be the duty of the Water Department to cause the meter to be examined and tested, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is accurately metering the water being delivered through it. If on such examination and test the meter shall be found to register in excess of one and one-half percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefore, and the fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be repaid to the person making the demand, and the water bill for the current period adjusted in such manner as the Superintendent of the El Monte Water Department may deem fair and just. If the meter be found to register not over one and one-half percent fast, the fifty dollars ($50.00) deposit shall be forfeited to the city and the water bills paid as rendered. 
(Prior code § 7409)  
13.04.120 - Separate services. 
A.  In all cases in which water is served to premises occupied by two (2) or more different and independent consumers of water, which premises are held under the same ownership, the owner or owners of such premises shall be and are required to provide for independent service to the curb line for each such independent consumer. Provided, however, that if the owner of such premises so served with water shall agree in writing to be responsible for and pay all money due for water used upon such premises, such independent service shall not be required. Should the owner or owners fail and refuse to provide such independent service and to assume responsibility for money due for water used upon such premises, the Water Department shall after thirty (30) days' notice to the consumers so served, and to the owner of such premises or the person in charge thereof, cut off the water from such premises until the independent services herein required are installed or the agreement assuming responsibility for money due for water served to the premises is made as herein provided. 
B.  No service connection shall be hereafter made for the purpose of supplying through a common service, two (2) or more independent consumers occupying premises held under the same ownership, unless said houses are on the same lot, or the property is what is known as a court, or apartment house or block covering more than one lot, and then only provided the owner or owners of such premises shall agree in writing to pay all charges for water served thereto. 
C.  No water shall be served to two (2) or more parcels of property separately owned through a common service pipe, unless there is no main contiguous to premises from which service may be had, and further unless the consumer first in order of service from the main shall in writing guarantee the payment of water rates for all parcels of property so served. The officers of the Water Department shall give thirty (30) days' notice in writing to all consumers served through such service before enforcing this section by cutting off water. 
(Prior code § 7410)  
13.04.130 - Metered service. 
All city water used on any premises where a meter is installed, must pass through the meter, except as provided in case of private fire services. No by-pass or connection between the meter and the main shall be made or maintained. Consumers will be held responsible and charged for all water passing through their meters. 
(Prior code § 7411)  
13.04.140 - Use of water. 
A.  No person shall draw water from the city pipes directly into any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump or similar apparatus. 
B.  Where city water is used to supply a steam boiler, hydraulic elevator or power pump, its owner shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply for at least twelve (12) hours into which the service pipe shall be discharged. 
C.  No person shall wilfully waste water in any manner whatsoever. No consumer shall permit leaks in water pipes or plumbing fixtures on his or her premises. 
(Prior code § 7412)  
13.04.150 - Check valves. 
If, in the judgment of the Water Superintendent the placing of an approved check valve on the property side of a water meter is considered necessary for the safety of the water system, such approved check valve shall be immediately installed at the expense of the consumer, after due notice in writing has been given to the consumer by the said Water Superintendent. 
(Prior code § 7413)  
13.04.160 - Hydrant use approval. 
No person shall use or operate any hydrant or other valves installed on any water system intended for fire suppression purposes and which is accessible to any public highway, alley or private way open to or generally used by the public, unless such person first secures a permit for use from the water company which supplies the water to the hydrant or valve. This section does not apply to the use of a hydrant or other valves by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by the water company which supplies water to such hydrants or other valves. No person shall use or operate any such hydrant or valve unless the same is first equipped with any eddy valve supplied by the Water Department. For the use of such eddy valve, the permit applicant shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) per day rental fee. Any hydrant or valve for which a permit is requested shall prior to its use by the permittee, also be equipped with a water meter furnished by the water company supplying water the hydrant or valve. The permit applicant shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) water usage plus all water measured by such meter at the rate established by the supplying water company for use of water from such a source. In addition thereto, the applicant shall deposit with the city the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), as security for the return of the eddy valve to the city in satisfactory condition, and also as security for the payment to the city for the cost of repairing any damage to a fire hydrant or a valve caused by the permittee in the use thereof or in the installation or removal of the eddy valve. From the amount of such deposit, the city shall first deduct any unpaid fees for the use of the eddy valve; the city shall next deduct from such security deposit the cost of repairing the fire hydrant or valve damaged by the permittee in the use thereof or in installing or removing the eddy valve, the city shall then deduct the cost of the water metered. After all proper deductions, the balance of any deposit, if any, shall be returned to the depositor. Any amount in excess of the deposit will be billed to the permittee and shall be due upon demand. (Added during 1999 recodification as prior code § 7414.1)  
13.04.170 - Fire hydrant flow testing. 
Any request for fire hydrant flow forms or testing to be completed by the water department personnel within the city's Water Department boundaries is subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee. (Added during 1999 recodification as prior code § 7414.2)  
13.04.180 - Consumer not to furnish water. 
No consumer shall supply water to any person other than the occupant or occupants of the premises of such consumer. 
(Prior code § 7415)  
13.04.190 - Inspectors. 
A.  Inspectors, foremen and employees of the Water Department whose duty it may be to enter upon private premises to make inspection and examination of the pipes, fixtures or attachments used in connection with the water supply, shall be provided with a badge or other credentials to identify them as authorized agents for the Water Department. 
B.  Any officer, inspector, foreman or other authorized employee of the Water Department shall, upon presentation of his badge or other credentials provided for in subsection A of this section, have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with city water for the purpose of making any inspection of the entire water system upon said premises. 
C.  In case any authorized employee be refused admittance to any premises, or being admitted shall be hindered or prevented from making such examination, the Superintendent of the El Monte Water Department may cause the water to be turned off from said premises after giving twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the owner or occupant of said premises of his or her intention so to do. 
(Prior code § 7416)  
13.04.200 - Private water systems. 
A.  All water pipes laid in the streets shall become the property of the city. 
B.  No person shall sell water for domestic purposes within the city without having first obtained permission so to do from the Council. 
(Prior code § 7417)  
13.04.210 - Groundwater basin management and environmental clean-up charges and assessments. 
The Main San Gabriel Valley Water Basin is a groundwater basin and domestic water supply resource which has been identified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as a contaminated site which is eligible for expenditures of public funds for purposes of responding to contamination damages under the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA). The city is also a party to certain judgments regarding the management and administration of groundwater rights among water producers in the Main San Gabriel Valley Water Basin including Los Angeles County Superior Court Case Nos. 722647 and 924128. Pursuant to these judgments and applicable state and federal law and sound groundwater management practices, the city may be required or compelled to make certain payments, contributions or expenditures of funds as a water producer as part of certain groundwater clean-up efforts. In the event that the City Council may find and determine that a charge or assessment for such purposes is necessary or appropriate, each water customer of the City Water Department shall be subject to such a charge or assessment in an amount as provided by resolution of the City Council. Such a charge or assessment as may be levied by resolution of the City Council, shall be collected in accordance with Section 13.04.050 and shall be identified on each bill for water services as a separate amount which is in addition to the service charges and fees as may be payable under other provisions for this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7420)  
Chapter 13.06 - WATER SERVICE RATES 
Sections: 
 
13.06.010 - Applicability. 
Without exception, any provision established in accordance with Chapter 13.04 of this code relating to water rates shall not be superseded and/or nullified by any provision established as a result of the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2516 § 1 (part), 2000)  
13.06.020 - Purpose. 
It is understood that the city from time to time shall encounter the need to implement certain fees for services provided either for or on behalf of the city or other public entity. It is further understood that the city, having the obligation to provide these services, shall have the responsibility to collect such fees, in a matter set forth in this section, from either the affected parties or benefactors of the services. 
(Ord. 2516 § 1 (part), 2000)  
13.06.030 - Authorization to add additional services. 
No person, entity, individual, business, corporation, service provider, or the like shall be permitted to place or cause the placement of any fee or special assessments on the water utility billings. The city, by the establishment of this section, shall be the only duly authorized entity to cause the placement of any fee on the water utility billings. Prior to the placement of any fee or assessment on the water utility billing, the City Council must determine a finding of need prior to consideration of the requested for billing placement. 
(Ord. 2516 § 1 (part), 2000: prior code § 7421)  
13.06.040 - Establishment of fees. 
A.  In accordance with the provisions established with the context of this chapter, the City Council of the city does reserve the right to place service items and fees as may be established on the water utility bill in conjunction with the billing provisions set forth in Chapter 13.04 of this code provided that such fees are established by resolution of the City Council, not contrary to any other billing provision or regulatory provisions, and have been established as a result of a special needs assessment areas, or other legally established provision as may be determined either currently or in the future. 
B.  Determination of Fees. Should the City Council of the city determine either by resolution or Council action that the placement of any authorized designated fee on the water utility billing is warranted, such fee(s), upon approval by the City Council, shall be placed on the water utility billing in accordance with the provisions established within the context of this code. 
(Ord. 2516 § 1 (part), 2000: prior code § 7422)  
13.06.050 - Establishment of service rates. 
Service rates for the placement of fees on the water utility bill must be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2516 § 1 (part), 2000: prior code § 7423)  
13.06.060 - Billing provisions. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the city to ensure that each billing unit or allocation other than those providing for the metered water rate commodity charges, water service meter base charges, fire protection water service charges, billing and collection of water service commodity charges, water service meter charges, or other charges associated with the utilization water and/or water services be allocated in accordance with the rates and fees established by resolution of the City Council as so required. 
B.  Registered Water User. Should it be established by resolution of the City Council that the establishment of fees are warranted and have been allocated for placement on the water utility billing in accordance with the provisions of this code, it shall be the responsibility of the registered water user and/or customer to pay all fees in accordance with the billing provisions. 
C.  Penalties and Service Charges. 
1.  Failure by the registered water user and/or customer to pay any and all charges allocated in accordance with the provisions of this code within the specified payment period, and as such be deemed delinquent, shall be subject to the disconnection of water service until such time as all delinquent fees and any applicable reconnect fees have been paid to and reconciled with the city and the account is in good standing with the city. 
2.  Failure by the registered water user and/or customer to pay any and all charges allocated in accordance with the provisions of this code within the specified payment period, and as such be deemed delinquent, shall be subject to a ten (10) percent penalty and added to the balance payable to the city immediately. If the delinquent bill is not paid prior to the delivery of a water service shut-off notice to the customer, the customer will be charged an additional amount of five dollars ($5.00) for the delivery cost of the shut-off notice. If the delinquent amount is not paid by the lock-off date and water service is discontinued, an additional thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be charged to the customer or registered water user. 
D.  Delinquent Accounts. Accounts considered to be delinquent by the city, as set forth in the provisions of this code, shall result in the notification of the legally registered property tax owner and/or registered owner of the property and/or parcel. 
E.  Property Tax Lien. In the event that neither the registered water user, customer, tenant, or registered property owner, after proper notification, fails to pay for services allocated under this code, the city shall possess the right to place a lien on the property in the form of a property tax lien. If so required, the property tax lien shall be registered with the Los Angeles County Auditor-Controller's Office and the city. Such lien shall be placed for any and all delinquent fees and any/all other costs associated with the collection of or placement of fees on the property tax lien notices in accordance with provisions established by the city. 
(Ord. 2516 § 1 (part), 2000: prior code § 7424)  
Chapter 13.08 - CROSS-CONNECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Purpose—Maintenance of cross-connections illegal. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to enact rules and regulations to (1) protect the public water supply system of the city against actual or potential cross-connection contamination by isolating within the premise contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; (2) to eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; (3) to eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination; (4) to prevent the making of cross-connections in the future. 
B.  The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the requirements of the State of California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Public Health, entitled "Regulation Relating to Cross-Connections." 
C.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city and any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city. 
(Prior code § 7450)  
13.08.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning defined below: 
"Air-gap separation" means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
"Approved backflow prevention device" means devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services. 
"Approved water supply" means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency. 
"Auxiliary supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply. 
"AWWA Standard" means an official standard development and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
"Backflow" means a flow conditions, caused by a differential in pressure that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the disturbing pipes of a portable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Backsiphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause. 
"Contamination" means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water. 
"Cross-connection" means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
"Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of at least two (2) independently action check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
"Health Agency" means the California Department of Health Services. 
"Local Health Agency" means the county of Los Angeles Department of Health Services. 
"Person" means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution. 
"Premise" means any and all areas on a customer's property which are served or have the potential to be served by the Water Company. 
"Public water system" means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption which has five or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year. 
"Reclaimed water" means a wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use. 
"Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" means a device incorporating two (2) or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two (2) or more checks, tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing. 
"Service connection" refers to the point of connection of a user's piping to the water suppliers' facilities. 
"Water Company" means the city of El Monte or its agents/representative. 
"Water user" means any person obtaining water from the Water Company, including without limitation, a customer of the Water Company. 
(Prior code § 7451)  
13.08.030 - Cross-connection protection requirements. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Unprotected cross-connections with the public water system of the Water Company are prohibited. 
2.  Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the Water Company will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device by and at his/her expense for continued service or before a new service will be granted. 
3.  Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user's premises, then any and all water supply lines from the Water Company entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. This type of device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this resolution. 
B.  Where Protection is Required. 
1.  Each service connection from the Water Company public water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the Water Company, and is approved by the Health Agency. 
2.  Each service connection from the Water Company public water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the public water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the Water Company public water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
3.  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having (a) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the Health Agency and the Water Company, or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist. 
C.  Type of Protection Required. 
1.  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the public water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP), and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the Water Company. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the public water system, at the user's water connections to premises with varying degrees of hazard, are given in Table 13.08.030. Situations which are not covered in Table 13.08.030 shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the Water Company. 
Table 13.08.030 
TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED 
Degree of Hazard 	Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention 
A. Sewage and Hazardous Substances. 	
1. Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply 	AG 
2. Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable public water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the Health Agency and the Water Company: 	AG 
3. Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable public water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the Health Agency and the Water Company: 	AG 
4. Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable public water system. This does not include a single family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the Health Agency and the Water Company: 	AG 
5. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be injected: 	RP 
B. Auxiliary Water Supplies. 	
1. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is inter-connected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the Health Agency and the Water Company: 	AG 
2. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the Health Agency and the Water Company: 	RP 
C. Fire Protection Systems. 	
1. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected): 	DC 
2. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the Health Agency and the Water Company: 	AG 
3. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used: 	DC 
D. Dockside Watering Points and Marine Facilities. 	
1. Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessel for any purpose: 	RP 
2. Premises where there are marine facilities: 	RP 
E. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or on sufficient frequency or on sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist: 	RP 
F. Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished: 	RP 
 
Two (2) or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to, and on the property side, of the respective meters. Such check valves shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city's mains from pollution or contamination: in such cases the installation of approved backflow assemblies at such service connections shall be required. 
(Prior code § 7452)  
13.08.040 - Backflow prevention devices. 
A.  Approved Backflow Prevention Devices. Only backflow prevention devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the Health Agency shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the Water Company's potable public water system. 
B.  Backflow Prevention Device Installation. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user's connection. The Water Company shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device. 
1.  Air-Gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and entirely visible. No water shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two (2) pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the flood rim of the receiving tank. 
2.  Reduced Pressure Principal Backflow Prevention Device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above grade and not more than thirty-six (36) inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of twelve (12) inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the Water Company. 
3.  Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six (6) inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight (8) inches below grade, so there is a minimum of six (6) inches of clearance between the side of the device with the rest cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of three (3) inches clearance between the other side of the device and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type. These devices must be installed on their "side" with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three (3) inch layer of gravel. 
C.  Backflow Prevention Device Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The owner of any premise on which or on account of which, approved backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who has demonstrated his or her competency in testing of these devices. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The Water Company may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the Water Company shall be filed with the Water Company each time a device is tested, relocated, or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
2.  Persons competent to test backflow prevention devices are those persons certified as backflow prevention assembly testers by the county of Los Angeles Department of Health Services, or the American Water Works Association. The Water Company will notify affected water users by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and shall also provide water users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. 
D.  Backflow Prevention Device Removal. Approval must be obtained from the Water Company before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated, or replaced. 
1.  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the Water Company to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. 
2.  Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the Water Company that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device. 
3.  Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or their service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the Water Company. A retest will be required following the repair of the device. 
4.  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the Water Company and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
(Prior code § 7453)  
13.08.050 - Water user supervisor. 
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the Water Company, a water user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This water user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the Water Company shall be promptly notified by the water user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the Water Company of the water user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Prior code § 7454)  
13.08.060 - Administrative procedures. 
A.  Water System Survey. 
1.  The Water Company shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the Water Company for review of possible cross connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
2.  The Water Company may need to perform an on-premise inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The Water Company will contact the water user requesting an inspection appointment. Any water user which cannot or will not allow an on-premise inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the Water Company considers necessary. 
3.  The Water Company may need to perform a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premise to which it serves water. The Water Company will contact the water user requesting a reinspection appointment. Any water user which cannot or will not allow an on-premise inspection of its piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the Water Company considers necessary. 
B.  Customer Notification—Device Installation. 
1.  The Water Company will notify the water user of the inspection (or reinspection) findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of sixty (60) days will be given to complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention devices. If, due to conditions beyond the water user's control, corrective action cannot be completed within sixty (60) days, a time extension may be granted. 
2.  A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two (2) week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two (2) week period the Water Company may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. 
C.  Customer Notification—Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The Water Company will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty (30) days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary forms to be completed and submitted to the Water Company. 
2.  A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his/her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty (30) day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two (2) week period to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two (2) week period, the Water Company may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. 
(Prior code § 7455)  
13.08.070 - Water service termination. 
A.  General. When the Water Company encounters a water user's on-premise system that poses a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the Water Company shall institute procedures for discontinuing the water service. 
B.  Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include but are not limited to the following items: 
1.  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device; 
2.  Refusal to test a backflow prevention device; 
3.  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device; 
4.  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device; 
5.  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
6.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
7.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; 
8.  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
C.  Water Service Termination Procedures. 
1.  For conditions found in subsection (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of this section, the Water Company will terminate service to a customer's premise after two (2) written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which such corrective action must be completed. If no corrective action is taken within the allowed time period water service may be terminated. 
2.  For conditions found in subsection (B)(5), (6), (7) or (8) of this section, the Water Company will take the following steps: 
a.  Make reasonable effort to advise the water user of the intent of the Water Company to terminate water service if time or other circumstances permit and if not abatement or correction is promptly obtained; 
b.  Terminate water supply and lock the service valve. The water service will remain inactive until the correction of the violation has been verified and approved by the Water Company. 
(Prior code § 7456)  
13.08.080 - Violations and termination of service. 
A.  No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision or who fails to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Cumulative with any other remedy, power or penalty which the Water Company may impose, in the event that any authorized employee of the Water Company is refused admittance to any premises for the purpose of conducting an inspection to verify compliance with this chapter, or if after being admitted is hindered or prevented from making a thorough premises examination, the superintendent of the Water Company may cause the water service to be terminated for the premises, after giving twenty-four (24) hours written notice to the water user. 
(Prior code § 7457)  
Chapter 13.10 - FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
13.10.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as "Fats, Oils and Grease Control Program". 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(a)  Prevent blockages and sanitary sewer overflows of sewer lines caused by the discharge of fats, oils and grease; 
(b)  Reduce the adverse affects on sewage treatment operations resulting from discharges of fats, oils and grease into the wastewater collection system; 
(c)  Specify appropriate fats, oils and grease discharge requirements for grease producing facilities discharging into the city's wastewater collection system; and 
(d)  Protect public health and the environment by minimizing public exposure to unsanitary conditions. 
The intent of this chapter is to use the police power of the city to regulate the direct and indirect discharge of waste containing fats, oils and grease into the city's wastewater collection system in a manner that complies with all applicable laws, including the federal Clean Water Act, California Water Code and applicable waste discharge requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
(a)  CITY ENGINEER means and refers to the City Engineer for the City of El Monte or designee. 
(b)  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE AGREEMENT means and refers to an agreement executed between the City Engineer and a FSE found to be in violation with the requirements of this chapter. The agreement shall specify requirements for the FSE to attain compliance. 
(c)  FATS OILS AND GREASE or FOG means any vegetable or animal product that is used in or is a by-product of the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
(d)  FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL PROGRAM MANUAL or FOG CONTROL PROGRAM MANUAL refers to a document adopted by a resolution of the City Council providing procedural guidelines to implement the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(e)  FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT or FSE means a place where food is prepared and served and/or sold for consumption by the public and includes commercial and non-commercial establishments. 
(f)  GREASE PRETREATMENT DEVICE means any device that reduces excessive amounts of fats, oils and grease prior to discharge into the wastewater collection system. 
(g)  NOTICE OF VIOLATION or NOV means and refers to a notice to the FSE owner or operator, provided by the City Engineer, that identifies a violation of the requirements of this chapter, a request to schedule an additional inspection or a request to provide information. 
(h)  SEWAGE means any liquid waste and water borne solid waste resulting from residential, commercial, industrial or institutional activities or uses. 
(i)  HARDSHIP WAIVER refers to waiving of certain conditions imposed pursuant to the issuance of a FOG permit which are deemed impractical by the City Manager. 
(j)  WASTEWATER means any volume of untreated or partially treated sewage ultimately discharged into the public sewer. 
(k)  WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM means any system of pipes, pump stations, sewer lines or similar devices on appurtenances used to collect and convey sewage to a treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.040 - Adoption of the FOG Control Program Manual. 
The City Council may periodically adopt or amend by resolution the Fats, Oils and Grease Control Program Manual which details the standards, requirements, policies and practices to be followed as part of the city's effort to regulate the discharge of fats, oils, and grease into the wastewater collection system within the city. Said document shall be available in the office of the City Clerk for examination and use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.050 - FOG discharge—Permit required. 
Any FSE desiring to discharge wastewater into a public sewer shall obtain a permit from the City Engineer which shall be referred to as a FOG discharge permit. The FOG discharge permit may require pretreatment of wastewater prior to discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewater only to specified sewers of the city, relocation of point of discharge, prohibition of discharge to certain wastewater components, restrictions of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional charges to defray increase costs of the city created by the wastewater discharge, and other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose and intent of this chapter. No person shall discharge wastewater in excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by any FOG discharge permit and any other applicable requirements pursuant to federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.060 - Permit application. 
A.  Persons seeking a FOG discharge permit shall complete and file with the City Engineer an application in the form prescribed by the City Engineer and accompanied by the applicable fees. The applicant shall be required to submit the following information: 
1.  Name and address of applicant; 
2.  Volume of wastewater to be discharged; 
3.  Time of daily food preparation operations; 
4.  Description of food preparation, type, number of meals served, cleanup procedures, dining room capacity, number of employees and size of kitchen; and 
5.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City Engineer to evaluate the permit application. 
B.  The City Engineer shall review the application within ten (10) calendar days and may require additional information and an on-site inspection of the waste discharge system, treatment systems or other system relating to the waste discharge. Within thirty (30) days of the submission of an application deemed complete by the City Engineer, the city shall either issue subject to certain terms and conditions or deny a FOG discharge permit. A denial of any FOG discharge permit shall be without prejudice. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.070 - Duration of permit. 
A FOG discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five (5) years. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. The FSE shall be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.080 - Permit non-transferrable. 
FOG discharge permits shall be issued only for specific use for a specific operation. Any sale, lease, transfer or assignment of the use or operation for which the permit issued shall require a new permit. Any new or changed conditions of use or operation may also require a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.090 - Revocation of permit. 
The City Engineer may revoke the FOG discharge permit issued to any FSE found to be in violation of the requirements of this chapter or if the same does any of the following: 
(a)  Fails to comply with the conditions of the FOG discharge permit; 
(b)  Fails to install required grease pretreatment devices as required by the FOG discharge permit; 
(c)  Fails to comply with the reporting and/or pretreatment requirements or pretreatment device maintenance as required by the FOG discharge permit; 
(d)  Fails to comply with a NOV or a compliance schedule agreement or any other provision of this code; 
(e)  Knowingly provides a false FOG discharge permit application or makes false representations or submits false documents, reports or logs to the City Engineer; 
(f)  Refuses to allow inspections during normal business hours or after hours if emergency conditions exist such as an overflow or suspected overflow; 
(g)  Interferes with an FSE inspection or the sampling of an FSE discharge; or 
(h)  Causes or contributes to sewer blockages or sewer overflows within the public sewer or fails to address the conditions leading to more than one overflow event from a private system within a twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.100 - Fees. 
A.  General. Fees identified in this chapter shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The city shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to establish fees for operation and enforcement of the regulatory program established under this chapter, including but not limited to the fees listed under subsections (B) through (F) of this section. 
B.  FOG Discharge Permit Fee. FOG discharge permit fees shall be collected in conjunction with the issuance of the permit. 
C.  Inspection Fee. A fee based on the specified frequency of inspection as outlined in the FOG Control Program Manual shall be collected at the time of FOG discharge permit issuance. 
D.  Re-Inspection Fee. A re-inspection fee may be collected for additional inspections required to determine whether specified corrective actions for noted violations of this chapter have been implemented and if additional improvements are required. 
E.  NOV Fee. A NOV fee may be collected from parties receiving a NOV of the FOG discharge permit. 
F.  Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee. A grease disposal mitigation fee shall be collected from parties who obtain a hardship waiver according to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.110 - Maintenance reports. 
The City Engineer shall require the FSE to maintain records of grease pretreatment device cleaning, maintenance and grease removal and to report on such maintenance to the city as requested. The City Engineer may require the FSE to provide results of periodic measurements of its discharge which may include chemical analysis of oil and grease content. The FSE shall allow the City Engineer ready access at all reasonable times to all areas of the use or operation for purposes of sampling and inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.120 - Hardship waiver. 
The City Manager may waive certain conditions imposed pursuant to the issuance of a FOG discharge permit upon making a determination that said conditions are impractical. If the City Manager makes the determination that a hardship exists then the applicant will be subject to a grease disposal mitigation fee referenced under subsection (F) of Section 13.10.100, above. In determining whether good cause exists to grant a waiver, the following factors shall be considered: 
A.  Whether or not the installation of a grease pretreatment device would conflict with other applicable laws or standards; and 
B.  Whether or not the installation of a grease pretreatment device is impractical due to existing physical conditions of the property were the subject facility is located. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.130 - Enforcement and penalty for violation. 
A.  Wastewater Discharge Violation. Whenever a discharge of wastewater in any manner is in violation of this chapter or any other chapter of the El Monte Municipal Code or whenever a discharge of wastewater in violates any order issued by the City Engineer pursuant to this chapter or any other chapter of the El Monte Municipal Code and is declared a public nuisance, the discharge shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City Engineer. Any person responsible for such a public nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Falsifying of Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the City Engineer or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Notice of Violation (NOV). The City Engineer may issue a NOV to a FSE for any violation of this chapter. The NOV may require that corrective action be taken by a specified date. Failure to comply with a NOV may result in the issuance of a compliance schedule agreement. Failure by the FSE to implement any element of a compliance schedule agreement shall be a violation of this chapter. 
D.  Termination of Service. The City Engineer may revoke any FOG discharge permit issued or terminate any wastewater service to any use or operation if a violation of any provision of this chapter exists or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance. If such conditions exist, the City Engineer may act immediately to suspend the use or operation of the FSE. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
13.10.140 - Notice, correction of NOV and appeal. 
A.  Any notice issuance pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the City Engineer. Where the address is unknown, service may be made upon the owner of the use or operation involved. 
B.  Violations and enforcement actions may be appealed to the City Manager. Appeals shall be made in writing setting forth the following information: 
1.  The name and mailing address of the person making the request or appeal; 
2.  The determination involved; and 
3.  The error claimed to have been made and all reasons in support of the request. 
Appeals from the determination of the City Engineer shall be filed with the City Manager's Office. Appeals from decisions of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The required fee shall be paid with the filing. All requests shall be filed within ten (10) days following the date of the final determination to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2742, § 2, 5-5-2009)  
Chapter 13.12 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
"Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
"District" or "underground utility district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
"Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees. 
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
"Utility" means and includes all persons, agencies and entities, public or private, supplying by means of electrical materials or devices, any electric, communication or similar or associated service, including any such service supplied only to departments or divisions of the supplier. 
(Prior code §§ 7711—7711.5)  
Article I. - Establishment  
13.12.020 - Council hearing. 
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
(Prior code § 7712)  
13.12.030 - Notice. 
The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. 
(Prior code § 7712.1)  
13.12.040 - Conducting of hearing. 
Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 7712.2)  
13.12.050 - Report. 
Prior to holding such public hearing, the Director of Public Works shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Prior code § 7712.3)  
13.12.060 - Council designation of district. 
If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Prior code § 7712.4)  
13.12.070 - Notice of establishment. 
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to this article, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall, prior to the date specified in said resolution, provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
(Prior code § 7712.5)  
13.12.080 - Notice of establishment—Method. 
Such notice by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to this article, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Prior code § 7712.6)  
Article II. - Prohibitions and Exceptions  
13.12.090 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Article I of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.12.110, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
A.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, in order to provide emergency service temporary overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. Any person installing such temporary overhead facilities shall, as soon as practicable, notify the Director of Public Works of any such temporary overhead facility. The Director of Public Works may require any such temporary overhead facility to be relocated and so maintained as he may deem necessary to prevent unnecessary interference with vehicular traffic or undue hazard to the public safety. 
B.  Other Exceptions. This chapter, and any resolution adopted pursuant to Article I of this chapter, shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
1.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works; 
2.  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
3.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
4.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts; 
5.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
6.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
7.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
8.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Prior code §§ 7713—7713.2)  
Article III. - Responsibility  
13.12.100 - Utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Article I of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(Prior code § 7714)  
13.12.110 - Property owners. 
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.12.100 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Article I of this chapter, the Director of Public Works shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Commission. 
(Prior code § 7714.1)  
13.12.120 - City. 
City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Article I of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7714.2)  
Article IV. - Performance  
13.12.130 - Notice. 
The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In the case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of El Monte. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the Director of Public Works shall within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises. 
(Prior code § 7715)  
13.12.140 - Content of notice. 
The notice given by the Director of Public Works to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the Director of Public Works will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
(Prior code § 7715.1)  
13.12.150 - Performance by city. 
If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the Director of Public Works shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the Director of Public Works shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. 
(Prior code § 7715.2)  
13.12.160 - Cost report. 
Upon completion of the work by the Director of Public Works, he or she shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof including administrative overhead, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter. 
(Prior code § 7715.3)  
13.12.170 - Notice of hearing. 
The Director of Public Works shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(Prior code § 7715.4)  
13.12.180 - Hearing on report. 
Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
(Prior code § 7715.5)  
13.12.190 - Collection of cost. 
If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Director of Public Works, and the Director of Public Works is directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum. 
(Prior code § 7715.6)  
13.12.200 - Time extension. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Article I of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Prior code § 7715.7)  
Chapter 13.16 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL 
Sections:  
Article I. - Title, Purpose and General Provisions 
 
13.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of El Monte Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Ordinance" and may be so cited. 
(Prior code § 7800)  
13.16.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of city of El Monte citizens by: 
1.  Eliminating nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm drain; 
2.  Controlling the discharge to municipal separate storm drains from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
3.  Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable. 
B.  The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act. 
(Prior code § 7801)  
13.16.030 - Definitions. 
A.  Any terms defined in the federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on November 16, 1990 (as may from time to time be amended) as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in that statute or regulations. Specifically, the definition of the following terms included in that statute or regulations are incorporated by reference, as now applicable or as may hereafter be amended: discharge, illicit discharge, pollutant, and stormwater. These terms presently are defined as follows: 
"Discharge" means (1) any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any point source, or (2) any addition of any pollutant to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft. 
"Illicit discharge" means any discharge to the city storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit, discharges resulting from fire fighting activities, and discharges further exempted at Section 13.16.020. 
"Municipal NPDES permit" or "NPDES permit" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, Order No. 01-182, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001 Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Stormwater and Urban Runoff Discharges within the County of Los Angeles, and the incorporated cities therein, except the City of Long Beach and any amendments or revisions thereof. 
"Pollutant" means those "pollutants" defined in CWA Section 502 (6) (33 U.S.C. Section 1362 (6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code Section 13373. 
"Stormwater" means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
B.  When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
"Authorized enforcement officer" means the Community Development Director and those individuals designated by the Community Development Director as authorized enforcement officers. 
"Best management practices" (BMPs) means methods, measures, or practices designed and selected to reduce or eliminate the discharge of pollutants to surface waters from point and nonpoint source discharges including stormwater. BMPs include structural and nonstructural controls, and operation and maintenance procedures, which can be applied before, during, and/or after pollution producing activities. 
"City" means the City of El Monte. 
"City storm drain system" means and includes but is not limited to those facilities within the city by which stormwater may be conveyed to the waters of the United States, including flood control channels, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains, which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at CFR Section 122.2. 
"County" means the county of Los Angeles. 
"County storm drain system" means and includes but is not limited to those facilities within the county by which stormwater may be conveyed to the waters of the United States, including flood control channels, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters ditches, man-made channels or storm drains, which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2. 
"Director" means the Community Development of the City of El Monte. 
"Facility" means any nonresidential premises. 
"Nonstormwater discharge" means any discharge that is not entirely composed of stormwater. 
"Premises" means any building, lot parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
(Ord. 2572 § 1, 2002: Prior code § 7802)  
13.16.040 - Responsibility for administration. 
This chapter shall be administered for the City by the Community Development Director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 2572 § 2, 2002: prior code § 7803)  
13.16.050 - Construction and application. 
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and the municipal NPDES Permit No. CAS004001 (Order No. 01-182) and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. 2572 § 3, 2002: prior code § 7804)  
13.16.060 - Taking. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not operate to deprive any landowner of substantially all of the market value of his/her property or otherwise constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. If application of this chapter to a specific project would create a taking then pursuant to the chapter the City Council may allow additional land uses, but only to the extent necessary to avoid a taking. Such uses shall be consistent with and carry out the purposes of this chapter as stated in Section 13.16.020. 
(Prior code § 7806)  
Article II. - Discharge Regulations and Requirements 
 
13.16.070 - Discharge of pollutants. 
A.  The discharge of nonstorm discharges to the city storm drain system is prohibited. All discharges of material other than stormwater discharges must be in compliance with an NPDES permit issued for the discharge (other than the municipal NPDES Permit). 
B.  Exemptions to Discharge Prohibition. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in this section. 
1.  The prohibition of discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations. 
2.  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to waters of the United States when properly managed: water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, infiltration to separate storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges or flows from fire fighting, accordingly are not subject to the prohibition of discharges. 
(Ord. 2572 § 4, 2002: prior code § 7807)  
13.16.080 - Discharge in violation of permit. 
Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the municipal NPDES Permit (this permit is available for viewing at the City of El Monte, Community Development Department, 11333 Valley Boulevard, El Monte, California) and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. 
(Ord. 2572 § 5, 2002: prior code § 7808)  
13.16.090 - Illicit discharge and illicit connections. 
It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, or continue illicit drainage connections to the city storm drain system, and to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the city storm drain system. This prohibition is expressly retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(Prior code § 7809)  
13.16.100 - Reduction of pollutants in stormwater. 
Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the city storm drain system shall undertake all practical measures to reduce such pollutants. Example of such activities include ownership and use of facilities which may be a source of pollutants such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, stores fronting streets, etc. The following minimum requirements shall apply: 
A.  1.  Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except containers or in lawfully established waste disposal facilities. 
2.  The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property as required for the disposal of garbage. 
3.  No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or any other body in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
B.  Standard for Parking Lots and Similar Structures. Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station pavement, paved private street or road, or similar structure, shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the city storm drain system. 
C.  Best Management Practices for New Developments and Redevelopments. The Director may adopt regulations establishing controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants. The Director may require of any construction contractor performing work in the city a water pollution prevention plan prior to final map approval, or issuance of a building permit whichever first occurs. 
D.  Notification of Intent and Compliance with General Permits. Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger, described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, shall provide notice of intent, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such discharges. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. 
E.  Compliance with Best Management Practices. Where Best Management Practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any federal, state of California, regional, and/or City Agency, for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharges of nonstormwater to the stormwater system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as may be identified by the Director. 
(Ord. 2572 §§ 6, 7, 2002; prior code § 7810)  
Article III. - Inspection and Enforcement 
 
13.16.110 - Authority to inspect. 
A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the officer may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the office by this chapter; provided that (1) if such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and (2) if such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
B.  Any such request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the officer is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
C.  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit discharges, discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater system, or similar factors. 
D.  Authority to Sample and Establish Sampling Devices. With the consent of the owner or occupant or pursuant to a search warrant, any authorized enforcement officer may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the officer may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on-site. 
E.  1.  Notification of Spills. All persons in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility have a personal responsibility to train facility personnel and maintain notification procedures to assure immediate notification is provided to the city of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of material, pollutants or waste creating a risk of discharge into the city storm drain system. 
2.  As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants or waste which may result in pollutants or nonstormwater discharge entering the city storm drain system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and clean up of such release and shall notify the city of the occurrence by telephoning 580-2058 and confirming the notification by correspondence to Community Development Department, Public Works and Engineering Division, 11333 Valley Boulevard, El Monte, CA 91731, Attention: Spill Notification. 
F.  Requirement to Test or Monitor. Any authorized enforcement officer may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater system, undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the officer may specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analyses and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports required. 
(Ord. 2572 § 8, 2002; prior code § 7811)  
13.16.120 - Violations constituting misdemeanors. 
Unless otherwise specified by chapter, the violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, at the discretion of the authorized enforcement officer may be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. 
(Prior code § 7812)  
13.16.130 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36901. 
B.  Upon conviction of an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36900. After a third conviction for a violation of the same provision subsequent violations within a twelve (12) month period may be charges as a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 7813)  
13.16.140 - Continuing violation. 
Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 7814)  
13.16.150 - Concealment. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(Prior code § 7815)  
13.16.160 - Acts potentially resulting in violation of Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those Acts including civil and criminal penalty. Any enforcement action authorized under this article should also include notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Prior code § 7816)  
13.16.170 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
A.  In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, is declared and deemed a nuisance, may be summarily abated and/or restored by any authorized enforcement officer, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City Attorney. 
B.  The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property. If the invoice is not paid within sixty (60) days, a lien shall be placed upon and against the property. If the lien is not satisfied within three (3) months, the property may be sold in satisfaction thereof in a like manner as other real property is sold under execution. 
C.  If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the Director shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing. 
D.  In any administrative or civil proceeding under this chapter in which the city prevails, the city shall be awarded all costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, costs of suit and reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. 2572 § 9, 2002; Prior code § 7817)  
13.16.180 - California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure are applicable to judicial review of city decisions pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7818)  
13.16.190 - Civil actions. 
In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the city in any such action, the city may seek, and the Court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
A.  A temporary and/or permanent injunction; 
B.  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection; 
C.  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation; 
D.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7819)  
13.16.200 - Administrative enforcement powers. 
In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, any authorized enforcement officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies: 
A.  Cease and Desist Orders. When an authorized enforcement officer finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this chapter, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: (1) comply with the requirement, (2) comply with a time schedule for compliance, and/or (3) take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. 
B.  Notice to Clean. 
1.  Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds any oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in an increase of pollutants entering the city storm drain system or a nonstormwater discharge to the city storm drain system, he or she may give notice to remove such oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice. 
2.  In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the required activities as described in the notice, the authorized enforcement officer may cause such required activities as described in the notice and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property. If the invoice is not paid within sixty (60) days, a lien shall be placed upon and against the property. If the lien is not satisfied by the owner of the property within three (3) months, the property may be sold in satisfaction thereof in a like manner as other real property is sold under execution. 
(Prior code § 7820)  
13.16.210 - Authority to arrest or issue citations. 
A.  Authorized enforcement officers shall have and are vested with the authority to arrest or cite and release any person who violates any section of this code in the manner provided by the California Penal Code for the arrest or release on citation of misdemeanors or infractions as prescribed by Chapter 5, 5c and 5d of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code (or as the same may be hereinafter amended). 
B.  Such authorized enforcement officers or employees may issue a citation and notice to appear in the manner prescribed by Chapter 5c of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code, including Section 853.6 (or as the same may hereafter be amended). It is the intent of the City Council that the immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code be applicable to public officers or employees acting in the course and scope of employment pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7821)  
13.16.220 - Remedies not exclusive. 
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Prior code § 7822)  
13.16.230 - Appeal. 
Any person, firm, corporation or organization required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities by an authorized enforcement officer who is aggrieved by the decision of the authorized enforcement officer may appeal such decision to the Director within ten (10) days following the effective date of the decision by writing to the Director. Upon receipt of such request, the Director shall request a report and recommendation from the authorized enforcement officer and shall set the matter for hearing at the earliest practical date. At said hearing, the Director may hear additional evidence, and may reject, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement officer's decision. Said decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 2572 § 10, 2002: prior code § 7823)  
13.16.240 - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Prior code § 7824)  
Article IV. - Coordination with Other Programs 
 
13.16.250 - Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program. 
After the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter the business plan of any facility subject to the city's hazardous materials inventory and response program shall be revised within one year to include a program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on nonstormwater discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce stormwater pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. All facilities notified by the City of El Monte shall be required to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2572 § 11, 2002: prior code § 7825)  
Chapter 13.20 - STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2840, § 2(Exh. A), adopted June 10, 2014, amended Ch. 13.20 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.20, §§ 13.20.010—13.20.270, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2568 §§ 1—4, 6, 8, 9, 2002; Ord. 2529 § 1 (part), 2001; and Ord. 2573 §§ 1—7, 2002. 
 
13.20.010 - Definitions. 
Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this Chapter 13.20 shall be defined as that term in the current municipal NPDES permit, or if it is not specifically defined in either the municipal NPDES permit, then as such term is defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder. If the definition of any term contained in this chapter conflicts with the definition of the same term in the current municipal NPDES permit in effect at the city at the time of development application, then the definition contained in the municipal NPDES permit shall govern. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter: 
"Automotive service facility" means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes. For inspection purposes, city need not inspect facilities with SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 5511, provided that these facilities have no outside activities or materials that may be exposed to stormwater. 
"Basin plan" means the Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region Basin Plan for the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and subsequent amendments. 
"Best management practice (BMP)" means practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water. 
"Biofiltration" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through incidental infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Therefore, the term "biofiltration" as used in this chapter is defined to include only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or achieve the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an underdrain (subject to approval by the Regional Board's Executive Officer). Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention systems with an underdrain and bioswales. 
"Bioretention" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and infiltration. The bioretention system typically includes a minimum two-foot top layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel-filled temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in the municipal NPDES permit, a bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not include an underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with an underdrain it is regulated by the municipal NPDES permit as biofiltration. 
"Bioswale" means a LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass or other dense, low-growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect stormwater runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense vegetation for a period of several minutes. 
"City" means the city of El Monte. 
"Clean Water Act (CWA)" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted in 1972, by Public Law 92-500, and amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987. The Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of pollutants to Waters of the United States unless the discharge is in accordance with an NPDES permit. 
"Commercial malls" means any development on private land comprised of one or more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various merchandise, with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers. 
"Construction activity" means any construction or demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activity that results in land disturbance. Construction activity also covers any activity that requires coverage under the State General Construction Permit by the State of California General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Industrial Activities or for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activities. 
"Control" means to minimize, reduce or eliminate by technological, legal, contractual, or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities. 
"Development" means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail, and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
"Directly adjacent" means situated within two hundred (200) feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area. 
"Discharge" means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance. 
"Disturbed area" means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation. 
"Flow-through BMPs" means modular, vault type "high flow biotreatment" devices contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain. 
"General construction activities storm water permit (GCASP)" means the general NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the discharge of stormwater from construction activities under certain conditions. 
"General industrial activities storm water permit (GIASP)" means the general NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the discharge of stormwater from certain industrial activities under certain conditions. 
"Green roof" means a LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation leaves and through evapotranspiration. Green roofs may be designed as either a bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. To receive credit as a bioretention BMP, the green roof system planting medium shall be of sufficient depth to provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain the design storm depth and may not be designed or constructed with an underdrain. 
"Hazardous material(s)" means any material(s) defined as hazardous by Division 20, Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Hillside" means a property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is twenty-five (25) percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes. 
"Hydromodification" means the alteration of the hydrologic characteristics of coastal and non-coastal waters, which in turn could cause degradation of water resources. Hydromodification can cause excessive erosion and/or sedimentation rates, causing excessive turbidity, channel aggradation and/or degradation (source: GCASP). 
"Impervious surface" means any man-made or modified surface that prevents or significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying soil, resulting in runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at an increased rate, when compared to natural conditions prior to development. Examples of places that commonly exhibit impervious surfaces include parking lots, driveways, roadways, storage areas, and rooftops. 
"Industrial park" means land development that is set aside for industrial development. Industrial parks are usually located close to transport facilities, especially where more than one transport modalities coincide: highways, railroads, airports, and navigable rivers. It includes office parks, which have offices and light industry. 
"Infiltration BMP" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by capturing and infiltrating the runoff into in-situ soils or amended onsite soils. Examples of infiltration BMPs include infiltration basins, dry wells, and pervious pavement. 
"LID" means low impact development. LID consists of building and landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff. 
"MS4" means municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The MS4 is a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains): 
1.  Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; 
2.  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
3.  Which is not a combined sewer; and 
4.  Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2. (40 CFR 122.26(b)(8)). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA § 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an "approved program." 
"Natural drainage system" means a drainage system that has not been improved (e.g., channelized or armored). The clearing or dredging of a natural drainage system does not cause the system to be classified as an improved drainage system. 
"New development" means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to a municipal storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Parking lot" means land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
"Planning priority projects" means development projects subject to city conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate stormwater pollution, prior to completion of the project. 
"Pollutant" means any "pollutant" defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act or incorporated into the California Water Code Section 13373. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge). 
2.  Metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, and non-metals such as phosphorus and arsenic). 
3.  Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease). 
4.  Excessive eroded soil, sediment, and particulate materials in amounts that may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the state. 
5.  Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities). 
6.  Substances having characteristics such as pH less than 6 or greater than 9, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus. 
"Project" means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities. The term is not limited to "project" as defined under CEQA (Public Resources Code Section 21065). 
"Rainfall harvest and use" means a LID BMP system designed to capture runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building department. 
"Receiving water" means "water of the United States" into which waste and/or pollutants are or may be discharged. 
"Redevelopment" means land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activity related to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
"Regional board" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. 
"Restaurant" means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC Code 5812). 
"Retail gasoline outlet" means any retail gasoline outlet per SIC 5541. 
"Routine maintenance." Routine maintenance projects include, but are not limited to projects conducted to: 
1.  Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility. 
2.  Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities. 
3.  Includes road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts. 
4.  Update existing lines* and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased capacity. 
5.  Repair leaks. 
Routine maintenance does not include construction of new** lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations. 
* Update existing lines includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes. 
** New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines. 
"Significant ecological areas (SEAs)" means an area that is determined to possess an example of biotic resources that cumulatively represent biological diversity, for the purposes of protecting biotic diversity, as part of the Los Angeles County General Plan. Areas are designated as SEAs, if they possess one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  The habitat of rare, endangered, and threatened plant and animal species. 
2.  Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant and animal species that are either one of a kind, or are restricted in distribution on a regional basis. 
3.  Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant and animal species that are either one of a kind or are restricted in distribution in Los Angeles County. 
4.  Habitat that at some point in the life cycle of a species or group of species, serves as a concentrated breeding, feeding, resting, migrating grounds and is limited in availability either regionally or within Los Angeles County. 
5.  Biotic resources that are of scientific interest because they are either an extreme in physical/geographical limitations, or represent an unusual variation in a population or community. 
6.  Areas important as game species habitat or as fisheries. 
7.  Areas that would provide for the preservation of relatively undisturbed examples of natural biotic communities in Los Angeles County. 
8.  Special areas. 
"Site" means land or water area where any "facility or activity" is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
"Storm drain system" means any facilities or any part of those facilities, including streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels, and watercourses that are used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of stormwater and are located within the city of El Monte. 
"Storm water" or "stormwater" means water that originates from atmospheric moisture (rain or snow) and that falls onto land, water, or other surfaces. Without any change in its meaning, this term may be spelled or written as one word or two (2) separate words. 
"Stormwater runoff" means that part of precipitation (rainfall or snowmelt) which travels across a surface to the storm drain system or receiving waters. 
"SUSMP" means the Los Angeles Countywide Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan. The SUSMP was required as part of the previous municipal NPDES permit (Order No. 01-182, NPDES No. CAS004001) and required plans that designate best management practices (BMPs) that must be used in specified categories of development project. 
"Urban runoff" means surface water flow produced by storm and non-storm events. Non-storm events include flow from residential, commercial, or industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water. 
(Ord. No. 2840, § 2(Exh. A), 6-10-2014)  
13.20.015 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Low Impact Development (LID) Ordinance of the city of El Monte" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 2840, § 2(Exh. A), 6-10-2014)  
13.20.020 - Stormwater pollution control measures for development planning and construction activities. 
A.  Objective. The provisions of this section contain requirements for site design and post-construction BMP operation and maintenance of development and redevelopment projects to comply with the city of El Monte's municipal NPDES permit (permit) currently in effect at the time of development application submittal, to lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices, and integrate LID design principles to mimic predevelopment hydrology through infiltration, evapotranspiration and rainfall harvest and use. 
B.  Scope. This section contains requirements for stormwater pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the city of El Monte to further define and adopt stormwater pollution control measures, to develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies, and to grant alternative compliance for technical infeasibility, as allowed by the municipal NPDES permit currently in effect at the time of development application, and collect fees from projects granted exceptions. Except as otherwise provided herein, the city of El Monte shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section. Any guidance documents supporting implementation of the municipal NPDES permit requirements, currently in effect at the time of development application submittal, meeting application in this chapter, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
C.  Applicability. This section is applicable to projects as defined below: 
1.  All development and redevelopment projects, termed "planning priority projects," as defined in the municipal NPDES permit currently in effect at the time of the development application, shall comply with subsection E of Section 13.20.020. 
2.  Street and road construction projects of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface, in addition to complying with all other applicable provisions of Section 13.20.020, shall follow USEPA guidance regarding "Managing West Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets" (December 2008, EPA-833-F-08-009) to the maximum extent practicable. This subsection applies to standalone streets, roads, highways, and freeway projects, and also applies to streets within larger projects, including capital improvement projects (CIPs). 
3.  Single family hillside homes (as defined in City Code Section 13.20.010 subsection C), in addition to complying with all other applicable provisions of Section 13.20.020, shall implement the following measures: 
i.  Conserve natural areas. 
ii.  Protect slopes and channels. 
iii.  Provide storm drain stenciling and signage. 
iv.  Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would results in slope instability. 
v.  Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability. 
4.  Any other project, as deemed appropriate by the department, submitted for complete discretionary or non-discretionary permit application filed with the department after December 31, 2012. 
D.  Effective Date. The planning and land development requirements contained in this chapter shall become effective thirty (30) days from the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This includes all applicable projects listed in subsection C of Section 13.20.020 that are discretionary permit projects or project phases that have not been deemed complete for processing, or discretionary permit projects without vesting tentative maps that have not requested and received an extension of previously granted approvals within thirty (30) days of adoption of the ordinance. Projects that have been deemed complete within thirty (30) days of adoption of the ordinance are not subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
E.  Stormwater Pollution Control Requirements. All applicable projects listed in subsection C of Section 13.20.020 shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volumes to the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use. All applicable projects shall prepare a LID plan that is submitted to and approved by the Department. All LID plans shall comply with the following: 
a.  Low impact development standards and BMP implementation hierarchy: All project applicants shall: 
i.  Properly select, design and maintain LID and hydromodification control BMPs to address pollutants that are likely to be generated, reduce changes to pre-development hydrology, assure long-term function and avoid breeding of vectors. 
ii.  Prioritize the selection of BMPs to remove stormwater pollutants, reduce stormwater runoff volume, and beneficially use stormwater to support an integrated approach to protecting water quality and managing water resources in the following order: 
1.  On-site infiltration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use; then 
2.  On-site biofiltration, offsite groundwater replenishment, and/or off-site retrofit. 
a.  If using biofiltration due to demonstrated technical infeasibility, then the volume to be biofiltrated shall be calculated using the following equation: 
B v = 1.5 * [SWQD v - R v ] 
Where: 
B v = biofiltration volume 
SWQD v = the storm water runoff from a 0.75 inch, 24-hour storm or the 85th percentile storm, whichever is greater 
R v = volume reliably retained on-site 
b.  Retain onsite the stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) as required per the permit currently in effect at the time of development application submittal. 
c.  When one hundred (100) percent onsite retention of the SWQDv is technically infeasible, partially or fully, the infeasibility shall be demonstrated in the submitted LID plan and approved by the Department. Technical infeasibility may result from conditions that may include, but are not limited to: 
i.  The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than 0.3 inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv onsite. 
ii.  Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within ten (10) feet of surface grade. 
iii.  Locations within one hundred (100) feet of a groundwater well used for drinking water. 
iv.  Brownfield development sites or other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern. 
v.  Locations with potential geotechnical hazards. 
vi.  Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the onsite volume retention requirement. 
d.  Projects that have successfully demonstrated technical infeasibility for full retention of the SWQDv to the Department, shall implement alternate compliance measures (alternate mitigation options) as designated in the permit currently in effect at the time of development application submittal. 
e.  Additional alternative compliance options, such as offsite infiltration, may be available to the project. The project applicant should contact the Department to determine eligibility. Alternative compliance options are as further specified in the permit currently in effect at the time of development application submittal. 
f.  A multi-phased project shall comply with the standards and requirements of this section for all of its phases by: 
i.  Designing a system acceptable to the Department to satisfy these standards and requirements for the entire site during the first phase; and/or 
ii.  Implementing these standards and requirements for each phase of development or redevelopment of the project during the first phase or prior to commencement of construction of a later phase, to the extent necessary to treat the stormwater from such later phase. 
iii.  For purposes of this subsection, "multi-phased project" shall mean any planning priority project implemented over more than one phase and the site of a multi-phased project shall include any land and water area designed and used to store, treat or manage stormwater runoff in connection with the development or redevelopment, including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property, whether developed or not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under common ownership or control with such development or redevelopment. 
g.  Minimize hydromodification impacts by maintaining the project's pre-development storm water runoff volumes, flow rates, and durations by maintaining the erosion potential (EP) in streams at 1, or implementing hydromodification control BMPs and/or LID strategies, or other restoration measures to meet hydromodification control criteria as designated in the permit currently in effect at the time of development application submittal. 
h.  Department may exempt certain applicable projects listed in subsection C of Section 13.20.020 from hydromodification control requirements where assessments of downstream channel conditions and proposed discharge hydrology indicate that adverse hydromodification effects to beneficial uses of natural drainage systems are unlikely: 
i.  The replacement, maintenance or repair of existing, publicly-maintained flood control facilities, storm drains, or transportation networks. 
ii.  Redevelopment of a previously developed site in an urbanized area that does not increase the effective impervious area or decrease the infiltration capacity of pervious areas compared to the pre-project conditions. 
iii.  Projects that have any increased discharge directly or via a storm drain to a sump, lake, area under tidal influence, into a waterway that has an estimated one-hundred-year peak flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) cubic feet per second or more, or other receiving water that is not susceptible to hydromodification impacts. 
iv.  Projects that discharge directly or through a storm drain into concrete or other engineered (not natural) channels (e.g. channelized or armored rip rap, shotcrete, etc.) which, in turn, discharge into receiving water that is not susceptible to hydromodification impacts. 
v.  Single family homes that incorporate LID BMPs. 
F.  LID Plan Review. The applicant for any development project shall submit a LID plan to the Department for review and approval that provides a comprehensive, technical discussion of how the development project will comply with this Section 13.20.020. A deposit and fee to recover associated review costs shall be required. Timing for obtaining LID plan approval shall be as follows: 
a.  For subdivisions, the LID plan shall be approved prior to the tentative map. 
b.  For any development project requiring a conditional use permit (CUP) or other discretionary entitlement required under (City Code Section 16.38.010, General Purposes), the LID plan shall be approved prior to the issuance of any such CUP or other discretionary entitlement. 
c.  For all development projects, the LID plan shall be approved prior to issuance of a grading permit for the development project, or when no grading permit is required, prior to the issuance of a building permit. When no grading or building permit is required, LID plan approval shall be prior to the commencement of any development activity or as otherwise indicated in the non-discretionary land use approval. 
G.  Ongoing Maintenance. 
a.  All project's LID and hydromodification control features shall be maintained and shall remain operable at all times and shall not be removed from the project unless and until such features have been replaced with other LID and/or hydromodification control features in accordance with this section. 
b.  Unless excused by the Department, all LID plans shall include an operation and maintenance plan and monitoring plan for all LID practices, LID BMPs and hydromodification control features incorporated into the project. 
c.  The owner of the subject development project site shall record a covenant or agreement, approved by the Department, in the office of the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk indicating that the owner of the subject development project site is aware of and agrees to the requirements in this subsection. The covenant or agreement shall also include a diagram of the development project site indicating the location and type of each LID and hydromodification control feature incorporated into the development project. The time to record such convenient or agreement shall be as follows: 
i.  For any subdivision, prior to final map approval. 
ii.  For any other development project, prior to issuance of a grading plan approval for the development project, and when no grading plan approval is required, prior to issuance of building plan approval for the development project. 
H.  Other Agencies of the city of El Monte. All city of El Monte departments, offices, entities and agencies, shall establish administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter on all applicable projects, as listed in subsection C of Section 13.20.020, and report their activities annually to the Department. 
I.  Validity. If any provision of this chapter is found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect remaining provisions of this chapter that are declared to be severable. 
J.  Certification. The City Clerk shall certify to the passage of this chapter and have it published in accordance with Council policy. 
(Ord. No. 2840, § 2(Exh. A), 6-10-2014)  
13.20.030—13.20.180 - Reserved.  
13.20.190 - Installation and maintenance. 
A.  Structural and treatment control best management practices must be implemented and installed as shown on the approved plans. All systems shall be constructed and installed in such a manner to permit convenient and safe access for perpetual inspection and maintenance. 
B.  Any person, as the term person is defined herein, as well as the agents, heirs, successors and assigns of such a person, who own, operate, manage or maintain improvements, systems and equipment required under this chapter or under any plan approved pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to, clarifiers, sediment ponds, and filters shall maintain such improvements, systems and equipment in good working order at all times. 
C.  The conveyance, transfer, licensing and/or leasing of any property or project subject to this chapter or subject to the terms and conditions of any plan approved under this chapter shall require the execution of a recorded covenant requiring the person to whom the property and/or project is conveyed, transferred, licensed and/or leased as well as the successors, heirs and assigns of such a person to either: 
(i)  Assume responsibility for all ongoing compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any plan approved pursuant to this chapter, including the ongoing operation, management, maintenance and repair of all improvements, systems and equipment required under this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter; or 
(ii)  Construct and install, at the persons sole cost and expense, new improvements, systems and equipment that satisfy any and all heightened BMPs and other standards which may be required under the El Monte Municipal Code or under state or federal law at the time of the conveyance, transfer, licensing or leasing, subject to any and all review and updated plan approval procedures set forth under this chapter as the same may provide at the time of the conveyance, transfer, licensing or leasing. 
The foregoing notwithstanding, in the event any property or project subject to this chapter is licensed or leased, the licensor or lessee shall remain jointly and severally responsible along with the licensee or lessee for compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all provisions of any plan approved under this chapter or any subsequent plan or approval arising out the construction and/or installation of new improvements, systems and equipment pursuant to subsection C.(ii) above. The covenant(s) required under this subsection shall be included in any purchase any agreement for the conveyance or other transfer of the property and in any licenses or lease agreement and shall be recorded as a covenant against the property. The issuance of a certificate occupancy, business license or other permit to the person to whom property and/or any project subject to this chapter or any plan approved under this chapter is conveyed, transferred, licensed or leased shall be conditioned upon the satisfaction of the requirements of this subsection which are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other conditions that must be satisfied for such certificates, licenses and/or permits. 
D.  For residential projects and properties with common areas maintained by a homeowner's associations, language regarding the responsibility for the maintenance, repair and upkeep of all improvements, systems and equipment called for under this chapter or any plan approved under this chapter shall be included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&R) for such properties/projects. In addition, printed educational materials will be required to accompany the first deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to provide information on what improvements, systems and equipment are present, signs that maintenance, repair and upkeep is required and how the necessary maintenance, repair and upkeep can be performed. The transfer of the CC&Rs shall also be required with any subsequent sale of the property and/or the project. 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Editor's note— Sections 13.20.190—13.20.270: Omitted by Urgency Ordinance No. 2840 and reinserted with confirming changes to text by Urgency Ordinance No. 2877 dated March 1, 2016.  
13.20.210 - Inspections. 
The City Manager, City Engineer or designee(s) may enter and inspect any private property or project subject to this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter during any reasonable time for the purpose of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter. Such inspection may include, but is not limited to: 
A.  Inspecting efficiency and adequacy of construction or maintenance of post construction BMPs; 
B.  Inspection sampling and testing of any area runoff, soils in areas subject to runoff and/or treatment system discharges; 
C.  Inspection of integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, including the use of smoke and dye tests and video survey of such pipes and conveyance systems; 
D.  Inspection of all records of the owner, contractor, developer or occupant of public or private property relating to BMP inspections and maintenance conducted by the owner, contractor, developer or occupant; 
E.  Identifying points of stormwater discharge from the property and/or project whether surface or subsurface and locating any illicit connection or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Note— See editor's note, § 13.20.190.  
13.20.220 - Violation. 
A.  Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
B.  The City Manager, City Engineer or designee(s) may issue notices of violation and administrative orders to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of such a notice of violation or an administrative order shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Note— See editor's note, § 13.20.190.  
13.20.230 - Nuisance. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter is declared a nuisance and may be abated by the city in accordance with provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code and applicable state law for the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Note— See editor's note, § 13.20.190.  
13.20.240 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available to the city under any applicable federal, state or local law and its within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Note— See editor's note, § 13.20.190.  
13.20.250 - Inspection searches. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter, the City Manager, City Engineer, their designee(s) or any other designated enforcement officer for the city may enter any property in the city regulated by this chapter in a manner authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Note— See editor's note, § 13.20.190.  
13.20.260 - Fees. 
A.  The City Council may by adoption of a resolution establish, and from time to time adjust, modify, amend or repeal regulatory fees and charges for the administration of the regulatory program established by this chapter. The fee may be established to recover costs associated with application and plan reviews, inspections and other costs associated with the review and approval of plans, improvements, systems and equipment called for under this chapter or called for under any plan approved pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Pending the establishment of any such fees pursuant to subsection A, above, all applicants pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for paying to the city all necessary and reasonable costs associated with the review and approval of all plans called for under this chapter; and the inspection of all improvements, systems and equipment called for under this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter. The foregoing notwithstanding, such reasonable and necessary costs shall not exceed the aggregate sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a development site which is less than fifteen (15) acres in size and such costs shall be calculated in accordance with principles consistent with OMB Circular No. 122. The provisions of this subsection 13.020.260(B), are declaratory of existing provisions of subsection 13.20.020(F). 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Note— See editor's note, § 13.20.190.  
13.20.270 - Recovery of enforcement costs associated with violations of this chapter. 
The city may also recover costs of prosecution and enforcement from any other person who has been found to be in violation of this chapter or any plan approved pursuant to this chapter. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, the cost to city for any re-inspections of a property or project, monitoring, cleanup and the preparation, issuance and enforcement of any subsequent notices of violation or enforcement orders. 
(Ord. No. 2877, § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Note— See editor's note, § 13.20.190.  
Title 14 - SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
14.01.010 - Purpose. 
Purpose: this municipal code chapter is envisioned as a compendium of designated components of a sustainable community as defined in the proposed city of El Monte General Plan and as future needs become evident. The new chapter is designed to be adaptive and flexible in that it provides the enabling language and the fluidity to add, implement, and modify standards via a resolution or ordinance process to respond to environmental demands and challenges of future generations. 
(Ord. 2729 § 1 (part), 2008)  
14.01.020 - General provisions. 
Sustainable development is in a continual change of flux. To meet these changes, this chapter must have the ability to amend the various sections with either a resolution or adoption of an ordinance. Each amendment to this chapter that creates fixed standard must be adopted by an ordinance. Other amendments, such as a fee schedule that may be reviewed and modified on annual bases or more frequently can be adopted by resolution. 
(Ord. 2729 § 1 (part), 2008)  
14.01.030 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violation. The following shall constitute a violation of this title and may, in the prosecutorial discretion of the city and the City Attorney, be punishable as a misdemeanor in accordance with applicable provisions of Title 1 (General Provisions) of the El Monte Municipal Code: 
1.  Any failure to comply with the requirements of any building plans or specifications approved by the Chief Building Official in accordance with the provisions of this title; or 
2.  Any failure to comply with any conditions of approval imposed in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this title shall liable to the city for a civil penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
C.  Cumulative Remedies. The foregoing remedies shall be deemed nonexclusive, cumulative and in addition to any other remedy the city may have at law or in equity, including but not limited to injunctive relief to prevent violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2729 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 14.02 - DROUGHT RESPONSE CONSERVATION PLAN 
Sections: 
 
14.02.010 - Purpose and authorization. 
A.  Declaration of Policy . This chapter establishes water management requirements necessary to conserve water, promote effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial water use, prevent the waste of water, and prevent the unreasonable use of water and unreasonable water use practices. Recognizing that water is an increasingly scarce natural resource that requires careful management, especially in times of drought, the city hereby pursues the objectives set forth under this subsection in order to assure adequate supplies of water to meet the needs of the public, and to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Authorization . This chapter establishes water conservation measures to be applied citywide pursuant to the authority granted to the city under 23 CFR § 864 as well as separate water measures to be applied specifically to El Monte Water Department customers during times of declared water shortages, or declared water emergencies. As to the conservations measures to be applied to El Monte Water Department customers, this chapter establishes an escalating set of drought response actions to be implemented in times of shortage, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought conditions and decreasing available supplies. 
C.  Application . As set forth under this chapter, certain provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons within the city of El Monte while others shall apply only to persons who are customers of the El Monte Water Department or property using water provided by the El Monte Water Department wherever situated." 
D.  Presumption . For purposes of this title, it shall be presumed that a person in whose name the El Monte Water Department is, or has last been, billed or who is receiving the economic benefit of the water supply has knowingly made, caused, used or permitted the use of water received from the city for a purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2845, §§ 1, 2, 10-14-2014)  
14.02.015 - Water usage prohibitions applying to all persons. 
A.  The water conservation requirements under this Section 14.02.015 shall apply to all persons within the city of El Monte. 
B.  To promote water conservation, each of the following actions is prohibited, except where necessary to address an immediate health and safety need or to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by any state or federal governmental agency: 
1.  The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes in a manner that causes runoff such that water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private and public walkways, roadways, parking lots, or structures; 
2.  The use of a hose that dispenses potable water to wash a motor vehicle, except where the hose is fitted with a shut-off nozzle or device attached to it that causes it to cease dispensing water immediately when not in use; 
3.  The application of potable water to driveways and sidewalks; 
4.  The use of potable water in a fountain or other decorative water feature, except where the water is part of a recirculating system; 
5.  The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes during and up to forty-eight (48) hours after measurable rainfall; and 
6.  The serving of drinking water other than upon request in eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to restaurants, hotels, cafes, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drink are served and/or purchased. 
C.  Violations of this Section 14.02.015 may result in the imposition of fines or other penalties pursuant to Section 14.02.085 (penalties for violation of water usage prohibitions under Section 14.02.015) below. 
(Ord. No. 2845, § 3, 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 2861, § 2, 8-4-2015)  
14.02.020 - Stage 1—Drought preparedness conditions. 
A.  During Stage 1 voluntary drought preparedness conditions, all water customers of the El Monte Water Department as well as all other persons using water provided by the same shall be encouraged by the city to adhere to the following voluntary water conservation measures as applicable: 
1.  Automated sprinklers, automated drip irrigation systems and other automated irrigation systems and devices shall be adjusted and maintained to avoid overspray, runoff and/or waste. For purposes of this chapter, the phrase "other automated irrigation systems and devices" includes, but is not limited to, a garden hose or drip irrigation hose that is not being held in a persons hand during the irrigation process but which is nevertheless connected to an open water spigot and is being used to disburse potable water; and 
2.  Avoid watering in the hot part of the day and/or during morning and evening peak hours, and avoid watering on windy days; and 
3.  Install new landscaping, low-water using trees, plants and shrubs and install efficient irrigation systems; and 
4.  Install pool and spa covers to minimize water loss due to evaporation and keep pools and spas with covers covered when not in use; and 
5.  Retrofit indoor plumbing fixtures with low flow devices; and 
6.  Refrain from washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, public and private parking areas and all other impervious hard surfaced areas by direct hosing when runoff water directly flows to a gutter or storm drain, except as may be necessary to properly dispose of flammable or other dangerous liquids or substances, wash away spills that present a trip and fall hazard, or to prevent or eliminate materials dangerous to the public health and safety (nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to relieve property owners or their tenants of the obligation to keep sidewalks and parkways abutting the subject property in a clean condition, free of solid waste or other refuse or debris); and 
7.  Check faucets, toilets, and pipes, both indoor and outdoor for leaks and repair immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2861, § 3, 8-4-2015)  
14.02.030 - Stage 2—Drought watch conditions—Emerging shortage stage. 
A.  During Stage 2 drought watch conditions, all water customers of the El Monte Water Department as well as all other persons using water provided by the city shall comply with the following mandatory conservation measures: 
1.  Refrain from washing of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, public and private parking areas and all other impervious hard surfaced areas by direct hosing when runoff water directly flows to a gutter or storm drain, except as may be necessary to properly dispose of flammable or other dangerous liquids or substances, wash away spills that present a trip and fall hazard, or to prevent or eliminate materials dangerous to the public health and safety (nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to relieve property owners or their tenants of the obligation to keep sidewalks and parkways abutting the subject property in a clean condition, free of solid waste or other refuse or debris); and 
2.  Stop water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation practices, such as allowing excessive or unreasonable runoff, low head drainage or unreasonable over-spraying, etc. Similarly, stop water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. Every customer is deemed to have his or her water system under control at all times, to know the manner and extent of this water use and any runoff, and to employ available alternatives to apply irrigation water in a reasonably efficient manner; and 
3.  Repair breaks and leaks within a customer's plumbing or private water distribution system to prevent the escape of water within seventy-two (72) hours after the customer discovers such a break or leak or receives notice from the city of a break or leak unless other arrangements are made with the Public Works Maintenance Superintendant; 
4.  In no event may landscaped areas be irrigated through the use of automated sprinklers, automated drip irrigation systems or other automated irrigation systems and devices, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. All persons are encouraged to avoid the use of such automated irrigation systems and devices on windy days. Except as otherwise prohibited under Section 14.02.015 of this chapter, manual irrigation by hand-held garden hose or by hand held bucket or other similar container containing potable water shall be permitted any time. In no event may any water used for irrigation purposes described in this subsection be permitted or undertaken in such a fashion as to cause water to run off into storm drains or onto streets, sidewalks, paved walkways, driveways, public or private parking areas or other impervious hard surface areas. 
5.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of equipment (mobile or otherwise) shall be prohibited unless done with a hand-held bucket or hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. The nozzle shall be removed when the hose is not in use to ensure the water supply is shutoff. This subsection shall not apply to the washing of the above-listed vehicles or mobile equipment when conducted upon the premises of a commercial carwash; and 
6.  Eating and drinking establishments of all kind including, but not limited to, any restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar or club, whether public or private, shall not provide drinking water to any person unless it is expressly requested; and 
7.  Guests in hotels, motels, and other commercial lodging establishments shall be offered the option of not laundering towels and linens daily. 
B.  Exceptions . None of these restrictions shall apply to the following: 
1.  The routine and necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuit of its governmental functions for the benefit of the public, such as construction projects and for the cleaning of streets to prevent debris and harmful substances from entering water systems via storm drains; and 
2.  The reasonably necessary use of water for the routine maintenance and/or repair of (i) water distribution facilities; (ii) residential and commercial plumbing; or (iii) permanently installed landscaped irrigation systems. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2845, § 4, 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 2861, § 4, 8-4-2015)  
14.02.040 - Stage 3—Drought alert conditions—Moderate shortage stage. 
A.  During Stage 3 drought alert conditions, all water customers of the El Monte Water Department as well as all other persons using water provided by the city shall comply with the mandatory conservation measures set forth under this section in addition to those measures required under Stage 2 conditions, except to the extent such Stage 2 measures conflict with the measures set forth under this section. The additional Stage 3 conservation measures shall include the following: 
1.  a.  Outdoor irrigation of landscaped areas by automated sprinklers, automated drip irrigation systems or other automated irrigation systems or devices shall be permitted as follows: (i) on even days of each month for those properties having a street address with an even last digit; and (ii) on odd days for each month for those properties having a street address with an odd last digit. In the event a street address ends in a digit which is a fraction, the street address will be considered an even address if the last whole digit in the address is an even number and the street address will be considered an odd address if the last whole digit in the address is an odd number. If two (2) or more properties with both even and odd numbered street addresses share one or more landscaped areas in common, such common landscaped areas may be irrigated on either an even or odd day of the week but in no event may such landscaped areas be irrigated for two (2) consecutive days in a row. 
b.  Except as otherwise prohibited under Section 14.02.015 of this chapter, manual irrigation by hand-held garden hose or by hand held bucket or other similar container containing potable water shall be permitted on any day, subject to the hourly restrictions of paragraph c. of this subsection, below. In no event may any water used for irrigation purposes described in this subsection be permitted or undertaken in such a fashion as to cause water to run off into storm drains or onto streets, sidewalks, paved walkways, driveways, public or private parking areas or other impervious hard surface areas. 
c.  Paragraphs a. and b. of this subsection notwithstanding, in no event may landscaped areas be irrigated, whether manually or through the use of automated irrigation systems or devices, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. In no event may any water used for irrigation purposes described in this subsection be permitted or undertaken in such a fashion as to cause water to run off into storm drains or onto sidewalks, paved walkways, driveways, public or private parking areas or other impervious hard surface areas. 
2.  Washing of Vehicles, Trailers, Boats, Airplanes and Mobile Equipment . 
a.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of equipment (mobile or otherwise) shall be prohibited between the hours of twelve midnight to twelve noon and sundown to twelve midnight, except on the designated outdoor water use times set forth under subsection (A)(1) of this section. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. The nozzle shall be removed when the hose is not in use to ensure the water supply is shutoff. 
b.  Washing trucks, trailers and other types of mobile equipment (such as solid waste collection vehicles, mobile solid waste containers, vehicles used to transport food and other perishables), when such washing is necessary in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, shall be restricted to the hours of sundown to noon. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. The nozzle shall be removed when the hose is not in use; and 
3.  The refilling or adding of water to swimming pools is prohibited except on designated outdoor water use days, which shall be the same days as outdoor watering is permitted under subsection (A)(1) of this section; and 
4.  Stop operating ornamental fountains or similar decorative water features unless recycled water is used; and 
5.  The irrigation of golf course fairways is prohibited (this section shall not apply to the irrigation of any golf course solely with reclaimed wastewater); and 
6.  The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and emergency-related activities and/or other activities necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of El Monte residents and commercial establishments. This restriction shall not apply to businesses which pursuant to state or federal law or any city-issued permit require the use of water for land development and building construction processes. 
B.  Exceptions . None of the Stage 3 conservation measures shall apply to the following uses of water: 
1.  The routine and necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuit of its governmental functions for the benefit of the public, such as construction projects and for the cleaning of streets to prevent debris and harmful substances from entering water systems via storm drains; and 
2.  The routine and necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, for land development (e.g., roadway base preparation, flushing of utility lines, dust control, concrete and asphalt work) or for building construction processes; and 
3.  The necessary use of water for the routine maintenance and/or repair, of water distribution facilities, residential and commercial plumbing and permanently installed landscape irrigation systems; and 
4.  The use of water necessary to irrigate large, landscaped areas in commercial and institutional establishments as authorized by the terms and conditions of an approved compliance agreement issued by the review board, as defined in Section 14.02.080; and 
5.  The use of water pursuant to the approved terms and conditions of a variance granted by the review board as defined in Section 14.02.080. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2861, § 5, 8-4-2015)  
14.02.050 - Stage 4—Drought critical conditions—High shortage stage. 
A.  During Stage 4 drought critical conditions, all water customers of the El Monte Water Department as well as all other persons using water provided by the city shall comply with the mandatory conservation measures set forth under this section in addition to those measures required under Stage 3 conditions, except to the extent such Stage 3 measures conflict with the measures set forth under this section. The additional Stage 4 conservation measures shall include the following: 
1.  The washing of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, public and private parking areas and other impervious hard surfaced areas by direct hosing when runoff water directly flows to a gutter or storm drain, except as may be necessary to properly dispose of flammable or other dangerous liquids or substances, wash away spills that present a trip and fall hazard, or to prevent or eliminate materials dangerous to the public health and safety is prohibited (nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to relieve property owners or their tenants of the obligation to keep sidewalks and parkways abutting the subject property in a clean condition, free of solid waste or other refuse or debris); and 
2.  Every water customer shall be responsible for the operation of his or her irrigation systems and devices and such systems and devices shall at all times be deemed to be under the supervision and control of the water customer, regardless of whether the customer is physically on the property being irrigated at the time such irrigation is underway. Every water customer shall be deemed to have knowledge and awareness of the manner and extent of his or her irrigation systems water consumption and usage and the occurrence of runoff occurrences prohibited under this chapter. Every water customer shall employ available alternatives to apply irrigation water in a reasonable efficient and non-wasteful manner; 
3.  Allowing, permitting or causing the escape of water through breaks or leaks within the customer's plumbing or private water distribution system for any substantial period of time within which such break or leak should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be presumed that a period of seventy-two (72) hours after the customer discovers such a break or leak or receives notice from the city of a break or leak, is a reasonable time within which to correct such break or leak, or, at a minimum, to stop the flow of water from such break or leak; and 
4.  a.  Except as otherwise prohibited under Section 14.02.015, above, outdoor irrigation of landscaped areas by automated sprinklers, automated drip irrigation systems or other automated irrigation systems or devices shall be permitted as follows: (i) on Monday and Thursday of each week for those properties having a street address with an even last digit; and (ii) on Tuesday and Friday of each week for those properties having a street address with an odd last digit. In the event a street address ends in a digit which is a fraction, the street address will be considered an even address if the last whole digit in the address is an even number and the street address will be considered an odd address if the last whole digit in the address is an odd number. Except as otherwise prohibited under Section 14.02.015, above, if two (2) or more properties with both even and odd numbered addresses share one or more landscaped areas in common, such common landscaped areas may be irrigated on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday or Friday of each week only but in no event may such common landscaped areas be irrigated for two (2) consecutive days in a row. No automated irrigation system shall be set for a duration greater than fifteen (15) minutes or used in such a manner as to cause any specific landscaped area to be irrigated for a period longer than fifteen (15) minutes on a particular day. 
b.  Manual irrigation, including but not limited to, irrigation by hand-held garden hose or hand-held bucket or similar container containing potable water shall also be subject to the same day restrictions as applied under paragraph a. of this subsection, above. 
c.  Paragraphs a. and b. of this subsection notwithstanding, in no event may landscaped areas be irrigated, whether manually or through the use of automated irrigation systems and devices, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. In no event may any water used for irrigation purposes described in this subsection be permitted or undertaken in such a fashion as to cause water to run off into storm drains or onto sidewalks, paved walkways, driveways, public or private parking areas or other impervious hard surface areas. 
5.  Pools and spas with covers shall be covered when not in use to minimize the loss of water due to evaporation. 
B.  Exceptions . None of the high shortage restrictions shall apply to the following uses of water, provided there is prior written approval by the review board as defined in Section 14.02.080: 
1.  The routine and necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuit of its governmental functions for the benefit of the public, such as construction projects and for the cleaning of streets to prevent debris and harmful substances from entering water systems via storm drains; and 
2.  The routine and necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, for land development (e.g., roadway base preparation, flushing of utility lines, dust control, concrete and asphalt work) and for building construction processes; and 
3.  The necessary use of water for the routine maintenance and/or repair of water distribution facilities, residential and commercial plumbing and permanently installed landscape irrigation systems; and 
4.  The use of water necessary to irrigate large landscaped areas in commercial and institutional establishments as authorized by the terms and conditions of an approved compliance agreement issued by the review board, as defined in Section 14.02.080. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2861, §§ 6, 7, 8-4-2015)  
14.02.060 - Stage 5—Drought emergency conditions—Severe shortage stage. 
A.  During Stage 5 Drought Emergency Conditions, all water customers of the El Monte Water Department as well as all other persons using water provided by the city shall comply with the mandatory conservation measures set forth under this section in addition to those measures required under Stage 4 conditions, except to the extent such Stage 4 measures conflict with the measures set forth under this section. The additional Stage 5 conservation measures shall include the following: 
1.  a.  Except as otherwise prohibited under Section 14.02.015, above, outdoor irrigation of landscaped areas by automated sprinklers, automated drip irrigation systems or other automated irrigation systems or devices shall be permitted as follows: (i) on Monday of each week for those properties having a street address with an even last digit; and (ii) on Thursday of each week for those properties having a street address with an odd last digit. In the event a street address ends in a digit which is a fraction, the street address will be considered an even address if the last whole digit in the address is an even number and the street address will be considered an odd address if the last whole digit in the address is an odd number. If two (2) or more properties with both even and odd street addresses share one or more landscaped areas in common, such common landscaped areas may be irrigated on Monday or Thursday of each week only but in no event may such common landscaped areas be irrigated more than once in a week. No automated irrigation system shall be set for a duration greater than ten (10) minutes or used in such a manner as to cause any specific landscaped area to be irrigated for a period longer than ten (10) minutes on a particular day. 
b.  Manual irrigation, including but not limited to, irrigation by hand-held garden hose or hand-held bucket or similar container containing potable water shall also be subject to the same day restrictions as applied under paragraph a. of this subsection, above. 
c.  Paragraphs a. and b. of this subsection notwithstanding, in no event may landscaped areas be irrigated, whether manually or through the use of automated irrigation systems and devices, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. In no event may any water used for irrigation purposes described in this subsection be permitted or undertaken in such a fashion as to cause water to run off into storm drains or onto sidewalks, paved walkways, driveways, public or private parking areas or other impervious hard surface areas. 
2.  Washing of Vehicles, Trailers, Boats, Airplanes and Mobile Equipment . 
a.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of equipment (mobile or otherwise) is prohibited except as provided elsewhere in this section. 
b.  No individual, firm or business that regularly washes vehicles for remuneration or provides facilities for customers to do so through coin-operated machinery shall be permitted to operate such a business unless their place of business is equipped and operating to approved city standards with equipment to recycle water for use within their facility. Washing of vehicles in such facilities shall occur only between the hours of six a.m. and twelve noon. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2861, § 8, 8-4-2015)  
14.02.070 - Drought response stages and procedures for implementation. 
A.  The measures called for under Stage 1 drought preparedness conditions shall apply at all times as voluntary measure, except to the extent all or any such measures are later made mandatory by the declaration of Stage 2 conditions or higher. 
B.  Stage 2 drought watch conditions apply when, due to drought or other supply reductions, there is a reasonable probability there will be supply shortages and that a consumer demand reduction from ten (10) percent to seventeen (17) percent is required in order to ensure that sufficient supplies will be available to meet anticipated demands. 
C.  Stage 3 drought alert conditions apply when, due to cutbacks caused by drought or other reduction in supplies, a consumer demand reduction from seventeen (17) percent to twenty-four (24) percent is required in order to have sufficient supplies available to meet anticipated demands. 
D.  Stage 4 drought critical conditions apply when due to increasing cutbacks caused by drought or other reduction of supplies, a consumer demand reduction from twenty-four (24) percent to thirty-one (31) percent is required in order to have sufficient supplies available to meet anticipated demands. 
E.  Stage 5 drought emergency conditions apply when a water shortage emergency is declared pursuant to Water Code Section 350 and requires a demand reduction from thirty-one (31) percent to fifty (50) percent in order for the City of El Monte to have maximum water supplies available to meet anticipated demands. 
F.  The existence of drought response Stages 2, 3, 4 and 5 may be declared in accordance with the procedures specified in California Water code Sections 351 and 352. All mandatory drought response measures shall take effect ten (10) calendar days after the date the drought response stage is declared. Within five (5) calendar days following the declaration of the response level, the City of El Monte shall publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices. If the City of El Monte establishes a water allocation, it shall provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement for the fee or charge or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for the fees or charges for ongoing water service. Water allocations shall be effective on the fifth (5) days following the date of the mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009)  
14.02.080 - Undue hardship review. 
A.  Review Board—Variances, Permits and Compliance Agreements . A review board is established to review special cases which cannot follow the letter of this chapter. The review board shall, consist of the Public Works Maintenance Superintendent, the Water Systems Supervisor, the City Engineer, the Planning Services Manager and the City Attorney, or their appointed representative(s). 
B.  Appeal of review board decisions shall be made to the City Council . It is the purpose of the review board to review special cases and to determine whether or not such cases warrant a variance, permit or compliance agreement including conditions of approval. The board shall consider the facts of each case and decide whether to grant a variance or a permit or to enter into a compliance agreement within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of a properly completed application for variance/permit/compliance agreement form. 
C.  A variance or permit shall be granted only for reasons of economic hardship, which is defined as a threat to an individual business's primary source of income. (Under no circumstances shall inconvenience or the potential for damage of landscaping be considered an economic hardship, which justifies a variance.) The board shall authorize only the implementation of equitable water use restrictions which further the purpose and intent of the water conservation plan. The special water use restrictions authorized by the board in each case shall be set forth on the face of the variance, permit or compliance agreement. The city shall have the authority to establish a nonrefundable application processing, review and investigation fee to reimburse the city for the reasonable estimated cost of administering the hardship program. The precise amount of the fee shall be established, and may from time to time be amended, by City Council resolution following a noticed public hearing on the matter in compliance with applicable laws for the establishment of such fees. 
D.  Early Termination of Variances, Permits or Agreements Upon Escalation of Shortage Stage. 
1.  A variance, permit or agreement implemented during a given water short stage shall terminate automatically in the event city approves escalation to a higher water shortage stage, unless, upon initial issuance, the issued variance or permit contains internal conditions and provisions intended to address escalations to a higher stage. Such multistage variances, permit or agreements must contain conditions and provisions which demonstrate significant additional savings of water, or nonuse of water, under progressively more critical shortage stages. 
2.  Exception . If, within the stated life of the variance or permit, the shortage stage for which the permit was originally issued is reinstated, the permit will be considered valid until the original expiration date, as long as that original shortage stage remains in effect. 
E.  Any person, corporation or association who is issued a variance or permit or enters into a compliance agreement and makes use of water pursuant to such instrument shall provide proof of the variance, permit or compliance agreement upon demand by any peace officer or person authorized by the city to enforce this title. 
F.  Upon conviction of a person, corporation or association of violating any provision of this chapter, the review board shall revoke any permit, variance, or compliance agreement previously granted. However, the board shall notify the applicant of the proposed revocation five (5) business days before taking such action, and applicant shall be given the opportunity to be heard by the review board prior to its taking such action. 
G.  Persons wishing to appeal the decision of the review board shall have the right of appeal to the City Council. Appeal shall be made in writing within ten (10) business days of the review board's decision. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
H.  Undue hardship review and procedures afforded under this Section 14.02.080 shall not apply to or be available for violations of Section 14.02.015 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2845, § 5, 10-14-2014)  
14.02.085 - Penalties for violation of state water usage prohibitions under Section 14.02.015. 
A.  No person within the city of El Monte shall use or permit the use of water in a manner contrary to Section 14.02.015 above. For purposes of this section, the term "person" shall have the same meaning as in Section 14.02.090(A)(1) below. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of Section 14.02.015 shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified at the city's discretion, and each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense. 
C.  Fines . The following penalty schedule shall apply to violations of Section 14.02.015: 
1.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of Section 14.02.015 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be issued a written citation for the first such offense in a single calendar year. 
2.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of Section 14.02.015 for a second time in a single calendar year shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
3.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of Section 14.02.015 for a third time in a single calendar year shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
4.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of Section 14.02.015 four (4) or more times in a single calendar year shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars($500.00). 
D.  Additional Penalties . Subsection C of this section notwithstanding, a violation of any prohibition set forth under Section 14.02.015(C)(2), 14.02.015(C)(3) or 14.02.015(C)(4) in a single calendar year may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor at the city's sole discretion. 
1.  In addition to the above penalties, such convicted person may, in the discretion of the court, be ordered to reimburse the city for all necessary costs incurred through investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, abatement and other actual costs incurred by the city or its agents pertaining to the violation. 
2.  The court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursements upon submission of proof of such costs by the city. Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve a person from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2845, § 6, 10-14-2014)  
14.02.090 - Penalties for violation of Sections 14.02.020 through 14.02.070. 
A.  Compliance—Guidelines . 
1.  No customer of the El Monte Water Department or person who uses water provided by the El Monte Water Department shall knowingly use, or permit the use of water in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, public or private entity, public or private association, public or private agency, governmental agency or institution, school district, college university, or any other use of water provided by the City of El Monte. 
2.  Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified at the city's discretion, and each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense. 
B.  The following penalty schedule shall apply to violations of any provision of this chapter, excluding violations of Section 14.02.015: 
1.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of this chapter (excluding Section 14.02.015) shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be issued a written citation for the first such offense in a single calendar year. 
2.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of this chapter (excluding Section 14.02.015) shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second such offense in a single calendar year. 
3.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of this chapter (excluding Section 14.02.015) shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third such offense in a single calendar year. 
4.  Any person who violates any of the prohibitions of this chapter (excluding Section 14.02.015) shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for four (4) or more such offenses in a single calendar year. 
C.  1.  Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor at the city's sole discretion. In addition to the above penalties, such convicted person, firm, corporation or other entity may, in the discretion of the court, be ordered to reimburse the city for all necessary costs incurred through investigation, discovery, analysis, inspection, abatement and other actual costs incurred by the city or its agents pertaining to the violation. 
2.  The court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursements upon submission of proof of such costs by the city. Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve a person, firm or corporation, or other entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. 
D.  In addition to the above, the Public Works Maintenance Superintendent is empowered to enact other penalties and restrictive measures that are intended to abate the conduct or circumstances comprising the violation including, but not limited to, the following: placement of a flow restricting device upon the water service, locking off of water meter, removal of water meter, and shutting off of the service line valve. 
(Ord. No. 2738, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2845, §§ 6, 7, 10-14-2014)  
Chapter 14.03 - TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION 
 
14.03.010 - Purpose and intent. 
Tree protection and preservation is necessary for the health and welfare of the City of El Monte. Trees growing within the city are a natural, aesthetic resource, which help define the character of the city and provide many social, economic, and environmental benefits. Trees are worthy of protection in order to preserve the scenic beauty, prevent soil erosion, provide shade and wind protection, serve as a natural buffer between adjacent land uses, and counteract air pollution. 
It is pertinent to the public peace, harmony, and welfare that such trees be protected from indiscriminate cutting or removal of mature trees, especially where such trees are located on properties that are slated for new development. Trees have a positive economic effect on the city by enhancing property values and making the city a more attractive place in which to live, visit, and do business. 
This chapter establishes policies, regulations, and standards necessary to ensure that the city will continue to realize the benefits that a healthy urban forest provides. The provisions of this chapter are enacted to: 
A.  Establish polices for the protection of certain categories of trees and criteria for the removal the orderly (as opposed to indiscriminate) removal of such trees; 
B.  Protect the indiscriminate removal of healthy, mature trees within the city; 
C.  Prohibit the destruction, "severe pruning" and "topping" of mature, protected trees; 
D.  Maintain trees and mitigate hazards using the most current acceptable arboricultural standards and practices; and 
E.  Provide for the enforcement and administration of tree protection, there by promoting and protecting public health, safety and welfare and enhancing the quality of life. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
"ANSI A300 Pruning Standards." Industry-developed, national consensus standards for the practice of tree care such as reasons to prune a tree may include, but are not limited to, reducing risk, managing tree health and structure, improve aesthetics, or achieving other specific objectives. Intended for use by federal, state, municipal, private entities including arborists, property owners, property managers, and utilities. 
"Carve" means to take an object and scrape, cut, gouge, slice, or pierce through the bark of a live tree and remove pieces of the bark and tree, causing damage. 
"Certified arborist" means a person who has demonstrated extensive knowledge regarding trees and their culture and holds a current arborist certificate by the International Society of Arboriculture and/or is a Registered Consulting Arborist by the American Society of Consulting Arborists. 
"Circumference measured at breast height." The measurement around the tree trunk that is measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above ground level. Trees that split into multi-trunks below four and one-half (4½) feet shall use the sum of each individual trunk measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above ground level to determine the circumferences. 
"City-owned tree." Any tree in the public right-of-way, parks, parkway, median, easement and on other city-owned property. 
"Destroy(s) or destruction." With regard to a tree, any physical state or condition in which a tree is dead or is so severely damaged that its death is imminent. 
"Diameter at breast height (dbh)." A form of measurement of an existing tree trunk. Diameter is measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above ground level. Trees that split into multi trunks below four and one-half (4½) feet shall use the sum of each individual trunk measured four and one-half (4½) feet above the natural grade to determine the diameter 
"Drip line." A line which may be drawn on the ground around a tree directly under its outermost branch tips and which identifies that location where rainwater tends to drip from the tree. 
"Hazard or hazardous condition." Any condition in a tree that poses a significant and imminent threat of serious injury or harm to the public or catastrophic damage to real property. 
"Heritage Tree." The capitalized term "Heritage Tree" means any tree, shrub, or plant that meets one of the following criteria: 
1.  Any woody plant having a single trunk circumference of thirty-six (36) inches or more measured at breast height, a point four and one-half (4½) feet above the natural grade; 
2.  Any multi-trunk tree whose multiple trunks have a combined circumference of seventy-five (75) inches or more measured at a point four and one-half (4½) feet above the root crown; 
3.  Any tree that is thirty-five (35) feet or more in height as measured from the root crown to the highest point above the root crown; 
4.  Any stand of trees the nature of which makes each dependent upon the others for survival; 
5.  Any other tree as may be deemed historically or culturally significant by the City Arborist or the Economic Development Director because of its size, connection to the city's history or lore, location, or aesthetic qualities. 
"Lion-tailing." The excessive removal of branches from the lower two-thirds of a stem or branch, or the removal of only the lower and interior branches when pruning. 
"ISA." The International Society of Arboriculture ("ISA") which is a professional association of arborists and tree workers that is recognized internally as one of the leading agencies in the research and establishment of high standards for all aspects of tree care. 
"Maintain or maintenance." The act of routinely pruning, trimming, spraying, fertilizing, watering, treating for disease or injury or any other similar act which promotes growth, health, beauty, and life of trees. 
"Multi-trunk." Any tree with multiple trunks attributed to a single tree. Each trunk shall be measured at a height of four and one-half (4½) feet above ground level, and the combined circumference of the trunks shall be used to determine the tree's size for purposes of this chapter. 
"Native Tree." The capitalized term "Native Tree" means any tree with a trunk more than eight (8) inches in diameter measured at a height of four and one-half (4½) feet above natural grade that is one of the following species: Quercus agrifolia (Coast live oak), Quercus engelmannii (Engelmann oak), Quercus chrysolepis (Canyon oak), Platanus racemosa (California sycamore), Juglans californica (California walnut), Quercus berberidifolia (Scrub oak), Quercus lobata (Valley oak), Umbellularia californica (California bay), Populus fremontii (Cottonwood), Alnus rhombifolia (California alder), Populus trichocarpa (Black cottonwood), Salix lasiolepis (Arroyo willow), Aesculus californica (California buckeye) and Sequoia sempervirens (California redwood). 
"Protected Tree." The capitalized term "Protected Tree" means any public tree, Heritage Tree or Native Tree as the foregoing are defined under this chapter. 
"Protected zone." The word "protected zone" shall mean a specifically defined area totally encompassing a Protected Tree within which work activities are strictly controlled. When depicted on a map, the outermost edge of the protected zone will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows the contour of the drip line of the Protected Tree. In no case shall the protected zone be less than fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of a Protected Tree, or exclude the known root structure in the case of irregularly shaped trees. 
"Pruning." Pruning, trimming, or thinning means to reduce the size of a tree using industry accepted standards, as established by the International Society of Arboriculture and/or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Standards-Pruning, to control the height and spread of the tree, preserve its health and natural appearance, produce fuller branching and shaping, or make adjustments which will increase its longevity in an urban environment. 
"Public tree." Any tree planted in the public right-of-way, park, parkway, median, easement or on any other city-owned property. 
"Removal/remove." Removal or remove means the uprooting, cutting or severing of the main trunk, or major branches of a tree or any act which causes, or maybe reasonably expected to cause a tree to die, including but not limited to the following; inflicting damage upon the root system of a tree by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction; substantially changing the grade above the root system or trunk of the tree and excessively or severely pruning or root pruning. 
"Root prune." The process of cutting roots behind the line of a planned excavation to prevent tearing and splintering of remaining roots. 
"Serious harm." With regard to any tree, any act or activity that causes damage to a tree thereby leaving the tree in a physical state that, in the judgment of the City Arborist or any other Certified Arborist retained by the city, (i) makes the death of the tree reasonably eminent; (ii) significantly shortens the normal life expectancy of the tree; or (iii) makes it impossible or reasonably unlikely that the tree can be fully restored to a condition of good health and/or normal appearance within thirty (30) calendar days of such harm having been inflicted. 
"Severely prune" means pruning the tree that deviates from industry standards by "topping," "lion's tailing," removal of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the foliage or leaving stubs. 
"Topping," also known as "heading back," "stubbing," and or "pollarding" means a severe type of trimming which results in the indiscriminate cutting back of large diameter branches to stubs. Such severe practices disfigures the tree and is generally hazardous to the overall health and stability of a tree. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.030 - Prohibited activities. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to carve, remove, severely prune or relocate a Protected Tree, unless such activity is performed incident to the lawful removal, relocation or destruction of the Protected Tree pursuant to a tree removal permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the practice lion-tailing or topping of a Protected Tree, unless such activity is performed incident to the lawful removal or destruction of the Protected Tree pursuant to a tree removal permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or keep attached to any Protected Tree any rope, wire, nail(s), tack(s), staples, advertising posters, or other contrivance whatsoever. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to poison or allow any agent, employee, licensee or invitee allowed to enter upon a property to poison a Protected Tree. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person deposit, discharge, release or apply or allow any agent, employee, invitee or licensee allowed to enter upon his or her property to deposit, discharge, release or apply any hazardous material or toxic substance upon the ground that lies within the drip line of a Protected Tree. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity or practice that causes or otherwise results the removal of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the foliage of a protected tree or that otherwise leaves a Protected Tree completely deprived of branches (i.e., only stubs), unless such activity or practices is performed incident to the lawful removal or destruction of the Protected Tree pursuant to a tree removal permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
G.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity or practice that causes or otherwise results in the destruction of a Protected Tree or that is reasonably likely to cause or result in the destruction of a Protected Tree unless such activity is performed incident to the lawful removal or destruction of the Protected Tree pursuant to a tree removal permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
H.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity or practice that causes serious harm to a Protected or that is reasonably likely to cause serious harm to a Protected Tree, unless such activity is performed incident to the lawful removal, relocation or destruction of the Protected Tree pursuant to a tree removal permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
I.  For purpose of this chapter, actions or activities that are reasonably likely to cause serious harm to a Protected Tree or result in its destruction include but are not limited to the following prohibited activities: 
1.  Setting fire to or otherwise burning any part of the root system, bark or branches of a Protected Tree; 
2.  The depositing, discharge, release or application of hazardous materials, toxic substances or poisons upon the Protected Tree (excluding the use of legal and properly applied pesticides or fungicides) upon the tree itself or upon the ground that lies within the drip line of the tree; 
3.  Changing the grade above the root system or the trunk; 
4.  Any action or activity deemed unlawful pursuant to subsections (A) through (F) of this section; 
5.  Trenching, excavating or paving within the protected zone of the tree; 
6.  Excessive paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious materials in such a manner which may reasonably be expected to kill the tree; 
7.  Substantially changing the grade above the root system or trunk; 
8.  Excessive watering within the drip line of the tree; 
9.  Damage, disfigurement or other injury inflicted upon the trees branches, trunk or root system by machinery, the storage of materials or soil compaction. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.040 - Protection of protected trees during construction. 
Except with protected trees whose removal is authorized pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, all persons shall undertake the following prior to the commencement of any construction or demolition activities and until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy: 
A.  Install a sturdy fence at the perimeter of the protected zone of a Protected Tree; 
B.  Prohibit excavation, grading, drainage and leveling within the protected zone of a Protected Tree; 
C.  Prohibit the storage or disposal of oil, gasoline, chemicals or other harmful materials within the protected zone or in drainage channels, swales or other areas that may lead to the protected zone; 
D.  Refrain from any of the unlawful activities set forth under Section 4.03.030; 
E.  Design utility services and irrigation lines to be located outside of the protected zone of a Protected Tree to the extent reasonable feasible; 
F.  Notify the City Arborist of any serious harm, destruction or other damage that befall a Protected Tree during construction or demolition activities and in no event shall the applicant undertake the removal of any Protected Tree not otherwise slated for removal unless and until the City Arborist has been given the opportunity to inspect the subject tree, evaluate its prospects for survival and issue a written determination as to whether the tree should be allowed to remain or removed pursuant to a retroactively issued permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.050 - Exemptions. 
The following types of trees and/or activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Trees planted, grown, and/or held for sale by licensed nurseries and/or tree farms or the removal or transplanting of such trees pursuant to the operation of a licensed nursery and or tree/farm; 
2.  Routine pruning and maintenance that adheres to those industry accepted pruning and maintenance standards set forth under the ANSI A300 Pruning Standards; 
3.  Trees which are determined by a Certified Arborist to be a hazard and/or pose a threat to public safety or personal property; 
4.  Trees which, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer or his or her designee, has caused damage or the potential to cause damage to public infrastructure; 
5.  Trees which require maintenance or removal action for the protection of existing electrical power or communication lines or other property of a public utility; 
6.  Trees located within existing or proposed public rights-of-way where their removal or relocation is necessary to obtain adequate line-of-sight distances as required by the Director of Public Works/City Engineer or his or her designee; 
7.  Trees which are fruit, nut bearing and all species of palms; and 
8.  Any tree located on the site of a development project for which a variance, conditional use permit, design review, or tentative map approval was obtained from the city prior to March 2, 2010 for a development project for which a valid building permit was lawfully issued by the city prior to March 2, 2010, provided that the physical improvements contemplated and authorized under such land use entitlements and/or building permits necessarily require the removal or relocation of the tree in order to construct the improvements in the manner approved under the land use entitlement(s) or permit(s). Prior to removal or relocation of any Protected Tree pursuant to this exemption that property or developer shall notify the City Arborist of its intent to remove or relocate a Protected Tree so that the arborist may evaluate whether or not the tree may be preserved or relocated without undue burden or expense to the developer or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.060 - Permit—Requirements. 
A.  No person shall remove, relocate, or destroy Protected Tree or engage in any activity that causes serious harm to a Protected tree unless such actions are incident to the authorized removal or destruction of a Protected Tree pursuant to a permit issued by the Economic Development Department. The requirement to first obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter shall apply equally to the holders of any building permit or certificate of occupancy or any business license or business permit. The requirement to first obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter shall also apply equally to the holder of any discretionary land use entitlement issued by the Planning Commission, however, if the terms of the terms of a discretionary land use entitlement expressly call for the removal of a Protected Tree, the permit shall be granted upon the issuance of building permits for the improvements requiring the removal of the Protected Tree. 
B.  Routine pruning and maintenance of Protected Trees shall not require a permit but shall in all cases be in conformance with the most current guidelines of International Society of Arboriculture and the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300-Pruning Standards. Pruning which, in the opinion of a Certified Arborist, deviates from these guidelines, such as "topping," "lion's tailing," and severely pruning shall be subject to fines and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.070 - Same—Application. 
An application for a tree removal permit shall be filed, together with any required fees as set by resolution of the city council. Applications shall be filed with Economic Development Department care of the City Arborist. The application shall be submitted with a report which shall contain information as determined by the City Arborist to be necessary for evaluating the proposed removal of any Protected Tree, and shall include, but not be limited to the following information: 
1.  A statement as to reasons for removal or relocation; 
2.  The number, species, and size (circumference as measured four and one-half (4 ½) feet from ground level) and height of tree; 
3.  The location of all trees onsite on a plot plan in relation to structures and improvements (e.g. streets, sidewalks, fences, slopes, retaining walls, etc.); 
4.  Photographs of the trees to be removed or relocated; 
5.  If the tree is proposed to be relocated, the relocation site shall be identified and site preparation and relocation methods described; 
6.  Proposed method of removal or relocation; 
7.  The health of any tree declared dead, diseased, infested, or dying shall be determined by a Certified Arborist; and 
8.  Proposed tree replacement plan the substantive features and content of which shall be established administratively by the City Arborist. 
The City Arborist may require a report by a "third party" certified arborist to assist in making a determination on the tree removal permit application, All costs associated with using a certified arborist shall be paid by the applicant. For purposes of this chapter, the City Arborist shall be the Economic Development Director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.080 - Same—Procedure. 
A.  Upon receipt of the application, the City Arborist shall visit and inspect the subject property and the tree(s) proposed for removal and shall ascertain the following; 
1.  Confirm that the tree or trees in question are in fact Protected Trees. 
2.  The general health, vigor, and condition of the tree. 
3.  The presence of existence of any signs of disease, decay, or infestations that may be present. 
4.  Any damage or the potential to cause damage to public infrastructure, utilities, and property caused by the tree. 
5.  Any hazardous conditions or imminently hazardous conditions that may be present. If so, a tree risk assessment will be performed by the City Arborist. The cost incurred by the city for the tree risk assessment, requiring a certified arborist's report or tree appraisal shall be paid by the applicant. 
The City Arborist may grant the issuance of a tree removal permit if any one or more of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The condition of the tree(s) is such as to create a hazardous condition; 
2.  The tree(s) pose a threat to the public health and safety; 
3.  The tree(s) are dead, severely diseased or decayed, infested, and in a state of irreversible decline; 
4.  The tree(s) have an abnormal and incorrectable structure or appearance due to severe pruning practices; 
5.  The tree(s) significantly interfere with utilities and utility service; 
6.  The tree(s) are causing damage to structures as follows: 
a.  Sidewalks, Curbs, Drives, Buildings, and Other Structures. Removal shall be granted if the cost to repair the damage exceeds the appraised value of the tree (using the method established by the Guide for Plant Appraisal 9th edition, by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers) or if the tree is incompatible with the growing space or proposed development. 
b.  Sewer, Gas, Electrical, Water and Other Utilities. Removal shall be granted if it can be determined that the tree caused the damage to the utility. It will be the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate the cause. Interference with underground utilities, which can be rerouted or repaired and protected from root pruning, generally does not constitute grounds for tree removal. 
B.  After-the-Fact Permit Fees. The standard tree removal permit fee shall be doubled for tree removals or other work requiring a tree removal permit pursuant to this section if the work commenced prior to issuance of said permit. 
C.  Subsequent to investigation, the City Arborist may deny or approve the permit for removal of all or some of the trees included in the application, and may attach conditions of compliance as deemed necessary, including but not limited to the replacement of the removed tree(s) with a reasonably equivalent replacement tree(s) from the city's recommended tree palette at a 2:1 ratio. 
D.  The permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days, unless an extension is requested fourteen (14) days prior to the expiration of the permit. 
E.  The decision of the City Arborist can be appealed by the applicant by submitting a letter of appeal and the appropriate fee to the Economic Development Director within ten (10) calendar days of the City Arborist's decision. The appeal letter shall state with reasonable specificity the facts and grounds for the appeal and be signed by the appellant. Appeals shall be considered by the Economic Development Department within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.090 - Tree replacement policy. 
All removed trees shall be replaced with a tree ratio of 2:1. Two (2) thirty-six-inch box trees with a minimum height of twelve (12) feet shall be planted with suitable species selected from the city's recommended tree palette and with the approval from the Economic Development Department. If any trees cannot be planted on the subject property, or the immediate public right-of-way, an in lieu fee may be paid into the city's tree mitigation and planting fund pursuant to the fee schedule as adopted in Section 14.03.130 (Fee schedule). 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.100 - Tree mitigation and planting fund. 
The tree fund shall consist of fees generated as a result of tree replacement requirements as well as general donations for public tree planting. 
1.  Establishment of Fund. A tree fund is hereby established 
2.  Funds to be Deposited. Tree replacement fees for the installation of replacement trees, as provided for in Section 14.03.090, shall be deposited in the tree fund. 
3.  Use of Funds. Expenditures from the tree fund shall be used solely for the purpose of purchasing and installing trees on public rights-of-way, public parks and any other city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.110 - Emergency waiver. 
A permit shall not be required for the removal or destruction of a Protected Tree under this chapter, in cases of emergency weather conditions or other catastrophic events including, but not limited to, earthquake, fire, flood, windstorms, or lightening wherein such conditions have created or are creating an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of persons or property and the immediate removal of a Protected Tree is deemed necessary to abate a hazardous condition, provided such removal is performed by (i) City of El Monte Public Works Maintenance personnel acting under the authority and direction of the City Manager, the Chief of Police or their designees; or (ii) emergency response personnel of the Los Angeles County Fie Department, the El Monte Police Department and/or the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department in the course of responding to an emergency event or occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.120 - Violations—Penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), six (6) months in jail or combination thereof. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall pay a civil penalty in the amount of the appraised value of each Protected Tree but no more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per tree. If there is inadequate plant material to properly appraise the value of the Protected Tree, the penalty shall be no more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per Protected Tree unlawfully removed or destroyed. The collection of the penalties may be enforced by civil action brought in the name of the City of El Monte by the City Attorney. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall also be required to obtain a retroactive tree removal permit, if applicable and to comply with any tree replacement policy fees and replacement ratios and any other mitigation measures that may be required under this chapter. 
C.  If a violation occurs in the course of any construction activities authorized pursuant to a conditional use permit, variance, design review, tentative map or other discretionary land use approval or any city-issued grading permit, building permit, excavation permit or temporary certificate of occupancy, the city, in addition to all other remedies available to it under this chapter, may issue a stop-work order suspending and prohibiting further activity on the property until a mitigation plan has been filed with and approved by the Economic Development Director, agreed to in writing by the property owner(s) and either implemented or guaranteed by the posting of adequate security. The mitigation plan shall include measures for the protection of any remaining Protected Trees. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.130 - Fee schedule. 
By resolution, the City Council may establish and from time to time amend a schedule of fees for the recovery of costs associated with the administration and enforcement of the regulatory program established under this chapter, including but not limited to the processing and review of appeals made to any decision or determination of the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.140 - Appeals. 
A permit applicant who wishes to overturn a decision of the City Arborist appeal the decision to the Economic Development Director or designee, provided such appeal is submitted to the Economic Development Department care of the Economic Development Director. 
The filed appeal shall state the facts and grounds for the appeal, accompanied by the appropriate fee, and must be signed by the appellant and the property owner if different from the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.150 - Reserved.  
14.03.160 - Surveys and inspections incident to development. 
Any applicant for a discretionary land use approval (e.g., conditional use permit, variance and the like) issued by the Planning Commission who desires to remove one or more Protected Trees located upon any property in the city in connection with any residential or commercial development to be authorized under the land use approval shall include in their application to the Planning Division the following: 
1.  A tree survey plan that identifies all Protected Trees located upon the property and identifies those Protected Trees that are proposed to be removed or that may be affected by the proposed development. The plan shall specify the precise location of trunk and drip lines and the size, health and species of all existing Protected Trees on the property; and 
2.  The applicant shall also provide a report by a certified arborist. The report, based on the findings of the tree survey plan and other necessary information, shall be used to determine the health of existing trees, the effects of the proposed development upon the Protected Trees and recommendations for any special precautions necessary for the preservation of the Protected Trees. The report shall also identify which Protected Trees are proposed for removal. 
All new commercial, industrial, or residential development shall require a field verification survey prior to the issuance of any building, demolition, or grading permit. A fee as set by a resolution by the city council shall be charged for this survey. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
14.03.170 - Polices and guidelines. 
The City Council may establish and from time to time amend or modify administrative policies and guidelines consistent with the provisions of this chapter to provide more detailed guidance and parameters to staff in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2791, § 2, 3-20-2012)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION* 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.01 - BUILDING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2756, § 5, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, amended Ch. 15.01 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.01, §§ 15.01.010—15.01.130, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2710, § 5(part), 2007. 
 
15.01.010 - Adoption of California Building Code, 2016 Edition and Los Angeles County Building Code, 2016 Edition. 
A.  The California Building Code, 2016 Edition, is hereby adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference into the El Monte Municipal Code, together with, and subject to, those amendments, additions and modifications delineated in this chapter below. For the purposes of this chapter 15.01, the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code, as adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on November 22, 2016 and its appendices as adopted herein may be referred to collectively as the "El Monte Building Code" or "this code." 
B.  The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city of El Monte and certain equipment specifically regulated herein. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.020 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the words used in El Monte Building Code shall have the meanings ascribed to them within El Monte Building Code. The foregoing notwithstanding, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below for purposes of this chapter and the El Monte Building Code: 
A.  Whenever the term "municipality," "city," "county" or "city of El Monte" is used, it shall mean the city of El Monte or the appropriate department, division, or agency of said city as the context may reasonably require. 
B.  Whenever the term "legislative body," "Board of Supervisors," or "City Council" is used, it shall mean the City Council of the city of El Monte, California. 
C.  Whenever the term "Building Official" is used, it means Chief Building Official of the city of El Monte. 
D.  Whenever the term "Building Department" is used, it shall refer to the Building and Safety Division of the Economic Development Department of the city of El Monte. 
E.  If any term used in the El Monte Building Code refers to an office, officer, board, commission or other public body not established by, or having jurisdiction over or within, the city of El Monte, the term shall be deemed to refer to such office, officer, board, commission or other public body as shall in fact be charged with the responsibility of performing the duty intended to be performed by said office, officer, board, commission or other public body. 
F.  The terms "Los Angeles County Title 26 Building Code," "2016 Los Angeles County Building Code," "California Building Code," or "California Building Code, 2016 Edition" as used in El Monte Municipal Code mean and refer to the El Monte Building Code as adopted and incorporated by reference under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.030 - Amendment of Section 114 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
Adoption of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition and Los Angeles County Building Code, 2016 Edition shall be subject to the addition of the following subsection 114.5 (Municipal Code Violations) to the text of Section 114 (Violations) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of said code: 
 Any person who violates any provision of the El Monte Building Code shall be punishable as provided under Chapter 1.24 (General Penalty) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.040 - Amendment of Subsection 105.2 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code shall be subject to the following amendments to subsection 105.2 (Work Exempt from Permit-Building) of Section 105 (Permits) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration): 
Item "1" shall state the following: 
 1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the highest point of the roof does not exceed 15 feet 0 inches above adjacent grade. The accessory structure shall comply with the City Zoning Code regardless whether a permit for said structure is required or not. 
Item "2" shall state the following: 
 2. Wood, wrought iron and similar fences not over 6 feet high and masonry, concrete and similar garden or pilaster fences not over 3 feet high. Fences shall comply with the City's Zoning Code regardless whether a permit is required or not. 
Item "4" shall state the following: 
 4. Retaining walls not over 3 feet high measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. Retaining walls shall comply with the City's Zoning Code regardless whether a permit is required or not. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.050 - Amendment of Subsection 107.2.5 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code shall be subject to the addition of item 107.2.5.2 (Future Property Line) to Subsection 107.2.5 (Site plan) of Section 107 (Submittal Documents) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration). This added item 107.2.5.2 shall state the following: 
107.2.5.2 Future Property Line. 
 (a) It is contemplated that certain streets within the territorial boundaries of the City of El Monte may be widened in the future in compliance with the circulation elements of the city's updated General Plan. When such streets are proposed for future widening such information shall be shown on the official zoning maps in Title 17 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (b) Whenever building permits are issued for a structure on a lot having a future property line shown thereon in the official zoning maps, such future property line shall be considered to be the official lot line(s) for purposes of establishing building locations relative to set-backs, yard areas, open yards and the like. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.060 - Amendment of Subsection 105.3 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code shall be subject to the following amendments to Subsection 105.3 (Application for Permit) of Section 105 (Permits) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration). This added item 105.3.3 shall state the following: 
105.3.3 Demolition Permits. 
 (a) Demolition permits may be issued to raze buildings and structures when the following pre-conditions have been satisfied: 
 1. The permit applicant provides the Building Official with a reasonably detailed written description of the subject property as well as a legal description. 
 2. The permit applicant provides the Building Official with the date the contemplated demolition will begin. 
 3. The terms and conditions, if any, upon which each permit is granted are written upon the permit application or appended in writing thereto. 
 4. The permit applicant, or his/her/its authorized agent, posts a cash/surety bond or a depositor's cash book assignment in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus ten (10%) percent of the work required to be done or other amount as determined by the Building Official. Such costs shall be as estimated by the Building Official. 
 5. The permit applicant provides the Building Official with proof of compliance with the rules and regulations of the South Coast Air Quality Management District. 
 (b) The Building Official may waive the requirement for a bond or deposit at his/her discretion when the demolition is included as part of the permit for a new structure on the same site. 
 (c) Each bond posted or deposit made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) shall expressly require that each and every term and/or condition associated with a demolition permit be complied with to the satisfaction of the Building Official. 
 (d) If a demolition permit does not set forth a specific completion date, the work authorized shall be completed within sixty (60) days after the date of the issuance of the demolition permit, unless otherwise set forth by the written order of the Building Official in his/her discretion. 
 (e) Whenever the Building Official finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any demolition permit, the Building Official shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. In such notice of default, the Building Official shall state the work to be done, the estimated costs thereof, and the period of time determined by the Building Official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. If compliance is not had within the time specified by the Building Official, the Building Official, without delay and without further notice or proceeding, shall proceed to use any cash/surety bond or depositor's cash book or any portion of such instrument, to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise. The balance, if any, of such instrument upon the completion of the work, shall be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work, plus ten (10%) percent thereof. 
 (f) When a cash/surety bond or depositor's cash book assignment has been posted, the Building Official shall return the cash/surety or release the cash book assignment to the depositor or to his successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere provided in this chapter. 
 (g) In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the demolition permit, the Building Official, or any duly authorized person employed or engaged by the city, may go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure. The owner, or his representatives, successors, or assignees, or any other person who interferes with or obstructs the ingress or egress to or from any such premises of any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the City of El Monte engaged in the work of completing, demolishing, or removing any building or structure for which a demolition permit has been issued after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof shall be guilty of a violation punishable in accordance with Title 1 (General Provisions), Chapter 1.24 (General Penalty) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (h) In addition to the demolition permit, permits for encroachments of public rights-of-way, the construction of protective canopies, electrical wiring, and the like, shall be obtained when required by the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (i) The requirements for pedestrian protection shall be those set forth under Chapter 33 (Safeguards During Construction) of the El Monte Building Code as adopted herein. Except as otherwise provided under the El Monte Building Code, any use of the public right-of-way shall conform to the requirements of the El Monte Department of Public Works. 
 (j) The requirements, restrictions and procedures for the filling of abandoned cesspools and the capping of abandoned sewer lines shall be those set forth under the El Monte Plumbing Code as adopted pursuant to Chapter 15.02 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (k) All rubble, including footings and slabs, and debris shall be removed from the premises and the premises shall be left in a clean and orderly condition. The Building Official may approve alternate methods upon a written request by the applicant. 
 (l) A permit applicant for any of the following varieties of projects, activities or undertakings shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter 8.20 (Solid Waste - Removal, Collection, Disposal and Diversion) of the El Monte Municipal Code: (i) any project, activity or undertaking involving construction, demolition, additions, alterations, remodeling, encroachments, tenant improvements or grading when such projects, activities or undertakings require a building, demolition, encroachment and/or grading permit; (ii) any renovation and repair projects performed at all varieties of premises (including but not limited to roof tear-offs); (iii) any premises clean-outs (including but not limited to apartment clean-outs); (iv) any warehouse clean-ups; (v) nuisance and/or weed abatement clean-ups; or (vi) any street/road maintenance clean-ups. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.070 - Amendment of Subsections 109.1, 109.2 and 109.3 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
The adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code shall be subject to the amendment of Subsections 109.1, 109.2 and 109.3 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) in their entirety. As amended, Subsections 109.1, 109.2 and 109.3 shall now read as follows: 
109.1 General 
 All fees or service charges established in connection with this chapter shall be paid to the Building Official c/o the El Monte Licensing Division. Permit and plan check fees and any other Code-related fees or service charges shall be the fees and service charges of the City of El Monte unless by resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
109.2 Permit Fees 
 The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the Building Official whose determination shall be final. The value to be utilized in computing the permit and plan review fees established pursuant to this chapter, shall be the total value of all work for which the permit is issued including, by way of illustration and not by limitation, construction and finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems, and all other permanent equipment. 
109.3 Plan Review Fees 
 (a) When a plan or other data is required to be submitted for review and approval by the Building Official pursuant to this chapter, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of such plan or other data. Where the plan or other data is incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review (recheck), a recheck fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of such plan or other data. Said plan review and recheck fees shall be established and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.2, an additional plan review fee shall be charged as set forth in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.080 - Amendment of Section 202 of Chapter 2 (Definitions) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code shall be subject to amendment of Section 202 of Chapter 2 (Definitions) of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition by the addition of the following defined term to the list of defined terms set forth therein: 
 GARAGE, PRIVATE, is a building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles are kept or stored, and which has three sides fully enclosed with approved materials. The fourth side shall be provided with a door or doors providing ingress and egress for the motor vehicles to be kept therein. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.090 - Amendment of Section 3410 (Moved Structures) of Chapter 34 (Existing Structures) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code shall be subject to the amendment in its entirety of Section 3410 (Moved Structures) of Chapter 34 (Existing Structures). As amended, Section 3410 shall state the following: 
Section 3410. Moved Structures. 
 A. Buildings, structures, and their building service equipment moved into or within this jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the technical codes for new buildings or structures and their building service equipment, as amended by the State of California. Applicants requesting moving permits shall submit a certificate showing freedom from termite infestation for each building or structure to be moved. Said certificate shall be submitted at the time application for the moving permit has been duly filed. Upon filing of the application for permit to move a building or structure, and payment of the fee prescribed in the adopted fee schedule, the Building Official shall cause the building or structure to be inspected and shall prepare a written report which shall be forwarded to the applicant. This report shall indicate the approval or disapproval by the Building Official, and if approved for moving, shall outline the requirements necessary to make the building or structure conform to the codes and regulations of this and other ordinances duly adopted by the City of El Monte. 
 B. The report of inspection shall remain valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date that the building or structure has been inspected. If the building or structure has not been relocated by the expiration of this time limit, then a new report and inspection fee shall be required. The applicant shall agree in writing, which shall be notarized, to make all the required changes and repairs within one hundred and eighty (180) days after relocation and shall post with the Building Official, a faithful performance bond, cash or surety, in an amount equal to the cost of the required reconstruction as determined by the Building Official. The faithful performance bond shall guarantee that the required changes shall be made, or the building or structure shall be removed or demolished and the site cleared, cleaned and restored to its original condition insofar as is practical. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.100 - Amendment of Section 3109.4.1 of Chapter 31 (Special Construction) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
Subsection 3109.4.1 of Chapter 31 of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition is amended by the replacement of its first sentence with the following sentence: 
 The top of the barrier shall be at least sixty (60) inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.110 - Adoption of appendices. 
The following appendices that are part of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code are adopted in their entirety: 
A. Appendix I, Patio Covers; and 
B. Appendix J, Grading. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.120 - Amendment of Appendix "J" (Grading) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code. 
A.  Appendix "J" (Grading) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Building Code is amended by amending Section J109 in its entirety to state the following: 
 Section J109. Drainage. All drainage facilities shall be of such design as to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural watercourse approved by the City Engineer. 
 Drainage waters shall not flow over a public sidewalk or parkway, but shall be deposited in a concrete receptor, located outside the driveway and parking area where possible, and approved for the purpose, and then carried under the sidewalk or parkway, through the curb into the gutter in a manner approved by the City Engineer. 
 EXCEPTION: Group U Occupancies and R-3 Occupancies, other than townhouses, may flow over a public sidewalk or parkway. 
 Surface waters entrapped on adjacent properties by reason of any fill shall be drained by the installation of pipes, conduits, culverts, or flumes in keeping with good engineering practices and design, to the nearest street, storm drain, or natural watercourse, as approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which the fill is placed. 
 No slope of any kind shall drain surface waters onto adjoining property limits and where fill exceeds twelve (12") inches in depth. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.130 - Adoption of additional related codes. 
The following parts of the California Code of Regulations are adopted in their entirety: 
A.  Part 8, Historical Building Code; and 
B.  Part 10, Existing Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.140 - Exclusion of other appendices. 
Any additional appendices which may happen to be contained within the same book volume as the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, are not adopted or incorporated into the El Monte Municipal Code unless stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.510 - Adoption of 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code. 
A.  The 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code, as adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on November 22, 2016, is adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference into the El Monte Municipal Code, together with, and subject to, those amendments, additions and modifications delineated in this chapter below. For the purposes of this chapter 15.01, the Los Angeles County Title 30 Residential Code (California Residential Code, 2016 Edition) as adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on November 22, 2016 and its appendices as adopted herein may be referred to collectively as the "El Monte Building Code" or "this code." 
B.  The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city of El Monte and certain equipment specifically regulated herein. 
C.  For clarification purposes, the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code contains Chapters 1 through 10 and 44, as the State adoption of the 2015 International Building Code excluded Chapters 11 through 43. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.520 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the words used in El Monte Building Code shall have the meanings ascribed to them within El Monte Building Code. The foregoing notwithstanding, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below for purposes of this chapter and the El Monte Building Code: 
A.  Whenever the term "municipality," "city," "county," or "city of El Monte" is used, it means the city of El Monte or the appropriate department, division, or agency of said city as the context may reasonably require. 
B.  Whenever the term "Board of Supervisors," "legislative body" or "City Council" is used, it means the City Council of the City of El Monte, California. 
C.  Whenever the term "Building Official" is used, it means Chief Building Official of the city of El Monte. 
D.  Whenever the term "Building Department" is used, it refers to the Division of Building and Safety of the Economic Development Department of the city of El Monte. 
E.  If any term used in the El Monte Building Code refers to an office, officer, board, commission or other public body not established by, or having jurisdiction over or within, the city of El Monte, the term shall be deemed to refer to such office, officer, board, commission or other public body as shall in fact be charged with the responsibility of performing the duty intended to be performed by said office, officer, board, commission or other public body. 
F.  The term "Los Angeles County Title 30 Residential Code," "2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code," "California Residential Code" or "California Residential Code, 2016 Edition" as used in El Monte Municipal Code means and refers to the El Monte Building Code as adopted and incorporated by reference under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.530 - Amendment of Section R113 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code shall be subject to the addition of the following Subsection R113.5 (Municipal Code Violations) to the text of Section R113 (Violations) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of said code: 
 Any person who violates any provision of the El Monte Building Code shall be punishable as provided under Chapter 1.24 (General Penalty) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.540 - Amendment of Subsection R105.2 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code shall be subject to the following amendments to Subsection R105.2 (Work Exempt from Permit-Building) of Section R105 (Permits) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration): 
Item "1" shall state the following: 
 1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the highest point of the roof does not exceed 15 feet 0 inches above adjacent grade. The accessory structure shall comply with the City Zoning Code regardless whether a permit for said structure is required or not. 
Item "2" shall state the following: 
 2. Wood, wrought iron and similar fences not over 6 feet high and masonry, concrete and similar garden or pilaster fences not over 3 feet high. Fences shall comply with the City's Zoning Code regardless whether a permit is required or not. 
Item "3" shall state the following: 
 3. Retaining walls not over 3 feet high measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. Retaining walls shall comply with the City's Zoning Code regardless whether a permit is required or not. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.550 - Amendment of Subsection R106.2 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code shall be subject to the addition of item R106.2.1 (Future Property Line) to Subsection R106.2 (Site plan) of Section R106 (Construction Documents) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration). This added item R106.2.1 shall state the following: 
R106.2.1 Future Property Line. 
 (a) It is contemplated that certain streets within the territorial boundaries of the City of El Monte may be widened in the future in compliance with the circulation elements of the city's updated General Plan. When such streets are proposed for future widening such information shall be shown on the official zoning maps in Title 17 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (b) Whenever building permits are issued for a structure on a lot having a future property line shown thereon in the official zoning maps, such future property line shall be considered to be the official lot line(s) for purposes of establishing building locations relative to set-backs, yard areas, open yards and the like. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.560 - Amendment of Subsection R105.3 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code shall be subject to the following amendments to Subsection R105.3 (Application for Permit) of Section R105 (Permits) of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration). This added item R105.3.3 shall state the following: 
R105.3.3 Demolition Permits. 
 (a) Demolition permits may be issued to raze buildings and structures when the following pre-conditions have been satisfied: 
 1. The permit applicant provides the Building Official with a reasonably detailed written description of the subject property as well as a legal description. 
 2. The permit applicant provides the Building Official with the date the contemplated demolition will begin. 
 3. The terms and conditions, if any, upon which each permit is granted are written upon the permit application or appended in writing thereto. 
 4. The permit applicant, or his/her/its authorized agent, posts a cash/surety bond or a depositor's cash book assignment in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus ten (10%) percent of the work required to be done or other amount as determined by the Building Official. Such costs shall be as estimated by the Building Official. 
 5. The permit applicant provides the Building Official with proof of compliance with the rules and regulations of the South Coast Air Quality Management District. 
 (b) The Building Official may waive the requirement for a bond or deposit at his/her discretion when the demolition is included as part of the permit for a new structure on the same site. 
 (c) Each bond posted or deposit made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) shall expressly require that each and every term and/or condition associated with a demolition permit be complied with to the satisfaction of the Building Official. 
 (d) If a demolition permit does not set forth a specific completion date, the work authorized shall be completed within sixty (60) days after the date of the issuance of the demolition permit, unless otherwise set forth by the written order of the Building Official in his/her discretion. 
 (e) Whenever the Building Official finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any demolition permit, the Building Official shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. In such notice of default, the Building Official shall state the work to be done, the estimated costs thereof, and the period of time determined by the Building Official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. If compliance is not had within the time specified by the Building Official, the Building Official, without delay and without further notice or proceeding, shall proceed to use any cash/surety bond or depositor's cash book or any portion of such instrument, to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise. The balance, if any, of such instrument upon the completion of the work, shall be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work, plus ten (10%) percent thereof. 
 (f) When a cash/surety bond or depositor's cash book assignment has been posted, the Building Official shall return the cash/surety or release the cash book assignment to the depositor or to his successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere provided in this chapter. 
 (g) In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the demolition permit, the Building Official, or any duly authorized person employed or engaged by the city, may go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure. The owner, or his representatives, successors, or assignees, or any other person who interferes with or obstructs the ingress or egress to or from any such premises of any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the City of El Monte engaged in the work of completing, demolishing, or removing any building or structure for which a demolition permit has been issued after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof shall be guilty of a violation punishable in accordance with Title 1 (General Provisions), Chapter 1.24 (General Penalty) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (h) In addition to the demolition permit, permits for encroachments of public rights-of-way, the construction of protective canopies, electrical wiring, and the like, shall be obtained when required by the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (i) The requirements for pedestrian protection shall be those set forth under Chapter 33 (Safeguards During Construction) of the California Building Code as adopted herein. Except as otherwise provided under the El Monte Building Code, any use of the public right-of-way shall conform to the requirements of the El Monte Department of Public Works. 
 (j) The requirements, restrictions and procedures for the filling of abandoned cesspools and the capping of abandoned sewer lines shall be those set forth under the El Monte Plumbing Code as adopted pursuant to Chapter 15.02 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 (k) All rubble, including footings and slabs, and debris shall be removed from the premises and the premises shall be left in a clean and orderly condition. The Building Official may approve alternate methods upon a written request by the applicant. 
 (1) A permit applicant for any of the following varieties of projects, activities or undertakings shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter 8.20 (Solid Waste - Removal, Collection, Disposal and Diversion) of the El Monte Municipal Code: (i) any project, activity or undertaking involving construction, demolition, additions, alterations, remodeling, encroachments, tenant improvements or grading when such projects, activities or undertakings require a building, demolition, encroachment and/or grading permit; (ii) any renovation and repair projects performed at all varieties of premises (including but not limited to roof tear-offs); (iii) any premises clean-outs (including but not limited to apartment clean-outs); (iv) any warehouse clean-ups; (v) nuisance and/or weed abatement clean-ups; or (vi) any street/road maintenance clean-ups. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.570 - Amendment of Subsections R108.1, R108.2 and R108.3 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code. 
The adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code shall be subject to the amendment of Subsections 108.1, 108.2 and 108.3 of Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) in their entirety. As amended, Subsections 108.1, 108.2 and 108.3 shall now read as follows: 
R108.1 General 
 All fees or service charges established in connection with this chapter shall be paid to the Building Official c/o the El Monte Licensing Division. Permit and plan check fees and any other Code-related fees or service charges shall be established by resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
R108.2 Permit Fees 
 The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the Building Official whose determination shall be final. The value to be utilized in computing the permit and plan review fees established pursuant to this chapter, shall be the total value of all work for which the permit is issued including, by way of illustration and not by limitation, construction and finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems, and all other permanent equipment. 
R108.3 Plan Review Fees 
 (a) When a plan or other data is required to be submitted for review and approval by the Building Official pursuant to this chapter, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of such plan or other data. Where the plan or other data is incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review (recheck), a recheck fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of such plan or other data. Said plan review and recheck fees shall be established and may be amended from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.580 - Amendment of Section R202 of Chapter 2 (Definitions) of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code shall be subject to amendment of Section R202 of Chapter 2 (Definitions) of the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition by the addition of the following defined term to the list of defined terms set forth therein: 
 GARAGE, PRIVATE, is a building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles are kept or stored, and which has three sides fully enclosed with approved materials. The fourth side shall be provided with a door or doors providing ingress and egress for the motor vehicles to be kept therein. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.590 - Adoption of appendices. 
The following appendix that is part of the 2016 Los Angeles County Residential Code is adopted in its entirety: 
Appendix "H," Patio Covers 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
15.01.600 - Exclusion of other appendices. 
Any additional Appendices which may happen to be contained within the same book volume as the Los Angeles County Title 30 Residential Code (California Residential Code, 2016 Edition), are not adopted or incorporated into the El Monte Municipal Code unless stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2756, § 5, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 12, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 11, 12-6-2016)  
Chapter 15.02 - PLUMBING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2759, § 4, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, amended Ch. 15.02 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.02, §§ 15.02.010—15.02.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2706, § 5(part), 2007. 
 
15.02.010 - Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code. 
A.  The 2016 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code as adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on November 22, 2016 is hereby adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference into the El Monte Municipal Code, together with, and subject to, those amendments, additions and modifications delineated in this chapter below. For the purposes of this chapter 15.02, the 2016 California Plumbing Code, as adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on November 22, 2016 as adopted herein may be referred to as the "El Monte Plumbing Code" or "this code." 
B.  The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any plumbing system within the city of El Monte. 
(Ord. No. 2759, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 16, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 12, 12-6-2016)  
15.02.020 - Administrative authority. 
Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code shall be subject to the addition of the following sentence to subsection 102.1 (Authority Having Jurisdiction) of Section 102.0 (Organization and Enforcement) of Chapter 1, Division II (Administration): 
 Whenever the terms "Administrative Authority" or "Authority Having Jurisdiction" is used in this Code or its appendices, it shall mean and refer to the Chief Building Official of the City of El Monte or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2759, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 16, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 12, 12-6-2016)  
15.02.030 - Fees and service charges. 
The adopted provisions of the 2016 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code notwithstanding, permit and plan check fees and any other code-related fees or service charges shall be the fees or service charges of the city of El Monte unless changed by resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2759, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 16, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 12, 12-6-2016)  
15.02.040 - Adoption of appendices. 
A.  The following appendices that are part of 2016 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code are adopted in their entirety: 
 Appendices "A," "B," "D," "G," "I," and "K." 
B.  Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code shall be subject to the adoption and incorporation of an additional Appendix M (Swimming Pools). As adopted, Appendix M (Swimming Pools) shall state and provide the following: 
APPENDIX M 
Swimming Pools 
Basic Provisions: Appendix M (Swimming Pools) is hereby added for the purpose of providing basic plumbing regulations with respect to swimming pools. 
M1 - Swimming pool waste water shall be disposed of as hereinafter set forth in this section and the type of disposal proposed shall be approved by the Administrative Authority prior to the commencement of any work. A means of disposal of the total contents of the pool (periodic emptying) without surface run-off shall be established to the satisfaction of the Administrative Authority. 
M2 - The following are legal methods of swimming pool waste water disposal: 
1. To a public sewer. 
2. On the property if the property is large enough to ensure that runoff will not encroach on abutting property. 
3. To a tank truck. 
M3 - No direct connection shall be made between any sewer, drainage system, drywell or subsoil irrigation line and any line connected to a swimming pool. 
M4 - Waste water from any filter, scum gutter overflow, pool emptying line or similar apparatus or appurtenance when discharged to any part of a drainage system, shall be provided with a three (3) inch (76.2 mm) trap. 
M5 - Except as provided in M6, the discharge outlet terminal from any pool or filter shall be protected from backflow by an air gap at least six (6) inches (152.4 mm) above the flood rim of the receptor. 
M6 - No scum gutter drain, overflow drain, back wash discharge drain, or pool emptying line shall enter any receptor below the rim unless the pool piping at its deepest point, the bottom of the filters, and the bottom of the scum gutter drain, or overflow inlets are at least six (6) inches (152.4 mm) above the surface rim of the receptor. 
M7 - A positive point of potable water supply to each swimming pool shall be established and shall be installed as required by Chapter 6 of the California Plumbing Code. 
M8 - Plans for other than private swimming pools shall be approved by the Los Angeles County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 2759, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 16, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 12, 12-6-2016)  
15.02.050 - Exclusion of other appendices. 
Any additional appendices which may happen to be contained within the same book volume as the 2016 Los Angeles County Plumbing Code are not adopted or incorporated into the El Monte Municipal Code unless stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2759, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 16, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 12, 12-6-2016)  
Chapter 15.03 - MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2757, § 4, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, amended Ch. 15.03 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.03, §§ 15.03.010 and 15.03.020, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2668, § 2(part), 2006. 
 
15.03.010 - Adoption of Los Angeles County Title 29 Mechanical Code California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition. 
A.  The 2016 Los Angeles County Mechanical Code is hereby adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference into the El Monte Municipal Code, together with, and subject to, those amendments, additions and modifications delineated in this chapter below. For the purposes of this chapter 15.03, the 2016 Los Angeles County Mechanical Code as adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on November 22, 2016. as adopted herein may be referred to as the "El Monte Mechanical Code" or "this code." 
B.  The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the city of El Monte. 
(Ord. No. 2757, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 20, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 15, 12-6-2016)  
15.03.020 - Fees and service charges. 
The adopted provisions of the 2016 Los Angeles County Mechanical Code notwithstanding, permit and plan check fees and any other code-related fees or service charges shall be the fees and service charges unless established by changed by resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2757, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 20, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 15, 12-6-2016)  
15.03.030 - Adoption of appendices. 
The following appendices that are part of the 2016 Los Angeles County Mechanical Code are adopted in their entirety: 
Appendices "B," "C," and "D." 
(Ord. No. 2757, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 20, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 15, 12-6-2016)  
15.03.040 - Exclusion of other appendices. 
Any additional Appendices which may happen to be contained within the same book volume as the (California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition), are not adopted or incorporated into the El Monte Municipal Code unless stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2757, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 20, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 15, 12-6-2016)  
Chapter 15.04 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Green Building Standards Code. 
A.  The 2016 Los Angeles County Green Building Standards Code is adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference into the El Monte Municipal Code, together with, and subject to, those amendments, additions and modifications delineated in this chapter, below. For the purposes of this Chapter 15.04, the 2016 Los Angeles County Green Building Standards Code as adopted herein may be referred to as the "El Monte Green Building Standards Code" or "this code." 
(Ord. No. 2760, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 28, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 16, 12-6-2016)  
15.04.020 - Fees and service charges. 
The adopted provisions of the 2016 Los Angeles County Green Building Standards Code notwithstanding, permit and plan check fees and any other code-related fees or service charges may be established by resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2760, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 28, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 16, 12-6-2016)  
15.04.030 - Exclusion of appendices. 
Any appendices which may happen to be contained within the same book volume as the 2016 Los Angeles County Green Building Standards Code are not adopted or incorporated into the El Monte Municipal Code unless stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2760, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 28, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 16, 12-6-2016)  
Chapter 15.05 - ELECTRICAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2758, § 4, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, amended Ch. 15.05 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.05, §§ 15.05.010—15.05.050, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2667, § 1(part), 2006, and Ord. No. 2709, § 4(part), 2007. 
 
15.05.010 - Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Electrical Code. 
A.  The 2016 Los Angeles County Electrical Code is adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference into the El Monte Municipal Code, together with, and subject to, those amendments, additions and modifications delineated in this chapter, below. For the purposes of this chapter 15.05, the 2016 Los Angeles County Electrical Code as adopted herein may be referred to as the "El Monte Electrical Code" or "this code." 
B.  The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any electrical system within the city of El Monte. 
(Ord. No. 2758, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 24, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 17, 12-6-2016)  
15.05.020 - Amendment of Article 90 (Introduction) of the California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition. 
Adoption of the California Electrical Code, 2016 shall be subject to the addition of Section 90.10 (Administration) to Article 90 (Introduction). As adopted, Section 90.10 shall read as follows: 
 90.10. Administration. 
 All administrative permitting and related requirements of the El Monte Electrical Code shall be governed by the applicable provisions of Chapter 1.24 (General Penalty) of Title 1 (General Provisions) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2758, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 24, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 17, 12-6-2016)  
15.05.030 - Authority of building official. 
The adopted provisions of the 2016 Los Angeles County Electrical Code, notwithstanding, the Building Official of the city of El Monte, or the Building Official's expressly authorized city-employed representative(s) shall oversee the enforcement of the provisions of the El Monte Electrical Code and shall be vested with the authority to enforce all such provisions on behalf of the city of El Monte. 
(Ord. No. 2758, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 24, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 17, 12-6-2016)  
15.05.040 - Fees and service charges. 
The adopted provisions of the 2016 Los Angeles County Electrical Code notwithstanding, permit and plan check fees and any other code-related fees or service charges shall be the fees and service charges unless amended by resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2758, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 24, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 17, 12-6-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2904, § 17, adopted December 6, 2016, renumbered § 15.05.050 as 15.05.040.  
15.05.050 - Adoption of annexes. 
The following annexes that are part of the California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition are adopted in their entirety: 
 Annexes "A," "B," "C," "D," "E," "F," "G" and "H." 
(Ord. No. 2758, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 24, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 17, 12-6-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2904, § 17, adopted December 6, 2016, renumbered § 15.05.060 as 15.05.050.  
15.05.070 - Exclusion of other annexes. 
Any additional annexes which may happen to be contained within the same book volume as the 2016 Los Angeles County Electrical Code, are not adopted or incorporated into the El Monte Municipal Code unless stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2758, § 4, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2836, § 24, 1-28-2014; Ord. No. 2904, § 17, 12-6-2016)  
Chapter 15.06 - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 
Sections: 
 
15.06.010 - Prior code Section 8102—Deleted. 
Section 8102 of the El Monte Municipal Code is deleted. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.07 - EL MONTE ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
15.07.010 - Program creation. 
This chapter may be known and cited as the "El Monte Art in Public Places Program." The intent of the Art in Public Places Program is to provide a collection of nationally recognized, permanent outdoor art work throughout the city of El Monte, to be of public benefit. The program is designed to present the community with a variety of art work styles and themes, all of the highest possible quality. 
(Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006)  
15.07.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Advisory Committee" means the Art in Public Places Advisory Committee organized pursuant to section 15.07.070 of this chapter. 
"Art Coordinator" means a person designated by the Economic Development Director who shall review and evaluate all applications submitted pursuant to this chapter; work with project applicants to develop and refine art work proposals; and make recommendations to the Art in Public Places Advisory Committee. 
"Art work" means original creations of art, including, but not limited to, the following categories; sculpture, murals, mosaic, and fountains. These categories may be realized through such mediums as steel, bronze, stained glass, concrete, wood, ceramic tile, and stone, as well as other materials deemed suitable under the program guidelines established by the Economic Development Director. 
"Development project" and "project" means any construction, rehabilitation or renovation undertaking for which a building permit is required, including, but not limited to, construction, rehabilitation or renovation undertakings that are completed in multiple phases under separate building permits applied for within a twelve (12) month period commencing from the date that the first of the building permit is issued. 
"Planning Division" means the El Monte Planning Division of the El Monte Economic Development Department. 
"Project" means any undertaking that develops, erects, constructs, enlarges, alters, repairs, moves, improves, removes, converts or demolishes any real property and/or improvements. 
"Project cost" means the total value of a development project, excluding the land value, whether or not the development project is undertaken (i) in a single phase under a single building permit; or (ii) in multiple phases under multiple building permits applied for within a twelve (12) month period commencing from the date that the first of the building permits is issued. 
"Public place" means any exterior area on public or private property which is accessible and visible to the general public. 
(Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 2685 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 2—4, 51, 6-21-2016)  
15.07.030 - Requirement to provide art work or pay in-lieu contribution. 
When a project is subject to the requirements of this chapter, the project applicant shall comply with provisions of either subsection A or B of this section or a combination of both: 
A.  The project applicant shall acquire and install an art work in a public place on or in the vicinity of the project site as approved by the City Council pursuant to this chapter. The cost or value of such work as approved by the City Council shall equal or exceed the amount of an in-lieu contribution that would otherwise be made under subsection B of this section. 
B.  In lieu of acquiring and installing an art work, project applicants may contribute funds to the art in public places fund established pursuant to Section 15.07.080 of this chapter equal to one percent of the total project cost. The in-lieu fee shall be paid by the project applicant before the issuance of building permits, unless otherwise provided by the City Council. Project applicants shall indicate on their art in public places application that they wish to make an in-lieu contribution. 
(Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006)  
15.07.040 - Project subject to art in public places requirement. 
A.  The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the following development projects: 
1.  Commercial or industrial projects which incur project costs totaling more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), including, but not limited to, commercial or industrial development projects undertaken in multiple phases under separate building permits within a twelve (12) month period commencing from the date the first of the multiple building permits is issued; 
2.  Development projects involving the new construction of four (4) or more residential dwelling units, including, but not limited to, development projects involving the new construction of four (4) or more residential dwelling units (i) within a single building, structure or mixed use development; (ii) within a planned unit development; or (iii) within a mixed-unit development. 
For purposes of this section commercial or industrial development projects include, but are not limited to, the construction, rehabilitation and/or renovation of (i) multiple tenant developments; (ii) nonresidential portions of mixed-use developments; and (iii) buildings, facilities or other structures designed and approved for the following purposes: retail or wholesale; manufacturing; mechanical repair; office use; mini-mall; personal care facilities; entertainment; restaurant, dining or other food preparation; on-sale liquor establishment and off-sale liquor establishment; storage; agricultural; hotel, motel, motor hotel, inn, boarding house, or lodging house. 
B.  Exceptions. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
1.  All public work and governmental agency projects; 
2.  Reconstruction of structures which have been damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity; 
3.  Religious, hospital, scientific, charitable organizations, public educational institutions (such as public primary and secondary schools, public colleges, public adult schools and the like) if the project is constructed on property exempt from taxation pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 214. 
(Ord. 2685 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006)  
15.07.050 - Guidelines for art work. 
Subject to approval by the City Council, the El Monte Economic Development Department shall develop and establish guidelines for the construction, approval and maintenance of art works. For the purposes of this chapter such guidelines shall be referred to elsewhere in this chapter as the "city guidelines." The city guidelines shall include, but are not limited to, the following criteria; 
A.  The art work shall be displayed in an area that is open and freely accessible to the public for at least ten (10) hours each day or displayed in a manner which otherwise provides public accessibility in an equivalent manner based on the characteristics of the art work or its placement on the site; 
B.  The art in public places application shall include a site plan showing the location of the art work, complete with landscaping, lighting and other appropriate accessories to complement and protect the art work; 
C.  The composition of the art work shall be of a permanent type of material in order to be durable against vandalism, theft and weather, and in order to require a low level of maintenance; 
D.  The art work shall be related in terms of scale, materials, form and content to immediate and adjacent buildings and landscaping so that it complements the site and surrounding environment; 
E.  The art work shall be designed and constructed by persons experienced in the production of such art work and recognized by critics and by his or her peers as one who produces works of art; 
F.  The art work shall be permanently affixed to the property; 
G.  The art work shall be maintained by the property owner in a safe, neat, clean and orderly manner acceptable to the city. The art work shall also be maintained in good repair; 
H.  The art work installed on a project site shall remain the property of the project applicant. Art work installed on city property shall be the property of the city; 
I.  Prior to the issuance of building permits, the property owner shall execute and record with the Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk for the county of Los Angeles, covenants, conditions and restriction in the form and content approved by the Economic Development Director and the City Attorney providing, among other things: 
(1)  That the property owner, its successor and assigns and all subsequent owners of the underlying real property shall maintain the art work as required by subsection G of this section; 
(2)  That the owner shall indemnify, defend and hold the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, volunteers and related parties harmless from any and all claims or liabilities arising out of the art work; and 
(3)  That owner shall provide the City Clerk's office with a certificate of public liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured including such coverage and liability limits as may be specified by the Economic Development Director. 
J.  The following items are not to be considered as art works: 
1.  Art objects which are mass produced from a standard design, 
2.  Reproductions of original art works, 
3.  Decorative, ornamental or functional elements which are designed by the building architect as opposed to an artist commissioned for the purpose of creating the art work, 
4.  Landscape architecture and landscape gardening except where these elements are designed or approved by the artist and are in integral part of the art work by the artist, 
5.  Services or utilities necessary to operate or maintain the art work. 
(Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 5, 6, 6-21-2016)  
15.07.060 - Processing. 
The requirements and procedures for the processing of an art in public places application shall be as follows: 
A.  Upon submission of a project application subject to the requirements of this chapter, the Planning Division shall provide the project applicant with a copy of the ordinance as codified in this chapter of the El Monte Municipal Code and an art in public places application form. 
B.  The project applicant shall submit to the Planning Division a completed art in public places application form in a timely manner as set forth under the city guidelines. 
C.  The Planning Division shall, upon receipt of the application, submit the application to the Art Coordinator. The Art Coordinator shall review each project applicant's initial art work proposal; work with each project applicant to modify and/or refine each art work proposal to ensure its conformity with the city guidelines and to maximize its aesthetic compatibility with its anticipated surroundings; and make recommendations on each art work application based on his or her determinations. The Art Coordinator, in consultation with Economic Development staff, shall also ascertain the required value of the art work and the required amount of in-lieu fees in the event the project applicant elects to pay such fees as an alternative to the installation of art work. 
D.  Within sixty (60) days from the date the application is submitted to the Art Coordinator, the Art Coordinator shall submit to the Advisory Committee a written proposal based on the Art Coordinator's investigation and determinations and his or her consultations with the project applicant. 
E.  Within thirty (30) days from the date upon which the Advisory Committee receives a recommended proposal from the Art Coordinator, the Advisory Committee shall review and comment upon the recommendation and in its sole and absolute discretion, formulate and make a recommendation of its own to the City Council. The Advisory Committee's failure to make a recommendation to the City Council within the time allotted shall result in the Art Coordinator's recommendation becoming the recommendation of the Advisory Committee. 
F.  The City Council shall either approve the art work proposal as recommended by the Advisory Committee; approve the art work proposal subject to additional modifications and/or conditions acceptable to the project applicant; or deny the art work proposal. All City Council approvals shall be final. 
If the City Council denies an initial art work proposal, the project applicant, within thirty (30) days of the denial, shall submit a written notice to the City Clerk indicating that the project applicant has elected: (1) to have the art work proposal reconsidered at the Advisory Committee level so that the Advisory Committee in consultation with the Art Coordinator and the project applicant may develop and submit a revised and reformulated proposal for City Council approval within thirty (30) days from the filing date of the project applicant's written request; or (2) to contribute appropriate funds into the art in public places fund in lieu of installing art work. Subject to the restrictions of subsection G of this section, a project applicant may make successive written requests to have a denied proposals reconsidered at the Advisory Committee level until a proposal acceptable to the City Council is developed. All written requests to have a revised proposal reconsidered at the Advisory Committee level shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of a denial. 
The City Council reserves the right to approve a revised and reformulated art work proposal as proposed; approve a revised and reformulated art work proposal subject to additional modifications and/or conditions acceptable to the project applicant; or deny such revised and reformulated proposals. Subject to the restrictions of subsection G of this section, denials of initial art work proposals or revised and reformulated art work proposals shall be final if the project applicant subsequently elects to contribute to the art in public places fund in lieu of installing art work; or upon the project applicant's failure to timely request that a denied proposal be reconsidered at the Advisory Committee level. 
G.  When the project applicant has elected to acquire and install an art work, no building permit may be issued until the City Council has approved an art work proposal, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the approved art work has been installed. 
H.  In the event the City Council has approved an art work proposal but the art work itself cannot be completed before the completion of the overall private project, the project applicant may request that a certificate of occupancy be issued absent installation of the art work, provided the project application first submits to the El Monte Economic Development Department a cashier's check in an amount equivalent to the required value of the art work. The Economic Development Department shall hold the funds in trust until the art work is completed, permanently installed and inspected for compliance with this chapter. As an additional condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to this subsection, the project applicant shall be required to execute a three (3) party written agreement between the project applicant, the proposed artist and the city of El Monte regarding the artist's payment plan, using the funds held in trust by the Economic Development Department. The agreement shall provide that the city will be authorized to determine the final location of the art work, should there be any complications over the arrangement. Should the art work not be installed after six (6) months from the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the city shall control the decision-making regarding the funds in trust and completion of the public art work. Any project applicant who is issued a certificate of occupancy pursuant to this subsection, must install the approved art work no later than six (6) months from the date the certificate of occupancy is issued. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the city from denying a certificate of occupancy pursuant to provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code and/or state law unrelated to the subject matter of this chapter. 
I.  If the project applicant has elected to make an in-lieu contribution to the art in public places fund, no building permits shall be issued until such contribution has been paid. 
(Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 7, 8, 6-21-2016)  
15.07.070 - Art in Public Places Advisory Committee. 
A.  The Art in Public Places Advisory Committee (the "Advisory Committee") is a review panel charged with reviewing art in public places applications; evaluating the art work recommendations of the Art Coordinator with the aim of insuring that all art work criteria established pursuant to this chapter, including the city guidelines, are met; and making recommendations to the City Council as to each art in public places application. The Advisory Committee shall review the applications and examine the proposals for public safety, weather resistance, balance within the program, verification of value, public response, proper lighting, public accessibility, installation methods, proportion, composition, the artist's previous experience on monumental scale sculpture, the artist's art training and exhibition record, and the art works aesthetic compatibility with its anticipated surrounds. The Committee, shall consist of: 
1.  One representative member of the El Monte Planning Commission; 
2.  One representative member of the El Monte Cultural Affairs Commission; 
3.  One representative member of the El Monte Veterans and Homeless Affairs Commission; and 
4.  Two (2) El Monte residents appointed by the City Council who shall serve as public representatives. Where commissioners are found to be inactive, a second member of the Planning Commission and/or an additional resident may be appointed. 
B.  The five (5) commission representatives to the Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the City Council, pursuant to Government Code Section 40605. Members of the commissions shall be reappointed annually; residents shall be reappointed bi-annually. 
C.  The El Monte Economic Development Department and the Art Coordinator shall be responsible for providing administrative, investigative and advisory support to the Advisory Committee. The presence of at least three (3) Advisory Committee members at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the Advisory Committee shall constitute the minimum quorum necessary to conduct business and take action. 
(Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. No. 2883, § 9, 6-21-2016)  
15.07.080 - Art in public places fund. 
A.  Accounting. Any moneys collected in accordance with the in-lieu contributions provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in a separate account denominated as the "Art in Public Places Fund." The El Monte Economic Development Department in cooperation with the El Monte Finance Division shall establish accounting records sufficient to identify and control these funds. The account containing these funds shall earn interest and the earned interest shall be used for and be subject to the same restrictions established in subsection B of this section. 
B.  Use of Fund. The art in public places fund shall be used to provide sites for, and works of art in, public places in order to further the intent and purpose of this chapter as set forth in Section 15.07.010 of this chapter. 
C.  Permissible Expenditures. Expenditures of funds shall be limited to the following uses: 
1.  The cost of art work and its installation; 
2.  Waterworks, landscaping, lighting and other objects which are an integral part of the art work; 
3.  Frames, mats, pedestals, and other objects necessary for the proper presentation of the art work; 
4.  Walls, pools, landscaping or other architectural or landscape architectural elements necessary for the proper aesthetic and structural placement of the art work; 
5.  Maintenance and repair of art works funded through the art in public places fund. 
D.  Administration. 
1.  The art in public places fund shall be administered jointly by the El Monte Economic Development Department and the El Monte Finance Division. 
2.  The Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to the City Council concerning the purchase or commissioning of art works with art in public places funds, including: 
a.  Places which should be considered for art work; 
b.  The medium of the proposed art work; and 
c.  The artist whose work should be considered for placement in the recommended location. 
3.  Selection of artists and art works shall be based on the guidelines to be established pursuant to Section 15.07.050 of this chapter. 
4.  The city will contract with the artist and with consultants as necessary for the purchase or commissioning as well as the execution and installation of the art work. 
5.  On-site activity in connection with the art work installation shall be coordinated by the Economic Development Director or his or her designee under the supervision of the City Manager and the Assistant City Manager. 
6.  Maintenance and repair of art work funded through the art in public places fund shall be financed from that account. 
7.  So far as is practical, in the event repair of the art work is required, the city shall first give the artist the opportunity to do that work for a reasonable fee. In the event the artist is unable or refuses to make the repair for such a fee, the city may proceed to contract for such repair with another qualified artist. 
E.  Endorsements. The art in public places fund shall also be used as a depository for endowments, bequests, grants or donations. Such sums may be expended as set forth in subsection C of this section as approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2642 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 10, 11, 6-21-2016)  
Chapter 15.08 - PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
15.08.010 - Fee authorization. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, the approval by the city of a "development project," as said term is defined under Section 66000(a) of the California Government Code, shall be subject to the imposition of one or more of the fees, as applicable under subsection C, below, as a condition of approval of such development project by the city. For purposes of this chapter, the term "development project" also means: 
1.  Any substantial improvement, alteration, renovation and/or expansion of any existing structure or improvement in the event that such improvement or expansion adds more than fifty (50) percent of structural area to an existing single or multifamily residential unit or adds more than one hundred (100) square feet of area to any other type of existing building use; or 
2.  Any improvement, alteration and/or renovation of an existing structure or improvement which results in a net increase in the number of units within the structure or improvement; or which results in a substantial intensification of the use of the structure or improvement. 
B.  The specific amount of each variety of public facilities impact fees authorized under this chapter shall be established and from time to time adjusted by resolution of the El Monte City Council in accordance with applicable law. Fee amounts established by resolution may be automatically adjusted each year by an amount not exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of the annual percentage change in the consumer price index for the Los Angeles-Long Beach statistical area. The foregoing notwithstanding, fees established by resolution may not be automatically adjusted for a period exceeding five (5) consecutive years from the effective date of the resolution establishing such fees. Prior to the conclusion of such five-year period, the city shall be required to commission, consider and approve an updated fee study and adopt fees in accordance with the findings of the updated study. 
C.  The public facilities impact fees authorized under this chapter include for the enhancement, expansion and/or improvement of: 
1.  Sewer facilities; 
2.  Storm drain facilities; 
3.  Traffic signals; 
4.  Street and transportation facilities. 
D.  Fees established pursuant to this chapter are in addition to, and not in substitution of, any other required fees and/or charges relative to development of a subject property and shall be for the purpose of enhancing, expanding and/or improving those public facilities set forth under subsection C, above, so as to mitigate impacts upon the level and/or quality of service by new development within the city. 
E.  No building permit shall be issued for any development project unless and until any and all fees authorized under this chapter and required by resolution have been paid in full to the city, or paid subject to a fee waiver pursuant to subsection F of Section 15.08.010 has been issued. 
F.  An applicant for any "development project," subject to the fee described in Section 15.08.010(A) may apply to the Public Works Director for a waiver of the fee, based upon the absence of any impact of that development on city facilities and services. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Public Works Director prior to the issuance of a building permit authorizing construction of the project that is subject to the fee. The application shall state completely and in detail the applicant's factual basis, supported by studies or reports for a fee waiver. 
1.  The applicant may elect to pay the full fee under protest at the time of the submittal of the fee waiver application in order to obtain a building permit in advance of the determination of the fee waiver application. If the full fee is paid under protest and the application is subsequently granted, then the applicant shall receive a refund in the amount of the fee paid. 
2.  The Public Works Director shall consider the application and respond in writing setting forth the reasons for approval, denial, or request for additional information within sixty (60) days. The decision of the Public Works Director is appealable pursuant to subsection G of Section 15.08.010. 
3.  The application process under this section is limited in scope to applications for fee waivers based on the absence of any impact of development on city facilities and services. The application process for a development fee waiver under the specific facts of a particular development project site pursuant to this section is not applicable to a fee protest under Government Code Section 66020 et seq. 
4.  If a waiver is granted under this section, any change in the development project following the time of approval of the fee waiver shall invalidate the fee waiver. 
5.  Before accepting an application for filing, the Public Works Department shall collect an application processing and review fee for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this chapter. The amount of the fees collected shall be in accordance with the fee schedule of the city. 
G.  A decision of the Public Works Director with respect to an application for a fee waiver shall be appealable in accordance with this subsection. A person seeking judicial review of a decision shall first complete an appeal under this subsection. 
1.  Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the Public Works Director shall file an appeal to the City Council in writing with the City Clerk not later than ten (10) days from the date of the Public Works Director's written decision is delivered to the applicant. The written appeal shall state completely and in detail the factual grounds for the appeal. 
2.  The City Council shall consider the appeal at a regular or special meeting of the City Council within sixty (60) days after filing of the appeal of the Public Works Director's determination. 
3.  The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. 2712 § 2 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2777, §§ 1—3, 10-5-2011)  
15.08.020 - Management of fees collected. 
A.  Upon receipt of any public facilities impact fees, the city shall deposit, invest, account for and expend said fees in accordance with Government Code Section 66006. The Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services is authorized and directed to establish such accounts as may be necessary or appropriate to comply with applicable law concerning the fees as collected under this chapter. 
B.  The Deputy City Manager for Community Development in consultation with the City Engineer and the Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services shall prepare each year a report which identifies the sums on deposit in the funds established by this section and identifies the purpose for which the balance of each such fund is proposed to be sued and verify that a reasonable relationship continues to exist between the amount of the funds as accumulated and the purpose for which they are charged. The first such report shall be due September 1, 2008 and no later than September 1st of each calendar year, thereafter. 
(Ord. 2712 § 2 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 15.10 - MISCELLANEOUS DELETIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.10.010 - Prior code Section 8104—Deleted. 
Section 8104 of the El Monte Municipal Code is deleted. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.12 - DELETIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Prior code section 8105—Deleted. 
Section 8105 of the El Monte Municipal Code is deleted. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.14 - STATE ENERGY CALCULATION REVIEW FEE 
Sections: 
 
15.14.010 - State energy calculation review fee. 
For each state energy calculation submitted for review in conjunction with an application for a building permit, the Building Official shall charge and collect a state energy calculation review fee equal to five (5) percent of the applicable building permit fee. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.22 - BUILDING REGULATIONS—HOUSING NUMBERING 
Sections: 
 
15.22.010 - Entrances—Numbered. 
All entrances from the public streets to buildings shall be numbered as hereinafter in this chapter provided. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.22.020 - Place of numbering. 
The number of each and every entrance shall be placed upon or immediately above the door or gate closing such entrance, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. In all cases where the building is located on the back of the property line of the street on which the same fronts, the numbers may be placed either at the side of the main entrance of the building, over the main entrance, upon the porch, or such numbers may be placed over or at the side of the gateway of the property, or upon any steps or other structure near the back of the property line thereof, in such a manner that the same may be plainly seen from the street in front of such property. Whenever houses are located at the back of the property line, the numbers shall be placed and maintained in such a manner that the same will not be hidden from view from the street by any trees, bushes, shrubs or other obstructions. Each figure of all numbers shall be at least two (2) inches in height and of corresponding width. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.22.030 - Notice of designated number. 
The number designated for any entrance to any building shall be placed thereon within five (5) days after the receipt by the owner, occupant or lessee of such building of a notice from the city Building Official of such number; and all numbers other than such number shall be removed from every building by the owner, occupant or lessee thereof within five (5) days after receipt of such notice. The city Building Official shall designate the respective numbers for buildings fronting on streets theretofore laid out or hereafter to be laid out or extended. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.22.040 - Method of numbering. 
Twenty-five (25) feet frontage shall be allowed for each number, to be calculated from the end of the block at which the number begins, except in the case of lots fronting on Valley Boulevard between the westerly boundary line of the city and the westerly line of the Pacific Electric Railway Company's right-of-way, the city Building Official may allow a less amount of frontage so as to provide each separate place of business with a separate number as far as practicable. The city Building Official shall, so far as practicable, assign the numbers on either side of the streets in such a way that the consecutive even and uneven numbers shall be opposite each other and the city Building Official shall, on application, furnish information as to the numbers controlled by each lot. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.22.050 - Block defined. 
A block within the meaning of this chapter shall be that portion of any street between two (2) cross streets or between a cross street and an abutting street or between two (2) abutting streets. In case of abutting streets, the prolonged centerline of the abutting streets shall be the dividing line of the blocks, and provided that all blocks exceeding five hundred (500) feet in length shall be considered as two (2) blocks. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.22.060 - Allotment of block numbers. 
One hundred (100) numbers or as many thereof, as may be necessary, shall be allotted to each block. Number 100 shall be the first number used at the respective beginning points on the sides of the streets which are to contain the even numbers and 101 for the sides which are to contain the odd numbers. At the beginning of the second block from the starting point, the first numbers shall be 200 and 201 respectively and so continue throughout the system. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.24 - BUILDING REGULATIONS—MOVING, RELOCATION AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS, PART 1—DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.24.000 - Definitions—Generally. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms, phrases and words shall be construed as found in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.24.010 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.24.020 - Person. 
"Person" means a natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.24.030 - Structure. 
"Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, except temporary structures of not to exceed ninety (90) days duration used in connection with construction. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.26 - BUILDING REGULATIONS—MOVING, RELOCATION AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS, PART 2—DESIGN APPROVAL 
Sections: 
 
15.26.010 - Prerequisite of approval. 
No person shall apply for or be granted a permit pursuant to Chapter 15.28 of this title unless the relocation of the building or structure has been first approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and unless such building or structure was designed and is intended for a use or purpose in conformity with the general plan for the property upon which such building or structure is proposed to be relocated. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.020 - Design standards. 
In order that buildings or structures proposed to be relocated, and any signs proposed to be erected, the landscaping to be installed at the new location, the parking areas and the general appearance of the completed site will be in harmony with other structures and improvements in the area, and not of obnoxious, undesirable or unsightly appearance, plans of the exterior architectural design and appearance of all buildings and structures, plot plans, landscape plans, advertising sign plans, parking area plans and building setback plans shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. In reviewing the same, the items specified in the following subsections shall be considered: 
A.  The height, bulk and area of buildings; 
B.  The setback distances from all property lines; 
C.  The colors and materials on the exterior; 
D.  The type and pitch of roofs; 
E.  The size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings; 
F.  The size, type and location of signs; 
G.  Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television masts; 
H.  Plot plan, landscaping and automobile parking areas; 
I.  The relation to the existing buildings and structures in the general vicinity and area. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.030 - Information required. 
Any person seeking approval of a building or structure proposed to be relocated within the city shall submit to the Secretary of the Planning Commission the following: 
A.  All plans referred to in Section 15.26.020 of this chapter; 
B.  The location and address of the property on which the building or structure to be moved is presently situated; 
C.  The location and legal description and the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the land to which the building or structure is to be moved; 
D.  Ten (10) copies of a plot plan of the property on which the building or structure is to be moved or located showing all existing structures and the proposed location of the building or structure to be moved; 
E.  The name, address and the telephone number of the owner of the building or structure proposed to be moved; 
F.  The use to be made of the building or structure if it is moved; 
G.  At least four (4) current color photographs of the building or structure, a minimum of one showing each side. The minimum size of the photographs shall be three (3) inches by four (4) inches and they shall be of quality satisfactory to the Planning Department; 
H.  Elevations showing the finished appearance of the front, sides and rear of the building or structure, as proposed after relocation, shall be furnished unless the structure is to remain in the same condition, as shown in the photographs required by the subsection G of this section; 
I.  Two (2) sets of gummed labels containing the names and addresses, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, of the owners of property situated within three hundred (300) feet of the external boundaries of the property upon which the building or structure is proposed to be relocated. Applicant shall be responsible for the accuracy and completeness of such names and addresses, and the person preparing the same shall declare under penalty of perjury that all the names and addresses are as shown on the last equalized assessment roll (unless otherwise specified) and that they constitute all the names and addresses of the owners of property to whom notice is required by law or by this code to be mailed in connection with the application. 
J.  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each structure or building for which approval is sought, and a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each building site upon which any building is proposed to be relocated. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.040 - Notice. 
Upon receipt of the items specified in Section 15.26.030 of this chapter, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall cause to be posted, in a conspicuous place on the property to which it is proposed to move such building or structure, a notice with the heading "NOTICE OF PROPOSED RELOCATION OF BUILDING" in letters not less than one inch in height, stating that application has been made for the relocation of a building or structure upon such property; that the details thereof are on file in the city Planning Department and are available for inspection by any interested person; and that any objection to the proposed relocation shall be set forth in writing and filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission within ten (10) days after the date of the notice. The Planning Secretary shall also cause a copy of such notice to be mailed to the owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, of all properties situated within three hundred (300) feet of the external boundaries of the property upon which a building or structure is proposed to be relocated, the notices to be mailed the same day that the notice is posted on the property. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.050 - Approval with or without hearing. 
If no written objection to the proposed relocation of a building or structure is filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission within the time specified in the notice given pursuant to Section 15.26.040 of this chapter, the Planning Commission or its designated representative may approve the proposed relocation if it meets the criteria hereinbefore in this chapter set forth. If written objection to the proposed relocation of a building or structure is filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission within the time specified in the notice given pursuant to Section 15.26.040 of this chapter, the relocation shall not be approved, except by the Planning Commission after and in accordance with the evidence received at a public hearing held by and before the city Planning Commission after notice of the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing given by mail to the owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of all properties located within three hundred (300) feet of the external boundaries of the property upon which the building or structure is proposed to be relocated and to all persons that have filed an objection to the proposed relocation within the time specified in Section 15.26.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.060 - Negotiations. 
In the event it is determined, by either the Planning Commission or by its designated representative, that the general appearance of the completed site, as proposed, or the buildings or structures proposed to be relocated are inharmonious with other structures and improvements in the area, or are of obnoxious, undesirable or unsightly appearance, the Planning Commission or its designated representative, respectively, shall confer with the applicant in an endeavor to have the plans changed so that the structures will be harmonious and attractive in appearance. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.070 - Appeal. 
The applicant or any interested person dissatisfied with the action of the Planning Commission or its designated representative may, within ten (10) days after such action, appeal in writing to the City Council. The procedure for such appeal shall be the same as the procedure for an appeal for a variance. Upon approval by the City Council, the building permit shall be issued if all other requirements of law and of this code have been complied with. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.080 - Approval conditions. 
No application made pursuant to this chapter may be approved, except in accordance with the criteria hereinbefore in this chapter set forth. In granting any such approval, the city may impose and enforce such terms and conditions as the city deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.26.090 - Location and setback. 
Every structure relocated shall either face the principal street abutting the property upon which it is to be relocated, or shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the main street abutting such property. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.28 - BUILDING REGULATIONS—MOVING, RELOCATION AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS, PART 3—RELOCATION PERMIT 
Sections: 
 
15.28.010 - Relocation permit. 
No person shall move any building or structure into the city or from one location to another in the city without first obtaining a relocation permit from the Building Department for each such building or structure being moved. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.020 - Application. 
Every person intending to move a building or structure into the city or from one location to another in the city of El Monte, shall have first complied with and obtained approval pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15.26 of this title, and every application for a permit required by this chapter shall be filed with the city within six (6) months after such approval. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.030 - Application, information. 
The following information shall be provided: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or contractor who will install the foundations and do any other necessary work that may be required at the new site; 
B.  Two (2) copies of a plot plan of the property onto which the building or structure is to be moved or relocated showing all existing and proposed structures and other pertinent improvements. Such plot plan shall conform to approval obtained pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15.26 of this title; 
C.  Jurisdiction under which the building or structure was inspected when built and the year in which such construction was completed; 
D.  If the building or structure was not originally constructed under permit issued by and inspection performed by the city, the applicant shall cause either of the two (2) following listed provisions to be complied with: 
1.  Provide with the application two (2) copies of the original construction plans of the building or structure, 
2.  Expose electrical wiring, plumbing and structural beams in the building or structure prior to inspection by the Building Department to the extent necessary to enable the Inspector to adequately determine compliance with the applicable codes and provide two (2) copies of a floor plan showing the arrangement and size of each room and the size and type of each window and door therein; 
E.  Two (2) copies of the foundation plan to be provided at the proposed site; 
F.  Two (2) copies of structural details of any additions or alterations to be made to the building or structure; 
G.  Provide a certificate from a state-licensed pest control company stating that the building or structure has termite clearance. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.040 - Building permit fees. 
The applicant shall also apply for and pay the fees prescribed in the applicable sections of the building regulations for building, electrical, and plumbing permits necessary to complete the relocation of the building or structure. For the purpose of computing such fees, valuation shall include the reasonable cost of moving such structure and the reasonable value of all new construction, alterations, additions, repairs, replacements and foundations in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.050 - Completion bond. 
Applicant shall deposit with the city a cash bond or certificate of deposit payable to the city on demand in an amount equal to three dollars ($3.00) for each square foot of floor area contained within the building. In no event shall the sum thus deposited be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The purpose of such bond is to guarantee the compliance by applicant with the provisions of this section and the completion of the relocation of the building in accordance with the provisions of and within the time specified by this chapter and shall be used or refunded, as provided in Section 15.28.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.060 - Street improvements. 
Applicant shall, if they are not presently existing, construct or guarantee the construction of concrete curbs and gutters, concrete driveway approaches and, in Zones R-la, R-lb, R-1c, R-2, R-3, R-4 and all commercial zones, concrete sidewalks along all street frontages of the lot on which the building or structure is to be moved or relocated. The installation of these improvements may be guaranteed by a cash deposit in accordance with Section 12.08.090 of this code. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.070 - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit to move a building or structure, the Building Official shall make all necessary inspections to determine whether such building or structure may be moved safely without demolishing or destroying the same and shall determine whether or not the proposed location of any building or structure sought to be moved into or from one location to another in the city meets the requirements of the city building regulations and any other laws or ordinances appurtenant thereto. Where investigations are required to be made by the Building Official beyond the limits of the city, the applicant shall pay for each inspection or reinspection a sum equal to one dollar ($1.00) per mile for the full mileage one way, from the El Monte City Hall to the site where the inspection is to be made; this charge shall be in addition to other fees required to be paid for permits under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.080 - Zoning compliance. 
Every building or structure moved into or relocated in the city shall comply with all the provisions of Title 16 of this code applicable to the new location, except as may otherwise be permitted pursuant to such title. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.090 - Completion time. 
The building or structure shall be completely set down and placed upon its new foundation within thirty (30) days from its date of arrival at the new location. All required alterations and repairs shall be completed within sixty (60) days after the arrival of the structure at the new location, and in any event within one hundred (100) calendar days from the date of the issuance of the relocation permit. An extension of time may be granted by the Building Official, upon written application, when such extension is required because of circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. If any such application for extension of time is denied by the Building Official, the applicant may appeal such decision to the City Council. Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the date of such decision, and shall be accompanied by an appeal fee of five dollars ($5.00). The City Council shall consider and pass upon any such appeal without unreasonable delay, and may grant or deny the requested extension or grant an extension for a period of time less than that requested. In granting any such extension of time, the City Council may impose such additional conditions as it deems necessary or reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.100 - Final inspection. 
Upon completion of the relocation of a building in the city, the person owning same shall request an inspection from the Building Official. The Building Official shall thereupon cause an inspection of the building to be made, and if he or she finds that all the provisions of this chapter have been complied with he or she shall issue a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.110 - Performance by city. 
In the event that the applicant fails to complete such work within the time specified, or as extended, as provided in Section 15.28.090 of this chapter, the city shall proceed by such method as it deems convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed. The balance, if any, of the cash bond deposited shall, upon completion of the work, be returned to the depositor in accordance with Section 15.28.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.120 - Use or refund of cash bond. 
Upon completion of the relocation work, as specified in Section 15.28.100 of this chapter, the Building Official shall write a memorandum to the Administrative Officer requesting that the cash bond deposited pursuant to Section 15.28.030 of this chapter, be returned to the depositor thereof after first deducting therefrom all unpaid fees that may be due to the city under the provisions of this chapter, the cost as determined by the Director of Public Services, of repairing or replacing any public property damaged by the relocation of the building, and the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day or fraction thereof beyond the time limit specified in Section 15.28.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.28.130 - Appeals and modifications. 
The provisions of Section 105.1 of the Uniform Building Code and of Section 110.1 of the Uniform Mechanical Code, as amended by Section 15.04.020 of the El Monte Municipal Code, and of Section 104.2.7 of the Uniform Building Code, as added by Section 15.04.030 of the El Monte Municipal Code, shall apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.30 - BUILDING REGULATIONS—MOVING, RELOCATION AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS, PART 4—MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
15.30.010 - Moving of structures—Regulations. 
Every person moving a building or structure within, into or from the city shall comply with the regulations specified in the following sections. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.020 - Application. 
Every person desiring to move a building on public right-of-way in the city shall file an application for a housemoving permit on a form provided by the Building Department. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.030 - Contractor. 
No person, except a house mover licensed as such by the state of California, shall move any building or structure on any portion of public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.040 - Small buildings. 
Buildings or structures under thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches in height from the street level, less than one hundred (100) square feet in floor area and having no horizontal dimensions exceeding eighteen (18) feet, and if entirely supported upon a single vehicle without the assistance of any additional wheels or rollers, may be moved by any person and no housemoving permit shall be required. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.050 - Contents. 
Each application for a permit to move a building or structure from or through the city shall contain the following: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number and state contractor's license number of the contractor who will move the building; 
B.  The address, and if in the city, the legal description of the property, from which the building is being removed and the address to which it is being moved; 
C.  The maximum height above street level that any portion of the building will be while being moved; 
D.  The route proposed to be used for the moving of such building, the date and hour of the proposed move and such other information, as may be required by the Building Official; 
E.  Each such application shall be signed by the applicant or his or her authorized agent. If signed by an agent, the agent may be required to submit evidence of his or her authority to sign the application. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.060 - Documents, deposits and fees. 
Before issuance of a permit for the moving of any building into, within, or through the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city the sums and documents prescribed in the following subsections. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.070 - Insurance. 
Insurance shall be provided which names the city as an additional insured in accordance with Section 3.24.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.080 - Permit fee. 
A housemoving permit fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) covers the route inspection and necessary supervision during the actual move. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.090 - Performance bond. 
A cash bond in an amount equal to two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be deposited by the house mover to secure the city against damage to public property and to assure compliance with regulations controlling the moving of buildings on public streets in the city. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.100 - Site clearance deposit. 
Whenever a building is being removed from the city or being moved from one location to another within the city, an improvement security in an amount equal to twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each square foot of ground floor area contained in the building to be moved, but in no event less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be deposited by the owner of the property from which the structure is to be removed to guarantee final site clearance, as required by Section 15.30.140.8 of this chapter, together with written authorization from the owner of the property for the city or its agents to enter upon the land described in the application and to complete the site clearance as required by Section 15.30.140.8 of this chapter, if not completed within the time specified by such section. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.110 - Route approval. 
No housemoving permit shall be issued by the Building Department, except for a route, time and date first approved by the Director of Public Services. After issuance of the housemoving permit and in the event of any emergency requiring the use of city streets for any purpose with which the moving of a building would interfere, the Director of Public Services or the Chief of Police shall have the authority to require a change of the route to avoid such interference. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.120 - Utility clearance. 
No route shall be approved by the Director of Public Services unless the applicant furnishes to him or her a certificate from each public utility company maintaining or operating facilities above ground along such route that its facilities will not be required to be relocated or interrupted by the moving of the building along such route or that arrangements have been made by the applicant for the removal, relocation or restoration of such utility company's facilities with which the moving of the building along such route will interfere. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.130 - Disconnection of utilities. 
No final approval and issuance of the housemoving permit shall be made until all utility services have been shut off and disconnected from the building to be moved. Notification of such shutoff and disconnection shall be furnished to the Building Department by each of the utility companies concerned. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140 - Regulations. 
Every person moving a building from or through the city shall comply with the regulations specified in the following subsections. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.1 - Responsibility for damage. 
Every person moving a building into, from or through the city shall make good all damages or injuries caused by the moving thereof. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.2 - Equipment. 
The wheels and rollers of all equipment used in moving of buildings shall have sufficient tire or bearing width to prevent grooving, marring or damaging of any street, alley, or public property upon which the same may be used. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.3 - Posting permit. 
A copy of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted at a conspicuous location on the building being moved. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.4 - Lighting. 
Every building, while being moved upon any street, alley, or public property, shall, at all times between sunset and sunrise, be illuminated by adequate warning devices placed at each corner of the building and at the end of any projection thereof. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.5 - Parking. 
No person shall place or park any building upon any public street, alley or property without the prior written approval of the Chief of Police and of the designated fire official of the Los Angeles County Fire Department. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.6 - Height. 
If the highest point of the building, when loaded and ready for moving, is more than sixteen (16) feet above the ground surface, the cost of rearranging, protecting and restoring the equipment of any public utility affected shall be home by the permittee. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.7 - Removal from lot. 
Within seventy-two (72) hours after elevation of a structure from its foundation, such structure shall be removed from the lot. An extension of time may be granted by the Building Official, upon application, when such extension is required because of circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall accompany each application for an extension of time. The denial of a requested extension may be appealed upon the same terms, as specified in Section 15.28.090 of this title. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.8 - Site clearance. 
The site in the city from which a building is removed shall be cleared of all foundations, driveways and walkways and all portions thereof, shall have all loose combustible materials and debris removed therefrom, and all excavations shall be filled in with soil free of debris, all of which shall be accomplished within thirty (30) days from the time the building is removed. If before the expiration of such thirty (30) day period of time a valid building permit has been issued for construction upon the same property, the excavations shall not be required to be filled in unless in the opinion of the Building Official a hazardous condition is created by the failure to fill in such excavations. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.9 - Use or refund of security. 
A.  Upon completion of the housemoving, the Building Official shall write a memorandum to the Administrative Officer requesting that the cash bond deposited pursuant to Section 15.30.140.3 of this chapter be returned to the depositor thereof after first deducting therefrom the cost, as determined by the Director of Public Services of repairing or replacing any public property damaged by the moving of the building and the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day or fraction thereof beyond the limit of seventy-two (72) hours, or approved extension, as specified in Section 15.30.140.7 of this chapter. 
B.  Upon completion of the site clearance, as required in Section 15.30.140.8 of this chapter, the Building Official shall write a memorandum to the Administrative Officer requesting that the cash bond deposited pursuant to Section 15.30.100 of this chapter be returned to the depositor thereof after first deducting therefrom the cost of replacing any public property damaged by the clearing of the site, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day beyond the time specified in Section 15.30.140.8 of this chapter that the site clearance was not completed, and the cost to the city for its expense in completing the site clearance if it becomes necessary, as provided for in Section 15.30.100 of this chapter. 
C.  If improvement security other than a cash bond be deposited with the city pursuant to this chapter, the same shall not be released until all work required pursuant to this chapter has been completed and all sums due to the city pursuant to this chapter have been paid. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.30.140.10 - County permit. 
With respect to any building or structure moved from a point outside of the city to a point outside of the city and through the city solely via Valley Boulevard; Garvey Avenue; Baldwin Avenue, north of Valley Boulevard; Lower Azusa Road, west of Santa Anita Avenue; Santa Anita Avenue, between Lower Azusa Road and Tyler Avenue; Tyler Avenue, north of Valley Boulevard; and Ramona Boulevard, east of Valley Boulevard, the provisions of this chapter shall be suspended and be inapplicable throughout the period of time that a valid permit issued by the county of Los Angeles for the moving of such structure is in effect and all terms and conditions imposed either by law or in the issuance of such permit, including, but not being limited to, the provisions of state or local law concerning the posting of bonds or the maintenance of public liability and property damage insurance, are complied with. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.32 - BUILDING REGULATIONS—MOVING, RELOCATION AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS, PART 5—DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
15.32.010 - Demolition of buildings—Regulations. 
Every person salvaging or wrecking a structure shall comply with each of the regulations contained in the following sections. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.020 - Application. 
Every person desiring to salvage or wreck a structure shall file an application for a demolition permit on a form provided by the Building Department. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.030 - Contractor. 
No person, except a demolition contractor licensed as such by the state of California or a general contractor licensed as such by the state of California doing demolition work under a permit calling for demolition only in connection with remodeling or new construction upon the same premises, shall salvage or wreck any building or structure; provided, however, that the owner of a structure may salvage or wreck his or her own structure, provided he or she also owns the property on which his or her structure stands. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.035 - Contents. 
Each application for a demolition permit shall contain the following: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the building to be demolished and whether or not this person also owns the property on which this building stands; 
B.  The address, or legal description, of the property on which the building to be demolished stands; 
C.  The name, address, telephone number and state contractor's license number of the person that will demolish the building if such person is not the same as the person described in subsection A hereof; 
D.  A precise description of the portion of the building to be demolished. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.040 - Fees and deposits. 
Prior to the issuance of the demolition permit, the applicant shall deposit with the city fees and deposits prescribed in the following subsections. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.040.1 - Demolition fee. 
A demolition fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) per lot; provided, however, that the total permit fee shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) for demolition on contiguous lots performed simultaneously pursuant to a permit or permits issued under a single application. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.040.2 - Insurance. 
Insurance shall be provided, which names the city as an additional insured in accordance with Section 3.24.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.040.2(a) - Improvement security. 
Improvement security of a type set forth in Section 66499 of the California Government Code in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), together with written authorization of the owner of the property for the city or its agents to enter upon the land described in the application and to complete the site clearance required by Section 8554.3 after expiration of the completion time specified pursuant to Section 8554.5. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.050 - Disconnection of utilities. 
No demolition permit shall be issued until all utility services have been shut off and disconnected from the building to be demolished. Notification of such shutoff and disconnection shall be furnished to the Building Department by each of the utility companies concerned. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.060 - Regulations. 
Every person demolishing a building shall comply with each of the regulations contained in the following subsections. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.060.1 - Posting. 
The permit required by this chapter shall be conspicuously posted in the immediate vicinity of the building being demolished. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.060.2 - Responsibility. 
The person demolishing a building shall be responsible for all damages or injuries caused by such demolition and shall cause all dry or dusty materials or debris to be wet down to lay the dust. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.060.3 - Site clearance. 
All combustible materials or debris remaining at the site at the completion of work shall be removed, all cement, steel or other building material removed to a point even with the finished grade, and all excavations filled in to average grade with soil free of debris. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.060.4 - Sewer facilities. 
The applicant shall provide the Building Official with a sketch showing the location and depth of the sanitary sewer lateral which was capped off during the demolition work. If the building was served by a cesspool, it shall be exposed and filled with sand as a part of the demolition work. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.060.5 - Completion time. 
The demolition of any building shall be completed within forty-five (45) days after the issuance of the demolition permit. Demolition shall not be deemed completed until the provision of Sections 15.32.060.3 and 15.32.060.4 of this chapter have been complied with. If before the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period time a valid building permit has been issued for construction upon the same property, the excavations shall not be required to be filled in unless, in the opinion of the Building Official, a hazardous condition is created by the failure to fill in such excavations. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.070 - Refund or release of improvement security. 
Upon completion of the demolition work, as required in Section 15.32.060.5 of this chapter, the Building Official shall write a memorandum to the Administrative Officer requesting that the cash bond deposit pursuant to Section 15.32.040.2 of this chapter be returned to the depositor thereof after first deducting therefrom the cost, as determined by the Director of Public Services of repairing or replacing any public property damaged by the demolition of the building, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day beyond the limit specified in Section 15.32.060.5 of this chapter for the completion of the demolition and the clearance of the site in accordance with the provisions of this chapter during which such demolition and site clearance remains uncompleted, and the cost to the city for its expense in completing the demolition work if it becomes necessary, as provided in Section 15.32.040 of this chapter. If improvement security other than a cash bond be deposited with the city pursuant to this chapter, the same shall not be released until due to the city pursuant to this chapter have been paid. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.32.080 - Adoption by reference of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 2000 Edition. 
The City Council has adopted by reference the primary code known as "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 2000 Edition," in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 50022.2. The City Administrator is authorized and directed to include an appropriate reference to the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 2000 Edition, in public works construction bid and contract documentation as may be necessary to comply with state or federal law or as may be consistent with prudent public works civil engineering standards. 
(Ord. 2653 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 15.34 - FIRE CODE[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2782, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 10, 2012, amended Ch. 15.34 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 15.34, §§ 15.34.010—15.34.060, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2707, § 2 (part), 2007; and Ord. No. 2722, § 5 (part), 2008. 
 
15.34.010 - Adoption of the 2017 Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County Fire Code. 
A.  Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code, the 2017 Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County (the "District") Fire Code, as amended and adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors on January 24, 2017 and in effect on March 1, 2017, adopting the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below. For purposes of this chapter 15.34, the 2017 District Fire Code, as adopted, may be referred to as the "El Monte Fire Code" or the "code." 
B.  In the event of any conflict between the 2016 California Fire Code and the 2017 District Fire Code, the latter shall control. 
C.  A copy of the 2017 District Fire Code has been deposited in the office of the City of El Monte Building Division and shall be maintained for examination and use by the public. 
D.  The purpose of the code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard the life, limb, health, property, and public welfare within the City of El Monte. 
(Ord. No. 2782, § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2841, § 2, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 2911, § 2, 5-16-2017)  
15.34.020 - Fees and service charges. 
The adopted provisions of the District Fire Code notwithstanding permit and plan check fees and any other code-related fees or service charges shall be established by separate resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified, and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2782, § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2841, § 3, 6-24-2014)  
15.34.030 - Amendments adopted by the city to the code. 
The city is authorized to amend various provisions of the code as adopted by reference. The city is also authorized to adopt additional regulations relating to fire protection and fire safety. The amendments or additions to the code as contained in Sections 15.34.040 and 15.34.050 of this chapter, inclusive, are declared to be necessary and appropriate based upon local conditions present in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2782, § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2012)  
15.34.040 - Sale or discharge of fireworks prohibited with limited exceptions for safe and sane fireworks. 
A.  Except as specifically authorized in this subsection, no person shall possess or have in his or her immediate control, fire, discharge, set off, or use fireworks of any kind within the city. No parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care and custody of any minor child shall allow such child to violate the provisions of the subsection. A violation of any provision of this subsection is a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.24.010 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
B.  The city may permit the safe of "safe and sane fireworks" as described in the California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Subchapter 6 Fireworks, Article 8 - Labeling, subject to the provisions of subsection (C) through (S), inclusive of this subsection. The provisions of subsection 3308.2(A) shall not prohibit the possession, use or discharge of safe and sane fireworks in the city on the 3rd day of July between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. and the 4th day of July each year between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. by any person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age or by a minor who is under the direct observation and control of a parent or legal guardian who is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
C.  No person shall sell any fireworks in the city except safe and sane fireworks which are sold in accordance with the terms and conditions of a safe and sane fireworks sale permit as may be issued, subject to the provisions of this subsection. A person may sell safe and sane fireworks within the city on the dates authorized by this subsection, provided that such person has first obtained a permit as provided in Chapter 5.12 of the El Monte Municipal Code, from the city which authorizes the sale of safe and sane fireworks. No person who has obtained a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks from the city shall sell safe and sane fireworks except upon the first, second, third and fourth days of July of each year between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No person shall sell any fireworks to anyone under eighteen (18) years of age. 
D.  The sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be governed by this subsection, the provisions of Chapter 8.16 (Fireworks) and applicable provisions of Chapter 5.12 (Business Permits Generally). Each applicant for the issuance of a permit for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall concurrently upon the submission of an application to the city, have in his/her possession, a current and valid "retailers license" issued by the State Fire Marshal. 
E.  Within thirty (30) days after a completed application for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks has been received by the city, the Permit Committee shall take action to approve or deny the issuance of the permit. The Permit Committee may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the violation of such a condition by the permit holder may be grounds for the immediate suspension of a permit by the Chief or his/her designated representative or any City Code Enforcement Officer. After the issuance of the permit has been approved by the Permit Committee, a separate temporary structure building permit shall also be obtained from the El Monte Building Division for the erection of the safe and sane fireworks stand and for the installation of any electrical equipment required for such fireworks stand. For the purpose of the El Monte Municipal Code including those provisions of the 2014 Los Angeles County Fire Code, every premises or structure from which safe and sane fireworks may be lawfully sold, subject to compliance with the terms of a permit is hereby defined as a "fireworks stand." 
F.  Every fireworks stand shall be equipped with signs bearing the words "No Smoking" in red lettering at least four (4) inches in height. Such signs shall be visible to every person working in the fireworks stand and every customer while being served. 
G.  Every fireworks stand shall be equipped with two (2) exits. 
H.  Every fireworks stand shall be equipped with at least two (2) two-and-one-half-gallon pressurized water extinguishers, or 2, 2A10BC fire extinguishers and such extinguishers shall be maintained in working condition. 
I.  By a date no later than July 31st of each year, all unsold stocks of safe and sane fireworks shall be returned to the wholesaler from whom they were purchased or stored in a location approved by the Chief or his/her designated representative. 
J.  No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any building or side property line or within fifteen (15) feet of a street property line. 
K.  No automobile or other vehicle shall be parked within twenty-five (25) feet of any fireworks stand except that vehicles may park upon a public street at a distance of less than twenty-five (25) feet from such fireworks stand. Fireworks stands on public or private parking lots shall be provided with barriers to maintain the twenty-five-foot distance. 
L.  All combustible waste material, ground cover, or other material liable to cause or spread fire shall be removed from the area surrounding the fireworks stand at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet. 
M.  There shall be at least one supervisor twenty-one (21) years of age or older on duty at each fireworks stand during the time the fireworks stand is open for business. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to be inside of such fireworks stand at any time. No persons employed as a watchman shall remain inside any such fireworks stand during the time the fireworks stand is not open. 
N.  All paper, packing boxes, and other combustible waste materials shall be removed from every fireworks stand premises at least daily. Each fireworks stand shall be equipped with two (2) fifty-gallon metal trash containers with metal lids. 
O.  The sides of all fireworks stands shall be constructed of metal or one-quarter-inch gauge hardware cloth. 
P.  All fireworks on display, unless confined within a carton or package or provided with a taped fuse shall be separated from the public by either a solid glass, or plastic or metal partition. 
Q.  All persons engaged in the operation of any fireworks stand shall be instructed as to the operation of the fire extinguishers required and provided for the fireworks stand and shall be familiar with all provisions contained herein. 
R.  No fireworks stand shall be erected more than ten (10) calendar days prior to the time on which fireworks may lawfully be sold pursuant to this subsection. Every fireworks stand shall be removed from the premises within seven (7) calendar days after the time during which fireworks may be lawfully sold pursuant to this subsection. For each day or portion thereof that a fireworks stand is erected, maintained, or left standing contrary to the provisions of this subsection, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be deducted from the deposit required by Section 8.16.030(B) of the El Monte Municipal Code and shall be retained by the city. 
S.  The Chief and/or his/her designated representative or any City Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to suspend the operation of any fireworks stand which is in violation of any state or local ordinance or condition of the permit, or which may in his/her opinion constitute or create a condition contributing to a risk, cause or spread of fire. 
T.  In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this subsection 3308.2 and Title 19 California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6 (Fireworks), the provisions of Title 19 California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6 (Fireworks) shall control but only insofar as any of its provisions contain express non-discretionary mandates or express non-discretionary prohibitions that are in conflict with the provisions of this subsection 3308.2. Otherwise, the provisions of subsection 3308.2 shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2841, § 4, 6-24-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2841, § 4, adopted June 24, 2014, amended § 15.34.040 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said section to read as set out herein. The former § 15.34.040 pertained to deletion, amendments and additions to the California Fire Code and derived from Ord. No. 2782, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 10, 2012.  
15.34.050 - Violation of the code is a misdemeanor. 
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. The city may prosecute any violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor in accordance with Section 1.24.010 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2782, § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2012)  
15.34.054 - Administrative fines and penalties. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  This Section 15.34.054 authorizes the imposition of administrative fines or any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 15.34 in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this Chapter 15.34 for the benefit and protection of the entire community. This section governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines related to: the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as "dangerous fireworks" in Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. with the exception of a pyrotechnic licensee when operating pursuant to that license; and the use of "safe and sane fireworks" as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 12550 et seq. on or at the dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter. Said administrative fines are imposed under the authority of Government Code Section 53069.4, Health and Safety Code Section 12557, and the city's police power. 
2.  The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city authorized hereunder; and the issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy available to the city to redress violations of this Chapter 15.34 by any person. By adopting this Section 15.34.054, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violations of this code by any person, which the city may otherwise pursue. 
3.  The imposition of fines related to "dangerous fireworks" under this Chapter 15.34 shall be limited to persons who possess, sell, use and/or display, or the seizure of twenty-five (25) pounds or less (gross weight) of such "dangerous fireworks." 
4.  Fines collected pursuant to this Chapter 15.34 related to "dangerous fireworks" shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code Section 12706, which section provides that certain fines collected by a court of the state be deposited with, and disbursed by the County Treasurer. However, the city shall provide cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal pursuant to regulations to be adopted by the State Fire Marshal addressing the State Fire Marshal's cost for the transportation and disposal of "dangerous fireworks" seized by the city, which costs will be part of any administrative fine imposed. Unless and until said regulations have been adopted by the state of California, the city shall hold in trust two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of any fine collected, which ever is greater, to cover the cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal for said cost of transportation and disposal of the "dangerous fireworks." 
5.  Every person who applies for and receives a "block party permit" in accordance with Chapter 12.07 or other applicable code provision, or similar license or approval required by the city to close a street or otherwise reserve or use a piece of city property shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of such permit, license or approval, including but not limited to taking all reasonable efforts necessary to ensure that "dangerous fireworks" are not used at said event. A violation of this condition of such permit, license or approval shall be subject to a separate administrative fine under the provisions of this Chapter 15.34. Likewise, any person who fails to obtain any "block party permit", license or other such approval from the city, in accordance with Chapter 12.07 or other applicable provision of the code, when such person is so required by the code shall be subject to a separate administrative fine under this Chapter 15.34 as well as an additional administrative fine if "dangerous fireworks" are used at and during said event. 
6.  Because of the serious threat of fire or injury posed by the use of "dangerous fireworks" that can result from persistent or repeated failures to comply with the provisions of this code and the effect of such conditions or activities on the safety and the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties and to the public health, safety and welfare, this Chapter 15.34 imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of residential real property for all violations of this code existing on their residential real property. Each contiguous use, display and/or possession shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate administrative fine. 
B.  Issuance of Administrative Citations—Contents. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided under this Chapter 15.34, the procedures contesting the issuance of an administrative citation pursuant to this Chapter 15.34 shall be those procedures set forth under Sections 1.18.060 through 1.18.090 of Chapter 1.18 of the El Monte Municipal Code. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter 15.34 and the provisions of Section 1.18.060 through 1.18.090 of Chapter 1.18, the provisions of this Chapter 15.34 shall govern and control but only to the extent of the conflict and no further. 
2.  Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) determines that a violation of the code has occurred, the CEO may issue an administrative citation on a city- approved form listing the code violation(s) and the amount of the administrative fine required to be paid by the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 15.34. 
3.  Furthermore, an administrative fine or fines may be imposed on any person for failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed on any "block party permit," license and/or approval issued under or pursuant to Chapter 12.07 or other applicable EMMC provision. 
4.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  The name, mailing address, date of birth, California Drivers License number, and home or business telephone number of the responsible person charged with any violation of this code; 
b.  The address or description of the location of the violation; 
c.  The date or dates on which the person violated this code; 
d.  The section or sections of this code that were violated; 
e.  A description of the violations(s); 
f.  The amount of the administrative fine for each violation, the procedure in place to pay the fines, and any late fee and interest charge(s), if not timely paid, and notice that if the city is required to take action to collect such fines, the responsible person may be charged costs and attorneys' fees; 
g.  Notice of the procedure to request an administrative hearing to contest the citation (including the form to be used, how to obtain the form, and the period within which the request must be made in order for it to considered timely); 
h.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of any witnesses to the violations(s); 
i.  The name and signature of the CEO who issued the citation and the name and signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of issuance. The refusal of a citee to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceedings, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person is responsible for a violation of the code; 
j.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director for enforcement or collection purposes. 
C.  Administrative Fines. 
1.  Each person who violates any provision of this code as it relates to the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of "dangerous fireworks" shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offense in One-Year Period 	Amount of 
Administra- 
tive Penalty 	Late 
Charge 	Total Amount 
of Penalty 
Plus Late 
Charge 
First 	$1,000.00 	$250.00 	$1,250.00 
Second 	2,000.00 	500.00 	2,500.00 
Third 	3,000.00 	1,000.00 	4,000.00 
 
2.  A person who fails to obtain a "block party permit," license or approval, in accordance with Chapter 12.07 or other applicable EMMC provision, when such person is required to do so by the code shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offense in One-Year Period 	Amount of 
Administra- 
tive Penalty 	Late 
Charge 	Total Amount 
of Penalty 
Plus Late 
Charge 
First 	$500.00 	$125.00 	$625.00 
Second 	1,000.00 	250.00 	1,250.00 
Third 	1,500.00 	500.00 	2,000.00 
 
3.  Any person who does obtain a "block party permit," license or approval from the city as required by this code where there was a condition imposed upon the issuance of such "block party permit," license or approval requiring the person to make all reasonable efforts necessary to ensure that "dangerous fireworks" are not used at said event and said person is said to be in violation of the permit by virtue of the fact that there were "dangerous fireworks" used at said event shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offense in One-Year Period 	Amount of 
Administra- 
tive Penalty 	Late 
Charge 	Total Amount 
of Penalty 
Plus Late 
Charge 
First 	$1,500.00 	$375.00 	$1,875.00 
Second 	3,000.00 	750.00 	3,750.00 
Third 	5,000.00 	2,000.00 	7,000.00 
 
4.  Each person who uses "safe and sane fireworks" on or at dates times and/or locations other than those permitted in this Chapter 15.34 shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of Offense in One-Year Period 	Amount of 
Administra- 
tive Penalty 	Late 
Charge 	Total Amount 
of Penalty 
Plus Late 
Charge 
First 	$250.00 	$75.00 	$325.00 
Second 	500.00 	150.00 	650.00 
Third 	750.00 	300.00 	1,050.00 
 
5.  In the case of a violation of any of the provisions listed above, the administrative fine(s) shall be due and payable within thirty (30) calendar days from the issuance of the administrative fine citation, and the citee shall be required to abate the violation, and surrender all dangerous fireworks to the CEO, immediately. For penalties not paid in full within that time, a late charge in the amount set forth above is hereby imposed and must be paid to the city by the citee. Fines not paid within the time established by this section shall accrue interest at the prevailing established rate. On the second and each subsequent time that a person is issued a citation for the same violation in any twelve-month period, the fine is increased as indicated above and the citee shall be liable for the amount of the new fine until it is paid, in addition to being responsible for payment of previous fines. 
6.  All administrative fines and any late charges and interest due shall be paid to the city at such location or address as stated on the citation, or as otherwise be designated by the City Manager or his or her designee. Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code. The issuance of the citation and/or payment of any fine shall not bar the city from employing any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the code so violated including the issuance of additional citations and/or criminal prosecution pursuant to Chapter 1.24. 
7.  Upon confirmation of the citation or when the citation is deemed confirmed, all unpaid administrative fines, late fees and/or interest shall constitute a judgment which may be collected in any manner allowed by law for collection of judgments including but not limited to recordation to create a lien on any real property owned by the responsible person. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney's fees and costs incurred in collecting any administrative fines, late charges and/or interest. 
8.  Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee form the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of the code nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code. 
D.  Right to an Administrative Hearing. 
1.  Any citee may contest the violation(s), or that he or she is a responsible person, by filing a request for an administrative hearing in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth under Sections 1.18.060 through 1.18.090 of Chapter 1.18 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
2.  No fees shall be charged for the filing of a request for a hearing. 
3.  Except as otherwise authorized pursuant to Section 1.18.070 of Chapter 1.18 of the El Monte Municipal Code, a citee shall deposit the full amount of the penalty listed on the citation on or before the request for a hearing is filed. Failure to deposit the full amount of all penalties within the required time period, or the tender of a non-negotiable check, shall render a request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely. Penalties that are deposited with the city shall not accrue interest. Penalties deposited shall be returned to the person who deposited them in if the citation is overturned. 
4.  If the CEO submits an additional written report concerning the citation to the city for consideration at the hearing, the CEO shall also serve a copy of such report by first-class mail on the person requesting an administrative hearing no less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to receive said report shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action or proceeding pursuant to this Chapter 15.34. 
(Ord. No. 2817, § 3, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 2839, § 3, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2938, §§ 8—10, 11-20-2018)  
15.34.060 - Definitions. 
"Chief," as used in this chapter, means Chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department. 
"Citation" means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this section to remedy a violation. 
"Citee" means any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for violation. 
"Code" means the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Code Enforcement Officers (CEO)," as used in this Chapter 15.34, mean those individuals defined in Section 1.16.030(A) of the El Monte Municipal Code and any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Director" means the City Manager or his or her designee. 
"Hearing Officer" shall have the same meaning as set forth under subsection (H) of Section 1.18.020 (Definitions) of Chapter 1.18 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Issuance" or "issued" means any of the following: 
a.  The preparation and service of an administrative fine citation to a citee in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article III (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedures; or 
b.  Mailing of administrative fine citation to the citee by certified mail with return receipt, to the address shown on the official records of the County Assessor; or 
c.  By personally serving the responsible party by personal delivery of the administrative fine citation or by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows: 
1.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and thereafter mailing by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
2.  In the event the responsible party cannot be served by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, or cannot be personally served by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made upon the property manager or rental agency or may be affected by posting the property with the administrative fine citation and mailing a copy by First Class Mail, postage pre-paid, to the responsible party in violation at the address of the property where the violation exists. 
"Person" means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee and/or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of this Chapter 15.34 has occurred. 
"Responsible person," as used in this Chapter 15.34, means a person who cases a violation of this Chapter 15.34 to occur or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a residential parcel, as shown on the county's latest equalized property taxes assessment rolls, and lessee of a residential parcel has a notice of any violation existing on said property. For purposes of this Chapter 15.34, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. Any person, irrespective of age, found in violation of this article may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 15.34. Every parent, guardian or other person, having legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, who knows or reasonably should know that a minor is in violation of this Chapter 15.34, may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 15.34, in addition to any citation that may be issued to the offending minor. 
"Violation" or "violates" means any violation of any provision of this Chapter 15.34. 
(Ord. No. 2782, § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2012; Ord. No. 2817, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 2839, § 2, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2938, § 11, 11-20-2018)  
Chapter 15.36 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
15.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter 15.36 is to establish an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act, as amended by AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014), to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This Chapter 15.36 encourages the use of small residential rooftop solar energy systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding property owners' ability to install small rooftop solar energy systems. This Chapter 15.36 allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the community's health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
15.36.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This Chapter 15.36 applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this Chapter 15.36 are not subject to the requirements of this Chapter 15.36 unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
15.36.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter 15.36, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
B.  "Building Department" means the Building and Safety Division of the city of El Monte. 
C.  "Building Official" means the Building Official for the city of El Monte. 
D.  "City" means the city of El Monte. 
E.  "Common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project; 
2.  A condominium project; 
3.  A planned development; or 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
F.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  E-mail; 
2.  The Internet; and/or 
3.  Facsimile. 
G.  "Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall utilize its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)-(B). 
H.  "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal; 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city, county, or city and county and paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code; 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling; or 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
I.  "Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating; or 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
J.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
15.36.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city, state of California, and local fire department. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards published by the California Electrical Code, the institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
15.36.050 - Electronic processing. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city's website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by electronic means shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. Website applications may be allowed at such time in the future that the technology is made available to the city The city's website shall specify the permitted method of electronic document submission. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents, in lieu of a wet signature. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
15.36.060 - Duties of applicant. 
Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
A.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
B.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
15.36.070 - Duties of Building Department and Building Official. 
A.  The Building Department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
B.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting guidebook adopted by the State Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
C.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
15.36.080 - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  An application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit that Building Department determines to satisfy the informational requirements contained in the city's checklist as prepared by the Building Department pursuant to Section 15.36.070(A) shall be deemed complete. 
B.  Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the Building Department shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited issuance of a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit. 
C.  Upon the Building Department's determination that the application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system permit is complete, the Building Department shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within three (3) business days. 
D.  The Building Department's review of such applications for small residential rooftop solar energy system permits shall be limited to whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
E.  The Building Official shall require an applicant to apply for a use permit, if he or she finds, based on substantial evidence, that that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission. 
F.  If a use permit or other discretionary city approval is required, the Building Official may not deny the application for the use permit unless he or she makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid such adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decision by the Building Official may be appealed to the Planning Commission. 
G.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The city shall ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A)-(B). 
H.  The city shall not condition approval of an application for the approval of an association, as defined in Civil Code Section 4080. 
I.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. Such an inspection will be scheduled within two (2) business days of a request for such an inspection. 
J.  If a small residential rooftop energy system fails the Building Department's inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized by need not conform to the requirements of this Section 15.36.080. 
(Ord. No. 2864, § 3, 9-1-2015)  
Chapter 15.38 - EXISTING CODES 
Sections 
 
15.38.010 - Adoption of the 2016 Los Angeles County Existing Building Code. 
The 2016 Los Angeles County Existing Building Code is adopted in its entirety and incorporated by reference into the El Monte Municipal Code, together with, and subject to, those amendments, additions and modifications delineated in this chapter, below. For the purposes of this chapter 15.38, the 2016 Los Angeles County Electrical Code as adopted herein may be referred to as the "El Monte Existing Building Code" or "this code." 
(Ord. No. 2904, § 18, 12-6-2016)  
15.38.020 - Fees and Service. 
The adopted provisions of the 2016 Los Angeles County Existing Building Code notwithstanding, permit and plan check fees and any other code-related fees or service charges shall be the fees and service charges unless amended by resolution of the El Monte City Council and may be amended, modified and/or updated from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2904, § 18, 12-6-2016)  
Chapter 15.40 - GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL 
 
15.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and the public welfare by regulating and controlling the quality of materials used in, and the design, construction, location and maintenance of grading, and to implement measures to substantially reduce the potential for erosion and sedimentation damage within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.020 - Scope, interpretation, application and exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all grading within the city, unless specifically exempted under this section. 
B.  If two (2) or more pertinent limitations are not identical, those limitations shall prevail which provide the greater measure of safety to life, health, property or the public welfare and which are more restrictive upon the operations of the applicant, or which place upon the applicant the greater duty of providing safeguards both to the property being graded and to other property in the area. The permissive provisions of this chapter shall not be presumed to waive any limitations imposed by other ordinances of the city, state statutes or the requirements of other regulatory agencies. 
C.  Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any conditions imposed in the permit issued under this chapter, shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose any liability upon the city for damage to other persons or property. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Work in a public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place regulated by Section 12.08.010. 
2.  Mining, quarrying, processing or stockpiling of rock, sand, aggregate or clay, unless such work affects the lateral support of adjacent or contiguous property or structures; 
3.  Excavation or filling of graves in property dedicated or used for cemetery purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.030 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words are used in this chapter they shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
A.  "City Engineer." The City Engineer acting either directly or through properly authorized agents. 
B.  "Excavation." Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, scooped, quarried, bored, trenched, benched, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and includes the conditions resulting therefrom; including any and all work associated with geotechnical investigations, soils investigations or any other subsurface investigation; any and all demolition activities covered by a building permit; and removal of or abandonment of underground storage tanks. 
C.  "Fill." Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location and includes the conditions resulting therefrom. 
D.  "Grading." Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting there from. 
E.  "Grading permit." Any permit required by Appendix J Section J103 of the California Building Code. 
F.  "Permittee." Any owner, land occupier or contracting agent to whom a grading permit is issued. 
G.  "Site." A separate lot or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.040 - General requirement—Maintenance of premises. 
The owner, land occupier, or other person in control of any property who orders, or causes land owned, occupied or controlled by him, or any land, to be graded, or knowingly permits the same, shall maintain in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.050 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall commence or perform any grading without having first obtained a grading permit from the City Engineer. A separate grading permit shall be obtained for each site. One permit may cover both an excavation and any fill made with the excavated materials on the same site. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.060 - Permit—Exceptions. 
A grading permit shall not be required for the following exceptions, but in all other respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply: 
A.  An excavation below finished grade for swimming pool or underground structure authorized by a valid building permit; 
B.  An excavation or fill authorized by a valid plumbing permit; and 
C.  Grading by or for a public agency or utility company when specifically exempted by the City Engineer and/or Chief Building Official. 
D.  Minor grading, that will not redirect or concentrate existing drainage flows, and of negligible hazard, where site modification does not exceed a total area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or building addition less than five hundred (500) square feet, or when specifically exempted by the City Engineer and/or Chief Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.070 - Permit—Application. 
A.  An applicant for a grading permit shall first file an application there for in writing with the Engineering Department. Every such application shall: 
1.  Give the name and address of the record owner(s) of the site; 
2.  Give the name and address of the grading contractor; 
3.  Give the legal description and street address of the site; 
4.  State the purpose of the work; 
5.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made; 
6.  Be signed by the permittee, who shall be responsible for the correctness of the work and for requesting the inspections required in this chapter; 
7.  Be accompanied by plans, including: A map showing the present elevation of the land and the proposed elevations of the land after completion of the proposed grading; a plot plan showing the location of the grading boundaries, lot lines, neighboring public ways and sufficient dimensions and other data to show the location of all work; description of the type and classification of soil in Appendix J Section J103 of the California Building Code; details and location of proposed drainage structures, piping, walls and cribbing; and such other information that the engineer of record may require to carry out the purpose of this chapter. All plans shall bear the name of the person responsible therefor and shall be submitted to the City Engineer in duplicate. Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, all such plans and specifications shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer; 
8.  Be accompanied by a preliminary soil report prepared by a registered soils engineer, which shall be based on adequate test borings or excavations. The report may be waived if the available information as to the qualities of the soil satisfies the City Engineer that no preliminary analysis is necessary. 
a.  If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, than a soil investigation and report shall be required for each site. The soil investigation and report shall be prepared by a registered soils engineer. The report shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to any structure to be constructed on the expansive soil. 
b.  The soil investigation and report shall be approved if the City Engineer and/or Chief Building Official determines that the recommended action will likely prevent structural damage to any improvement to be constructed. As a condition to the issuance of a building permit, the approved recommended action shall be incorporated in the construction of any improvement on the site. 
B.  When an erosion and sedimentation control permit is required by 15.40.050, the provisions of said permit shall supersede conflicting provisions of any other permit. The application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a registered civil engineer. The developer shall be guided by the principles of erosion prevention described in the following subdivisions or by any other acceptable principles or practices. 
1.  The erosion and sedimentation control plan should be fitted to the topography and soil class so as to create the least potential for soil loss. Maximum use shall be made of vegetation to minimize inevitable soil loss through land disturbing activity, such as: 
a.  Natural vegetation should be retained wherever possible; 
b.  Where inadequate natural vegetation exists, or where it becomes necessary to remove existing natural vegetation, temporary vegetation or mulching should be installed promptly to minimize inevitable soil loss and to ensure that soil losses are kept below the tolerable limits; 
c.  Erosion control elements shall be implemented as soon as practical in the development process, except that the time elapsed shall not exceed sixty (60) days after the cessation, termination or completion of grading, whichever comes first. 
2.  Exposure of the soil through land disturbing activity should be held to the smallest practicable area and to the shortest practicable period of time consistent with maximum tolerable soil loss levels. 
3.  Appropriate provision should be made to accommodate increased storm water runoff and consequent soil loss occasioned by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. In addition to the use of vegetation and limitations on soil exposure as prescribed herein, such provisions may include but are not limited to: 
a.  Installing and maintaining sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps to substantially reduce sediment from runoff water. 
C.  Whenever an erosion and sedimentation control permit is required, a security deposit in the per the current Engineering Department fee schedule shall be required to guarantee that provisions of the permit are met. Any measures which are temporary and portable, such as sand bags and Visqueen, may be deposited so as to not interfere with normal construction activity during dry weather. However, any necessary measures shown on the approved plan shall be in place during any storm event. 
1.  If those erosion control measures shown on the plan are not in place within twenty-four (24) hours of the prediction of a storm event by the U.S. Weather Service, the City Engineer may have such measures installed and charge any costs thereof against the security deposit. 
2.  If any sedimentation does collect in the public right-of-way, it shall be cleaned up within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of each storm event. Failure to do so may permit the City Engineer to have the street cleaned and charge any costs thereof against the security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.080 - Permit—Issuance. 
The application, and plans and specifications for a permit under this chapter shall be checked by the City Engineer. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city to check compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the City Engineer is satisfied that the work described in the application and the plans filed therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances, and that the fee specified in Section 15.40.090 has been paid, the City Engineer shall issue a grading permit therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.090 - Permit—Fee. 
The applicant for a grading permit, under Section 15.40.070, or an erosion and sedimentation control permit, shall pay the following fees to the city: 
A.  Plan check fee. Whenever a permit is required by this chapter, the applicant shall pay a fee established by Council resolution to defray the cost of engineering and plan checking. The plan check fee shall be paid at the time of filing the application for the permit. 
B.  Inspection fee. The applicant shall pay a fee established by Council resolution to defray the cost of engineering and inspection. The inspection fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the permit. 
C.  If the permit is allowed to expire pursuant to Section 15.40.100, the inspection fee shall be refunded, less any direct costs incurred by the city. 
D.  If all improvements approved under the grading permit, including all public improvements, are not completed by the date shown on the valid grading permit, then an additional inspection fee, equal to the actual cost to the city, shall be required. The amount of such additional fees shall be deducted from the security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.100 - Permit—Expiration. 
Every grading permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within sixty (60) days of date the grading permit was issued; except that the City Engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work from being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time on said permit; provided that the application for the extension of time is made before the date of expiration of the permit and an erosion and sedimentation control permit is obtained when required. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.110 - Permit—Denial. 
The City Engineer shall deny a grading permit in any case where the work, as proposed by the applicant, is likely to endanger any private or public property, result in the deposition of debris thereon, remove or reduce lateral support or interfere with any drainage course. Factors to be considered in making such findings shall include, but shall not be limited to possible saturation by rains, earth movement, runoff of surface waters, and subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting of rock, and nature and type of soil or rock. Failure of the City Engineer to observe or recognize hazardous conditions or to fail to deny the grading permit shall not relieve the owner or his or her agent from responsibility for the condition or damages resulting therefrom, and shall not result in the city being responsible for the condition or damages resulting therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.120 - Inspections. 
A.  The City Engineer shall, when requested, make the inspections required in this section, and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with this chapter. Where it is found by inspection that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or shown in the application, the City Engineer may immediately order all work to cease until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions. 
B.  Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the City Engineer, shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the grading work and until the work has been approved. The permittee shall notify the City Engineer in order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule and at least twenty-four (24) hours before said inspection is to be made: 
1.  Initial inspection. When the permittee or his agent is ready to begin work on an excavation or fill; 
2.  Rough grading. When all rough grading has been completed; 
3.  Special structures. When excavations are complete for retaining and crib walls and when reinforcing steel is in place and before concrete is poured; 
4.  Final inspection. When all work, including slope planting and installation of drainage and other structures has been completed. 
C.  Compaction of fills which were approved by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 15.36.180 shall be inspected by a registered soils engineer. A report prepared and signed by said soils engineer shall be submitted to the City Engineer upon completion of the work and shall include the following: 
1.  A contour map showing the original and finished surfaces of the areas filled, unless such map has previously been filed as part of the application for the grading permit; 
2.  The foundation bearing values recommended for the compacted fill; 
3.  A description of the materials used in the fill and the procedure of deposit and compaction, including the preparation of original ground surface before making the fill; 
4.  A plan showing the location of tests made in the fill together with a tabulation of compaction test results; 
5.  A statement that all work was done in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.130 - Special precautions required. 
If at any stage of the work the City Engineer determines that the nature of the formation is such that further work, as authorized by an existing grading permit, may expose to risk any property or public way, the City Engineer may immediately order all work to cease, and require as a condition to allowing further work to be done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as considered advisable by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.140 - Certification by engineer. 
If, upon final inspection of any excavation or fill, it is found that the work authorized by the grading permit has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and any other requirements imposed, the Civil Engineer of record shall so certify. Such certification is required before any building permit may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.150 - Revocation of certification. 
The City Engineer shall have the power to revoke such certification whenever the work is found to have been materially extended or altered without obtaining necessary permits from the city or that any of the work included in the grading permit has not been maintained in good condition and repair as specified in Section 15.40.040 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.160 - Liability insurance and certificate. 
A.  Insurance certificate. A certificate of insurance as required in division (A) of this section, issued by a corporation authorized to do insurance business within the state, which certificate shall provide that the insurance thereby represented will not be canceled, reduced, or allowed to expire, shall be filed with the city before any permits under this chapter may be issued or authorized. All such insurance certificates shall be submitted to the City Attorney for approval before acceptance by the city. Said insurance shall insure to the benefit of any and all persons or property injured as a result of water or drainage damage, the flow of mud or debris, or earth slides, resulting from or contributed to by such excavation, fill or grading. The certificate shall designate the city as additional insured. 
B.  Insurance policy. The policy of insurance shall be submitted which fully describes coverages and exclusions. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.170 - Excavations. 
A.  No excavation shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than two (2) horizontal to one vertical. The City Engineer may require an excavation to be made with a cut-face flatter in slope if the City Engineer finds that the material in which the excavation is to be made is unusually subject to erosion, or if other conditions warrant a flatter slope for stability and safety. 
B.  Excavations shall not extend below the angle of repose, or natural slope, of the soil under the nearest point of any footing or foundation of any building or of the soil under the nearest point of any footing or foundation of any building or structure, unless such footing or foundation is first properly underpinned or protected against settlement in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. 
C.  No cut slope shall be constructed over thirty (30) feet in height unless the City Engineer has been furnished satisfactory evidence by a qualified geologist or soils engineer that such slope will be stable. If the soil structure so requires, as determined by the Engineer, terraces not less than five (5) feet in width shall be constructed in all cut slopes at the rate of one terrace for each twenty (20) feet of height (or portion thereof) above twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.180 - Fills. 
A.  No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than two (2) horizontal to one vertical unless supported by an approved Geotechnical Report. The City Engineer may require a fill to be constructed with an exposed surface flatter in slope if such flatter slope is determined to be necessary for stability and safety. 
B.  Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, no fill shall be made with materials other than clean soil or earth. 
C.  A written report of the compaction as specified in Section 15.40.120 shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval. 
D.  The City Engineer may request additional test information, or may modify or delete any of the above provisions, if the site conditions or materials so warrant. However, in no case shall the City Engineer approve a slope steeper than that called for in this chapter without first finding that the steeper slope would lead to an improvement in the overall quality of the development. A steeper slope may be permitted only if two (2) reports prepared by registered soils engineers concur that minimum factors of safety exist for both surficial and gross stability. The cost of both reports shall be borne by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.190 - Retaining walls or cribbing. 
Retaining walls or cribbing shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code and shall be used whenever necessary to prevent the surface of any excavation or fill from exceeding the maximum allowable slopes set forth in this chapter and requires Building Division approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.200 - Drainage provisions. 
A.  Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from damaging the cut face of an excavation or the sloping surface of a fill. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural watercourse approved by the City Engineer as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters, or to permit the flow of surface waters onto adjoining property in its normal manner, direction, location and volume. The City Engineer may require such drainage structures or facilities to be constructed or installed which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, are necessary to prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off surface waters. 
B.  Where pads or terraces are constructed, surface drainage shall not be permitted to sheet flow over the lower slope. Such drainage shall be carried laterally across the pad or terrace. When required by the City Engineer, terraces shall be paved. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.210 - Slope planting. 
All fill slopes shall be planted with approved ground cover, unless specifically exempted by the City Engineer. In addition, the City Engineer may require planting with approved ground cover for any cut slope to improve stability or to reduce erosion and runoff. In all cases where slope planting is required, approved sprinkler systems shall be installed to adequately water such planting. A landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted to the Development Review Committee for approval. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.220 - Correction of unsafe conditions. 
Whenever the City Engineer determines that any construction activity or site condition has become a hazard to life, safety, usability or stability of a public way, the owner of the property upon which such excavation or fill is located, or other person in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the City Engineer, shall immediately repair or reconstruct such excavation or fill so that it will conform to the requirements of this chapter or otherwise repair, reconstruct, strengthen or eliminate such hazard and charge the cost of doing so against the security deposit. The city shall not be responsible for any additional costs that accrue to the developer as a result of its action to correct an unsafe condition. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.230 - Appeals. 
The Planning Commission shall consider appeals from the provisions of this chapter or from the determinations of the City Engineer in the manner specified in section 2.24.060 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.240 - Retention of plans. 
Plans and specifications for grading which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, are of sufficient size or importance, and all plans, specifications and reports of compacted fill designed to support a building or other structure, shall be retained in the office of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
15.40.250 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in § 1.24.010 of this code. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 2, 8-21-2018)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Division 1. - General  
Chapter 16.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.02.010 - Citation and authority. 
A.  The City Council assumes control of all divisions of land and reversions to acreage, as such power is vested in the city by the provisions of Divisions 2 and 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California and all amendments thereto (hereinafter referred to as "Subdivision Map Act" or "Map Act") or as otherwise established and set forth in this title. 
B.  This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act and may be cited as the "subdivision ordinance" of the city. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.02.020 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this title shall not apply to those items listed in Section 66412-66412.8 of the Map Act, except as specified herein for lot line adjustments. The following provisions shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision legally created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title unless said lots are hereafter proposed for further subdivision or lot line adjustment. Nor is it intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this title, or in conflict herewith. Nor is it intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. Where this title imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this title shall control. 
B.  Any parcel of land that was created prior to March 4, 1972 shall be conclusively presumed to have been lawfully created, if at the time of creation of the parcel there was compliance with all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.02.030 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Government Code of the State of California referred to as the Subdivision Map Act, the Public Resources Code, the Business and Professions Code, and to all other regulations provided by law, concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and the procedure to he followed in securing official approval regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this title are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection, and proper use of land and to insure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities, and services. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.02.040 - Severability clause. 
If a provision of this title or the application thereof to any person(s) or circumstance(s) is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this title and the application of such provisions to other person(s) or circumstance(s) shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.02.050 - Compliance required. 
A.  No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with the general plan, any applicable specified plan, any applicable development plan, or specifically authorized by the city zoning ordinance. 
B.  The type and intensity of land use(s) for which the subdivision is designed shall be consistent with the land use designations as shown on the general plan and permitted by the zoning ordinance and shall provide for the streets, roads, highways, utilities, and public services as determined by the City Engineer or by local ordinance to be necessary for such type and intensity of land use. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.02.060 - Penalty for noncompliance. 
Pursuant to Section 66499.31 of the Map Act, each violation of this title by the subdivider or owner of record at the time of the violation, shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail or state prison for not more than one year, or by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or by both fine and imprisonment. Other violations shall be punishable as a misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.02.070 - Falsification. 
Fraudulent misrepresentation by the applicant of pertinent information necessary to an approval shall be sufficient reason to invalidate an approval obtained pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.02.080 - Inconsistent provisions. 
Where provisions of this title are inconsistent with existing provisions contained in other titles of this code, the provisions contained herein shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.04 - RESPONSIBILITIES 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - City Council. 
The City Council shall be the "Appeal Board", as defined in Section 66416 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.04.020 - Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission is made the Advisory Agency of the city as such Advisory Agency is defined and established in Section 66416 of the Map Act, and the authority is delegated to the Advisory Agency to investigate any and all matters pertaining to approval, conditional approval or disapproval of, all proposed divisions of land and reversions to acreage. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 2, 10-16-2018)  
16.04.030 - City Attorney. 
The City Attorney shall be responsible for approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and for providing guidance with regard to land use law to the staff, the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.04.040 - City Engineer. 
The City Engineer shall be responsible for: 
A.  Establishing design and construction details, standards, and specifications. 
B.  Determining if the proposed improvements comply with the provisions of this title and the Map Act and for reporting the findings together with any recommendations for approval, conditional approval, or denial. 
C.  The processing and certification of record documents, including but not limited to final maps, parcel maps and certificates of compliance. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.04.050 - Planning Services Managers. 
A.  The Planning Services Manager shall be responsible for the processing of all tentative land division or reversion to acreage maps, and processing requests for merger/unmerge of parcels and for the collection of all required fees and deposits. 
B.  Specifically, the Planning Services Manager shall be responsible for: 
1.  Investigating proposed subdivisions for conformity to the general plan, specific plans, redevelopment plans and the zoning ordinance of the city and reporting such findings, together with recommendations for approval, conditional approval or denial to the Planning Commission. 
2.  Certifying, as Secretary of the Planning Commission, that the Planning Commission has approved or conditionally approved the tentative map, parcel map or mergers as required in this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.04.060 - Subdivision Committee. 
A.  The Subdivision Committee shall consist of representatives from the following city divisions: Planning, Building, Engineering and Los Angeles County Fire Department. 
B.  The Committee shall review all proposed divisions of land, reversions to acreage or requests for merger/unmerge of parcels as required in this Title and shall provide a written report of such findings and recommendations to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.06 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.06.010 - Generally. 
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words in any gender include the others; the word "shall" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. Whenever any words or phrases used are not defined herein, but are defined in the Map Act or other state laws, such definitions are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.020 - Certificate of compliance. 
"Certificate of compliance" means a document recorded by the County Recorder which identifies, by legal description, certain real property and states that the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.030 - Collector street. 
"Collector street" means a street lower in classification and physical size than the arterial, that performs an equally important function of collecting neighborhood traffic from local streets and transferring it to larger arterial streets or to the more local activity areas such as schools, shopping centers, and employment centers. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.040 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building; such as, an apartment, office or store. In addition, a condominium may include a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either: 
A.  An estate of inheritance or perpetual estate; 
B.  An estate for life; or 
C.  An estate for years, such as a leasehold or subleasehold. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.050 - Condominium conversion. 
"Condominium conversion" means the conversion of existing developed real property into a condominium, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.060 - Dedicated street. 
"Dedicated street" means a public thoroughfare or right of way dedicated or deeded to the city for road purposes, and formally accepted as such by the city or condemned for use as such, other than an alley which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenues, places, ways, drives, lanes, boulevards. highways, roads and any other thoroughfare except as excluded in this paragraph. 
Nothing herein shall preclude or stop the city from claiming a dedication by public use, but no dedication by public use may be asserted against the city, if the city does not elect to accept or treat the street or road as dedicated. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.070 - Final map. 
"Final map" means a map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map is required by the Map Act or this chapter, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Map Act, designed to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.080 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city, adopted by City Council Resolution Number 7196 on July 23, 1991, and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.090 - Local street. 
"Local street" means a street intended to provide access to homes and not intended to carry through traffic. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.100 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel or portion of land separated from other portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease, or separate use. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.110 - Lot division. 
"Lot division" means a record map showing a division of land as required by Section 66426(a)—(d) of the Map Act. A lot division map is the same as a "parcel map." 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.120 - Lot line adjustment. 
"Lot line adjustment" means a shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustments where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.130 - Major arterial. 
"Major arterial" means streets and highways designed to move large volumes of traffic between freeway systems and between the freeway and local areas of traffic generation. They may also include streets that are designed to move large volumes of traffic between jurisdictions (refer to the circulation element of the general plan). 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.140 - Merger. 
"Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel, pursuant to Chapter 3, Article 1.5 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.150 - Owner. 
"Owner" means the individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation holding legal title to an interest in real property. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.160 - Parcel map. 
"Parcel map." See Section 16.06.110, "lot division." 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.170 - Planned development. 
"Planned development" means a development where the structures are individually owned and the property owners association, through covenants, codes and restrictions, maintains the common areas, as further defined in Civil Code Section 1351(k). Maps for such projects shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions for tentative tract maps or parcel maps contained herein. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.180 - Private street. 
"Private street" means a parcel of land not dedicated as a public street held by a private owner or over which a private easement for road purposes has been granted to the owners of property receiving access therefrom, and the instrument creating the easement has been duly recorded or filed in the office of the Recorder of Los Angeles County. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.190 - Redevelopment plan. 
"Redevelopment plan" means any plan adopted by the City Council and the El Monte Community Redevelopment Agency in conformance with California Community Redevelopment Law, Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.200 - Remainder. 
"Remainder" means that portion of an existing parcel or parcels of land which is not included as part of the subdivided land, pursuant to Section 66424.6 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.210 - Secondary arterial. 
"Secondary arterial" means a street to distribute traffic from the major arterial to the business districts and other centers of community activity, and also to the collector streets. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.220 - Specific plan. 
"Specific plan" means a detailed and comprehensive land use and development plan for a defined area within the city, adopted pursuant to Sections 65450 through 65456, inclusive, of the California Government Code. A specific plan must be consistent with the general plan and must contain regulations for the uses of land, including the conservation of open space, along with development standards and an implementation program to provide for all infrastructure and public services needed to support the land uses described in the plan. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.230 - Subdivision improvement standard. 
"Subdivision improvement standard" means standard details, standard specifications, and other standards approved by the City Engineer that shall govern the improvements to be constructed pursuant to this title and the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.240 - Vesting map. 
"Vesting map" means a special form of a tentative map, filed pursuant to Chapter 4.5 of the Map Act, which confers certain vested rights, for a specified period of time, to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting map is approved or conditionally approved. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.06.250 - Zoning ordinance. 
"Zoning ordinance" means Title 17 of this code, or any ordinance enacted under the zoning powers of the city. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Division 2. - Maps And Procedures  
Chapter 16.08 - MAPS REQUIRED 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Divisions of land requiring a final map. 
Tentative and final maps shall be required for those projects specified in Section 66426 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.08.020 - Divisions of land requiring a parcel map. 
Parcel maps shall be required for all proposed subdivisions which require a parcel map, as defined in Section 66426 of the Map Act, and for all land divisions creating four (4) or fewer parcels, unless expressly exempted by the Map Act or other provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.08.030 - Fees and deposits. 
All persons submitting a tentative map a final map or a parcel map as required by this chapter shall pay all fees and charges in accordance with Section 16.34.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.08.040 - Designated remainder parcels. 
A subdivider may designate as a remainder that portion of land within the subdivision which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. The designated remainder parcel shall not be counted as a parcel for purposes of determining whether a parcel map or final map is required. This section applies to a remainder as defined in Section 16.06.200 of this title and is enacted pursuant to Section 66424.6 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.10 - TENTATIVE TRACT MAP 
Sections: 
 
16.10.010 - General. 
The form and contents, application requirements and approval of tentative maps for a proposed subdivision shall be in accordance with the Map Act and this title. The tentative tract map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.020 - Pre-filing conference. 
After reviewing the requirements of this chapter, it is required that the subdivider confer with the city planning and engineering staff before preparing and filing a tentative map. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.030 - Form and content. 
A.  The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the Planning Services Manager and the City Engineer and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
B.  The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet at a scale not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch (1? = 20') and shall contain not less than the following: 
1.  A title that shall contain the subdivision number assigned by the County Engineer, subdivision name, and type of subdivision; 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of legal owner, subdivider, and person preparing the map (including registration number); 
3.  Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision; 
4.  Date, north arrow, scale, and contour interval; 
5.  Existing and proposed land use; 
6.  A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, flood control facilities, railroads, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community; 
7.  Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred (100) feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to: 
a.  Existing contours at one-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten (10) percent and not less than two (2) foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal to or greater than ten (10) percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines. 
b.  Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees and any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated. 
c.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked. 
d.  The approximate location and outline of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse. 
e.  The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways. 
f.  The widths, location and identity of all existing easements. 
g.  The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. 
h.  The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets. 
i.  The source and date of existing contours. 
8.  Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. 
b.  The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs. 
c.  The location, width and purpose of all easements, including the instrument number of the document recording the easement. 
d.  The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees. 
e.  The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale and the number of each lot. 
f.  Proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten (10) percent and shall be shown at five (5) foot intervals for existing ground slopes of ten (10) percent or more. A separate grading plan may be submitted. 
g.  Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use. 
h.  Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space. 
i.  The location and size of sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. 
j.  The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map. 
k.  All lettering size shall be one-eighth inch minimum. 
9.  If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units, the proposed units and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown. 
The City Engineer or the Planning Services Manager may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the type of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements, or that other circumstances justify a waiver, such waivers shall be provided for in writing. The City Engineer or Planning Services Manager may require other drawings, data or information as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.040 - Accompanying data and reports. 
The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports: 
A.  Soils Report. A preliminary soils report prepared in accordance with the city's grading ordinance shall be submitted. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. 
B.  Engineering Geology and/or Seismic Safety Report. A preliminary engineering geology and/or seismic safety report, prepared in accordance with city guidelines, is required if the subdivision lies within a "medium risk" or "high risk" geologic hazard area, as shown on maps on file contained within the safety element of the El Monte general plan. 
C.  Title Report. A preliminary title report, or other suitable evidence, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map. 
D.  Environmental Impact Study. The time limits set forth in this chapter for taking action on tentative maps shall not be deemed to commence until the subdivision is found exempt or an Initial Study is completed and a Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report, as appropriate, is prepared, processed, and a final environmental document, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, is available for concurrent consideration with the tentative map. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents pursuant to the city's procedures for implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
E.  Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed reasonably necessary by the Planning Services Manager or as required by the Condominium Conversion Division or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.050 - Filing of tentative map. 
A.  The tentative map shall be considered for filing only when such map conforms to Section 16.10.030 "Form and Contents," when all accompanying data or reports, as required by Section 16.10.040, have been submitted and accepted by the Planning Services Manager and the City Engineer and all required application fees have been paid in full. 
B.  The subdivider shall file with the Planning Services Manager the number of tentative maps as required in the city filing procedures. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.060 - Distribution of tentative map. 
A.  The Planning Services Manager shall forward copies of the tentative map to the following agencies which may, in turn, forward to the Planning Services Manager, such findings and recommendations. Public agencies and utilities shall certify that the subdivision can be adequately served. These agencies include: City Department of Public Works, Los Angeles County Fire Department, local school district, and other affected agencies or property owners as deemed necessary by the Planning Services Manager. 
B.  Within ten (10) days of the filing of a tentative map, the Planning Services Manager shall send notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of any elementary, high school or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located. The notice shall also contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density, and any other information that would be relevant to the affected school district. 
C.  The governing board may review the notice and may send a written report to the agency required by law to approve the tentative map. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the affected school district and shall make recommendations as the governing board of the district deems appropriate. In the event the school district fails to respond within a fifteen (15) working day period from receipt of notice of the tentative map, the failure shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district. The Planning Commission shall consider the report from the school district in approving, conditionally approving or denying the tentative map. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.070 - Subdivision Committee review. 
The Subdivision Committee shall meet to review and make recommendations and comments on the tentative map. A report containing their recommendations or comments concerning the tentative map and its impact on the community shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. Such reports shall be in writing and a copy shall be available to the subdivider, and on each tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project at least three (3) days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 3, 10-16-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2937, § 3, adopted October 16, 2018, renamed § 16.10.070 from "Subdivision Committee conference" to "Subdivision Committee review."  
16.10.080 - Notice of public hearing. 
A.  Upon receipt of a valid application, the Planning Services Manager shall set the matter for public hearing before the Planning Commission. Noticing shall be pursuant to Government Code Section 65090 or 65091. 
B.  In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by Government Code Section 66451.3. All costs of such notice shall be computed by the city and paid by the subdivider as part of the application fee for the condominium conversion. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.090 - Action by Planning Commission. 
At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall hear all the evidence, and recommendations, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within fifty (50) days of the filing thereof, a completed application. If an Environmental Impact Report is prepared for the tentative map, the fifty (50) day period specified above shall not be applicable and the Planning Commission shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after certification of the Environmental Impact Report. The decision of the Planning Commission may be recorded in the form of a resolution. If a resolution is prepared it shall contain the facts and reasons upon which the decision was based, and include the finding that said division is or is not consistent with the city general plan, or any applicable specific plans, or other applicable ordinances or policies. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall thereafter report the Commission's decision in writing to the applicant within ten (10) days of the action. Such action by the Planning Commission shall become final in the absence of any appeal. Time limits specified herein shall be modified only to the extent provided for in the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 4, 10-16-2018)  
16.10.100 - Approval. 
A.  In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a tentative map, the Planning Commission shall apply only those ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the Planning Services Manager has determined that the application is complete, pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code, except in the following instances: 
1.  The city has initiated proceedings to modify land use regulations by way of ordinance, resolution or motion. 
2.  The city has published legal notice containing a description sufficient to notify the public of the nature of the proposed change in the applicable general or specific plans, and zoning or subdivision ordinances. 
3.  Whenever the city has performed both subsections (A)1. and (A)2. of this section, it may apply any ordinances, policies or standards enacted or instituted as a result of those proceedings which are in effect on the date the Planning Commission approves or disapproves the tentative map. 
4.  If the applicant requests changes in applicable ordinances, policies or standards in connection with the same development project, any ordinances, policies or standards adopted pursuant to the applicant's request shall apply. 
B.  The Planning Commission, (or on appeal, the City Council) may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the Community Development Department's report. The Planning Commission and City Council may add additional requirements as a condition of their approval. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 5, 10-16-2018)  
16.10.110 - Denial. 
A.  The tentative map may be recommended for denial by the Planning Commission, or denied by the City Council on any of the grounds provided by city ordinances or the Map Act. 
B.  The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall deny the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. However, if an environmental impact report was prepared for the project and a finding was made pursuant to Subdivision (c) of Section 21081 of the Public Resources Code that specific economic, social and other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report, then the Planning Commission may still approve the tentative map; 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record and to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. No authority is granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.120 - Appeal of Planning Commission Action. 
A.  If any interested party or the applicant who filed the tentative map is dissatisfied with any requirement, ruling, finding, or disapproval that was specifically considered by the Planning Commission with respect to the map or the kinds, nature, and extent of the improvements and conditions imposed, they shall within ten (10) days after such action appeal in writing to the City Council for relief. Said written appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall set forth the grounds and reasons for such an appeal. 
B.  The City Council may sustain, modify, or overrule any such requirements, ruling, findings, or disapproval of the Planning Commission, and may modify the kinds, nature, and extent of any improvements required. The City Council shall consider such appeal within thirty (30) days of its filing with the City Clerk. The appeal hearing shall be a public hearing with notice being given pursuant to Section 16.12.080 of this chapter and with additional notices to be given to the subdivider and affected interested persons in a similar manner. The decision of the City Council shall be final, and upon making its decision the City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days, mail a written report of the outcome directly to the applicant or owner and to the various City Departments. Pursuant to Section 66451.2 of the Map Act, fees shall be collected from the subdivider or from persons appealing or filing a complaint, for expenses incurred in addressing the appeal or complaint. The specific fee shall be set in accordance with Section 16.36.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 6, 10-16-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2937, § 6, adopted October 16, 2018, renamed § 16.10.120 from "action by City Council" to "appeal of Planning Commission action."  
16.10.130 - Extension of time for Planning Commission/City Council action. 
The time limits set forth above for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission/City Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 66451.1 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.10.140 - Expiration of approved tentative map. 
An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire twenty-four (24) months following such approval by the Planning Commission, if the final map has not been approved by the City Engineer, unless permission to extend the expiration period is granted by the Planning Commission. Such extension of time shall not exceed an additional twelve (12) months. However, pursuant to Section 66452.6 (a) of the Map Act, if the subdivider is subject to a requirement of two-hundred thirty-six thousand seven hundred ninety dollars ($236,790) or more to construct, improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, each filing of a phase of a multiple final map authorized by Section 16.16.100 herein, shall extend the expiration of the approved tentative map thirty-six (36) months from the original or extended expiration date, or thirty-six (36) months from the date of recordation of the previous phase map. Such extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than ten (10) years beyond the original approval date. "Public improvements" include traffic control, streets, roads, highways, freeways, bridges, overcrossings, streets, interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities and lighting facilities. 
A.  A tentative map on property subject to a development agreement with the city or redevelopment agency may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. 
B.  The time periods specified in subsection A. of this section shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium or lawsuit affecting the property is in effect, pursuant to Sections 66452.6 (b), (c), and (f) or Section 66456.6(f) of the Map Act. 
C.  The subdivider shall file a request with the Planning Services Manager to extend the expiration of an approved tentative map no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration date. Such filing shall automatically extend the expiration date for sixty (60) days, or until the request is acted upon by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 7, 10-16-2018)  
16.10.150 - Map checking fees to City Engineer. 
Applicants for final parcel maps shall deposit a fee with the City Engineer to cover the cost associated with the checking of the tentative map, preparation of conditions of approval, final and parcel map, grading plans and offsite improvement plans. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 8, 10-16-2018)  
16.10.160 - Amendments to approved tentative map. 
A.  Amendments to an approved tentative map shall be submitted to the Planning and Engineering Divisions for their review. Applications for amendments shall conform to the requirements of the Planning Services Manager and the City Engineer, accompanied by the appropriate fee as established by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  The Planning Services Manager shall determine whether the requested amendment(s) are minor or major. If the Director determines that such amendment(s) is minor, the matter shall be set for review by the Planning Commission and shall prepare a written report concerning such amendment for consideration by the Planning Commission. 
C.  If the Planning Services Manager determines that an amendment is major, the matter shall set for a public hearing, and the amendment shall be processed as provided in Sections 16.10.060, 16.10.100, 16.10.110 and 16.10.120 of this title. 
D.  Actions on requested amendments shall not alter or extend the expiration date of the originally approved tentative map. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.12 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - General. 
The form and contents, submittal, and approval of tentative parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this section. The tentative parcel map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.020 - Pre-filing conference. 
After reviewing the requirements of this division, it is required that the subdivider confer with the city planning and engineer staff before preparing and filing the parcel map. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.030 - Form and content. 
The parcel map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet. The scale shall be approved by the City Engineer and all lettering shall be one-eighth inch minimum in height. The final form shall be as approved by the City Engineer and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
The map shall show the following information: 
A.  A title which shall contain the subdivision number assigned by the County Engineer, subdivision name, and type of subdivision. 
B.  Name, address, and telephone number of legal owner, subdivider, and person preparing the map (including registration number). 
C.  Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
D.  Date, north arrow, scale, and contour interval. 
E.  Existing and proposed land use. 
F.  A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroad, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community. 
G.  Existing topography of the proposed side and at least one hundred (100) feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to: 
1.  Existing contours at one-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten (10) percent and at not less than two (2) foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal to or greater than ten (10) percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines. 
2.  Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees and any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated. 
3.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked. 
4.  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each water course. 
5.  The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways. 
6.  The widths, location and identity of all existing easements. 
7.  The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. 
8.  The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets. 
9.  The source and date of existing contours. 
H.  Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. 
2.  The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs. 
3.  The location, width and purpose of all easements, including the instrument number of the document recording the easement. 
4.  The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four (4) degrees. 
5.  The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of a grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale and the number of each lot. 
6.  Proposed contours at one-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten (10) percent and shall be shown at two (2) foot intervals for existing ground slopes of ten (10) percent or more. A separate grading plan may be submitted. 
7.  Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use. 
8.  Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space. 
9.  The location and size of sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. 
10.  The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map. 
11.  All lettering size shall be one-eighth inch minimum. 
If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units, the proposed units and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown. 
The City Engineer or Planning Services Manager may waive any of the above map requirements if the type of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements, or that other circumstances justify a waiver, such waivers shall be in writing. The City Engineer or Planning Services Manager may require other drawings, data or information as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 9, 10-16-2018)  
16.12.040 - Environmental impact determination. 
The time limits set forth in this chapter for taking action on the parcel map shall not be deemed to commence until the land division is found exempt or an initial study is completed and a Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report, as appropriate, is prepared, processed, and a final environmental document, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, is available for concurrent consideration with the parcel map. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and information and shall deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents pursuant to the city's procedures for implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.050 - Filing of parcel map. 
The parcel map shall be considered for filing only when such map conforms to Sections 16.12.030 and 16.12.040, and has been submitted and accepted by the Planning Services Manager and all application fees have been paid in full. The subdivider shall file with the Department of Planning and Community Development the number of maps as required in the city filing procedures. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.060 - Subdivision Committee review. 
The Subdivision Committee shall meet to review and make recommendations and comments on the parcel map. A report containing such recommendations or comments concerning the tentative parcel map and its bearing on the community shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. Such reports shall be in writing and a copy shall be available to the subdivider, and each tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project at least three (3) days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.070 - Notice of public hearing. 
A.  Upon receipt of a valid application, the Planning Services Manager shall set the matter for public hearing before the Planning Commission. Noticing shall be pursuant to the public hearing requirements in Government Code Section 65090 or 65091. 
B.  In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by Government Code Section 66451.3(b). All costs of such notice shall be computed by the city and paid by the subdivider as part of the application fee for the condominium conversion. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.080 - Action by the Planning Commission. 
At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall hear all the evidence, and recommendations, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the parcel map within fifty (50) days of the filing thereof, a completed application. If an Environmental Impact Report is prepared for the parcel map, the fifty (50) day period specified above shall not be applicable and the Planning Commission shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days after certification of the Environmental Impact Report. The decision of the Planning Commission may be recorded in the form of a resolution. If a resolution is prepared it shall contain the facts and reasons upon which the decision was based, and include the finding that said division is or is not consistent with the city general plan, or any applicable specific plans, or other applicable ordinances or policies. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall thereafter report the Commission's decision in writing to the applicant within ten (10) days of the action. Such action by the Planning Commission shall become final in the absence of any appeal. Time limits specified herein shall be modified only to the extent provided for in the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.090 - Approval. 
A.  In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a parcel map, the Planning Commission shall apply only those ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the Planning Services Manager has determined that the application is complete, pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code, except in the following instances: 
1.  The city has initiated proceedings to modify land use regulations by way of ordinance, resolution or motion. 
2.  The city has published legal notice containing a description sufficient to notify the public of the nature of the proposed change in the applicable general or specific plans, and zoning or subdivision ordinances. 
3.  Whenever the city has performed both subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, it may apply any ordinances, policies or standards enacted or instituted as a result of those proceedings which are in effect on the date the Planning Commission approves or disapproves the parcel map. 
4.  If the applicant requests changes in applicable ordinances, policies or standards in connection with the same development project, any ordinances, policies or standards adopted pursuant to the applicant's request shall apply. 
B.  The Planning Commission, (or on appeal, the City Council) may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the Community Development Department's report. The Planning Commission and City Council may add additional requirements as a condition of their approval. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.100 - Denial. 
A.  The parcel map may be denied by the Planning Commission on any of the grounds provided by city ordinances or the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall deny the parcel map if it makes any of the follow findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. However, if an environmental impact report was prepared for the project and a finding was made pursuant to Subdivision (c) of Section 21081 of the Public Resources Code that specific economic, social and other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report, the Planning Commission may still approve the parcel map; 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. No authority is hereby granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.110 - Appeal of Planning Commission action. 
A.  If any interested party or the applicant who filed the parcel map is dissatisfied with any requirement, ruling, finding, or disapproval that was specifically considered by the Planning Commission with respect to the map or the kinds, nature, and extent of the improvements and conditions imposed, they shall within ten (10) days after such action appeal in writing to the City Council for relief. Said written appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall set forth the grounds and reasons for such an appeal. 
B.  The City Council may sustain, modify, or overrule any such requirements, ruling, findings, or disapproval of the Planning Commission, and may modify the kinds, nature, and extent of any improvements required. The City Council shall consider such appeal within thirty (30) days of its filing with the City Clerk. The appeal hearing shall be a public hearing with notice being given pursuant to Section 16.12.080 of this chapter and with additional notices to be given to the subdivider and affected interested persons in a similar manner. The decision of the City Council shall be final, and upon making its decision the City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days, mail a written report of the outcome directly to the applicant or owner and to the various City Departments. Pursuant to Section 66451.2 of the Map Act, fees shall be collected from the subdivider or from persons appealing or filing a complaint, for expenses incurred in addressing the appeal or complaint. The specific fee shall be set in accordance with Section 16.36.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.120 - Extension of time for Planning Commission/City Council action. 
The time limits set forth above for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.130 - Map checking fees to City Engineer. 
Applicants for final parcel maps shall deposit a fee with the City Engineer to defray the cost associated with the checking of the tentative map, preparation of conditions of approval, final and parcel map, grading plans and offsite improvement plans. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.12.140 - Expiration/extension of approved parcel map. 
The expiration period, procedures for extension of time and other limitations specified in Section 16.10.140 herein, shall apply. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.14 - VESTING MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.14.010 - General. 
The requirements for forms and content, submittal, review, and approval/denial of a tentative vesting map, whichever applies, in accordance with Chapters 16.10 and 16.12 of this title. In addition, the face sheet of a vesting map shall contain the words "vesting tentative tract map" or "vesting parcel map" in a conspicuous location and letter style. The filing of a vesting map is at the exclusion option of the subdivider and shall not be the prerequisite to any proposed subdivisions or an application for development. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.14.020 - Expiration of approved vesting tentative tract or parcel map. 
An approved vesting tentative tract or parcel map shall expire within twenty-four (24) months, unless extended by the Planning Commission, pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.10.140. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 10, 10-16-2018)  
16.14.030 - Vesting tentative tract or parcel map amendments. 
If the ordinances, standards and policies in effect at the time of vesting tentative tract or parcel map approval are subsequently changed prior to expiration of the vesting tentative map, the applicant may apply for an amendment to that map, to secure a vested right to proceed with the changed ordinances, policies and standards. Such an application shall be reviewed by the Subdivision Committee and acted upon by the Planning Commission and/or City Council pursuant to the requirements for tentative tracts and parcel maps, specified in Chapters 16.10 and 16.12 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.14.040 - Vesting upon approval of a tentative map. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the standards, policies and ordinances in effect at the time of such approval. However, the city may impose reasonable conditions or deny a request for a subsequent permit, approval, extension or other entitlement, if it determines that: 
A.  Failure to do so could place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; or 
B.  The condition or denial is required, to comply with state or federal laws. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.14.050 - Time period to exercise vested rights. 
A.  The rights conferred by an approved vesting tentative map shall last for an initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map, parcel map or waiver of parcel map. When multiple final maps are recorded, the one-year initial period shall begin for each phase when the final map for the phase is recorded. 
B.  The initial time period shall be automatically extended if the city fails to complete its review of an application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review within thirty (30) days from the date that a complete application is received by the city. 
C.  At any time prior to the expiration of the initial one-year time period, the subdivider may apply for a maximum, one-year time extension, to be considered by the Planning Commission. If such request is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council, within fifteen (15) days of the action. 
D.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit within the initial one-year period specified above, the rights conferred by the vesting map shall continue until the expiration of that permit or any extension of such permit granted by the Building Official. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.14.060 - Applications inconsistent with existing regulations. 
Pursuant to Section 66498.4 of the Map Act, a property owner may seek approval for a development within the subdivision for which a vesting tentative map was approved and subsequently recorded, which is not consistent with the ordinances, standards and policies in effect at the time of approval of the vesting tentative map, and the city may approve such request, only to the extent authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.16 - FINAL, PARCEL AND REVERSION TO ACREAGE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - General. 
The subdivider shall file the required number of copies of the final map with the City Engineer. Such filing shall also include adequate evidence that the subdivider has filed the statement required by Section 66492 of the Map Act, with the Los Angeles County Recorder, indicating that there are no liens against the subdivision for unpaid taxes or special assessments. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.020 - Title sheets. 
A.  The title sheet of each map shall contain a title consisting of "Tract No. _______" (insert map number) for final maps, "Parcel Map No. _______" (insert map number) for parcel maps, and a subtitle consisting of "A Reversion to Acreage of (insert legal description of land being reverted), for Reversion to Acreage Maps, along with the words "In the City of El Monte" or "Partly in the City of El Monte and partly in unincorporated territory" or "Partly in the City of El Monte and partly in the City of _______" (Insert the name of the adjacent city), whichever is applicable. The title sheet shall also contain a subtitle consisting of a description of all the property in the division of land or reversion to acreage by reference to such map or maps of such property as shall have been previously recorded or filed in the Office of the County Recorder, or filed with the County Clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or filed in the Office of the County Recorder pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure of the state or by reference to the plat of any United States survey. Each reference in such subtitle to any record maps shall be worded and spelled identically with, and contain a complete reference to, the book and page of the original record thereof. 
B.  The certificate of the surveyor or engineer, as required by the Map Act, shall appear on the title sheet along with the date of any survey and the basis of hearings with a reference to a record satisfactory to the City Engineer, of a solar or polaris observation. 
C.  If applicable, an acknowledgment of the owner's development lien shall be placed on the title sheet, pursuant to Section 66434.1 of the Map Act. The notary's official seal need not appear on the title sheet, provided that the notary's name, county of the notary's principal place of business and the notary's commission expiration date are typed or printed below the notary's signature of acknowledgment. 
D.  Title sheets may be prepared in a horizontal or vertical format, as approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.030 - Certificates and acknowledgments. 
Those certificates and acknowledgments required by Chapter 2, Article 2 of the Map Act commencing with Section 66425, along with the following additional acknowledgments shall be made by separate instrument and filed concurrently with final maps: 
A.  All of those certificates, acknowledgments, declarations and statements required by Chapter 2, Article 2, of the Map Act, along with the following additional certificates, may be combined and shall be made by separate instrument and filed concurrently with final maps and reversions to acreage maps. 
1.  Special assessments certificate, signed by the Director of Finance; 
2.  Planning commission Certificate, signed by the Planning Services Manager; 
3.  All of those certificates, acknowledgments and statements required by Chapter 2, Article 3, of the Map Act shall be recorded by separate instrument, concurrently with the parcel map; 
4.  Subdivider's and/or owner's statement consenting to recordation of the parcel map, as specified in Section 66445(e) of the Map Act; 
5.  Dedications or offers of dedication, signed by the same parties and in the same manner as specified in Section 66439 of the Map Act for dedications by a final map. 
B.  All required certificates, affidavits, acknowledgments, and signatures appearing on the title sheet shall be legibly stamped, printed, or signed with opaque ink and all such entries shall be readily reproducible by normal methods of reproduction. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.040 - Map sheets. 
A.  General. Each map sheet shall bear the main title of the map, the scale, north point and sheet number and designation of the relation, if any, between that sheet and each other sheet comprising the map. 
B.  Lot Numbers and Area. All lots shall be numbered and the numbers shall begin with the numeral "1" and continue consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the entire map. No prefix or suffix or combination of letter and number shall be used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one map sheet. Upon each lot contain an area of three-fourths of an acre or more shall have designated on the map sheet, the acreage of the lot to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre. 
C.  Lot, Block and Boundary Lines. The bearing and length of each lot, block, and boundary line shall be shown on the map provided, however, when bearings of lot lines in a series of lots are the same, the bearings may be omitted from each interior, parallel lot line of the series. Each required bearing or length shall be shown in full and no ditto mark or other designation of repetition shall be used. 
D.  The arch length, radius and total central angle or bearings of terminal radii of each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner of each curve, or the central angle of each segment within each lot, shall be shown. 
E.  Centerline and Widths of Streets, Alleys, and Other Ways. The centerline, the total width, and the total fractional widths on each side of the centerline of each street, alley or other way shall appear on the map sheets. The bearing and length of each tangent and the radius, central angle and arc length of each curve shall also be shown on each centerline. 
F.  The map sheets shall also show the following widths and fractional widths or right-of-way when dedications are to be made on the map: 
1.  The total width dedicated prior to the recording of such map; and 
2.  The width of additional strips to be dedicated by such map. 
G.  Street Names. The approved names including the word "Avenue", "Street", "Place" or other approved street designation shall be shown on the map sheet. Such names and designations shall be shown in, or arrowed into, both the newly dedicated portion and any existing portion of the street. No numerals or abbreviations shall be used in delineating street names. 
H.  Rights-of-Way and Easements. All rights-of-way and easements which are a burden upon the land and lots within the division of land or reversion to acreage or which are required as a condition precedent to the filling of the map shall be shown on the map sheets and shall conform to the following: 
1.  The centerline, sideline, width, and the length, bearing and sufficient ties thereto shall be shown, as necessary to definitely locate each right-of-way or easement. If the right-of-way or easement cannot be definitely located from the official records, a statement showing the existing of such right-of-way or easement shall be placed on the map. 
2.  All rights-of-way or easements shall be delineated by a fine dashed line, excepting where such rights-of-way or easements are lots or series of lots, they shall be shown as such in conformance with the provisions of this Title. 
3.  Distances, bearings, and all other indications of measurements on the lot lines which are crossed by rights-of-way or easements shall be arrowed or otherwise shown so as to clearly indicate the actual length, bearing or measurement, of each lot line. 
4.  The rights-of-way or easements shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if of record, the record reference shall be shown thereon. 
5.  Notes or figures pertaining to easements shall be subordinated in form and appearance to other notes or figures on the map sheets. 
I.  City Boundary Lines. City boundary lines crossing or abutting the division of land or reversion to acreage shall be clearly designated and tied. 
J.  Map Boundary Lines. The map boundary lines of the land included within the division of land or reversion to acreage shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so designated. 
K.  Evidence Determining Boundary. In all cases where a survey is required for a map, each map sheet shall show fully and clearly evidence where there may be found on the ground the stakes, monuments, and other evidence used to determine the boundaries of the division of land or reversion to acreage. 
Each stake, monument or other object found shall be fully described and referenced and the method used to establish each point or line shall be clearly shown and explained on the map sheet. It shall also show and identify each adjacent corner or each adjoining parcel of land or portion thereof by lot and block number, number or name, and place of record, or by section, township, and range, or, where no such identifying data is available, by another approved designation sufficient to establish the relation with such adjoining parcels of land. In those cases where a parcel map is compiled from record data, the source of the information used shall be contained in a note on the map sheet. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.050 - Waiver of parcel map. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 66428 of the Map Act, the Planning Commission may waive the filing of a parcel map for the following: 
1.  Subdivision of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days notice in writing); or 
2.  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a parcel map; or 
3.  Construction of a condominium project on a single parcel of land. 
B.  However, a tentative map shall still be required, except where waived by the City Engineer and Planning Services Manager. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.060 - Waiver of signature—Parcel map. 
The signatures of all parties having any record title interest in the real property being divided shall not be required on any parcel map unless dedications or offers of dedication are made by certificate on the parcel map. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.070 - Additional information. 
Pursuant to Section 66434.2 of the Map Act, the City Engineer may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with the final map, parcel map or reversion to acreage map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final map and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for information purposes, describing conditions as the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.080 - Approval of final map. 
A.  Review by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the final map and all improvement agreements, and the subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall also ensure that all required certificates and statements have been signed and, where required, acknowledged. The City Engineer shall ensure that all other conditions of the tentative map approval have been met. 
B.  Prior to approval of the final map by the City Engineer, the subdivider shall provide sufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of Chapter 4, Article 8, of the Map Act, with respect to required security for taxes and special assessments not yet payable. 
C.  The final map shall be deemed filed, for the purpose of establishing the time limit for action on the final map by the City Council, as of the date the final map is approved and executed by both the City Engineer and the Planning Services Manager and filed with the City Clerk. 
D.  Approval by City Council. Upon execution by the City Engineer and the Planning Services Manager, the final map, along with the Undertaking Agreement, shall be placed on the Council agenda for approval. The City Council shall consider the final map for approval within ten (10) days after filing with the City Clerk, or at its next regular meeting at which it receives the map, whichever is later. The City Council shall have approved the Undertaking Agreement before approving the final map. 
E.  If the Undertaking Agreement and final map are approved by the City Council, it shall instruct the Mayor to execute the agreement on behalf of the City. If the undertaking agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the Council shall recommend corrections, instruct the City Engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until after an acceptable agreement and/or final map are resubmitted. 
F.  Offers of dedication shall be accepted, subject to improvement or rejected by the City Council, at the time of approval of the final map. The City Clerk shall certify or state on the map, the action of the City Council. The City Council may also designate an officer of the county to accept into the county road system, pursuant to Section 941 of the Streets and Highways Code, any road for which an offer of dedication has been accepted or accepted subject to improvements. Rejected offers shall remain open and shall terminate as specified in Section 66477.2 of the Map Act. Acceptance of offers of dedication on a final map shall not be effective until the final map is filed with the office of the County Recorder, or a resolution of acceptance by the City Council is filed with the County Recorder's office. 
G.  Denial by City Council. The City Council may deny approval of the final map as provided for in the Map Act. 
H.  Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the final map by the City Council, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map to the Clerk of the County Board of Supervisors for transmittal to the County Recorder. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.090 - Approval of parcel map. 
A.  Review by City Engineer. The provisions of Section 16.16.080 of this chapter shall apply. 
B.  Review by Planning Services Manager. The provisions of Section 16.16.080 of this chapter shall apply. 
C.  Approval/Denial by the Planning Commission. If dedications or offers of dedication are not required, the Planning Commission shall approve or deny the parcel map as provided for in the Map Act. 
D.  Approval/Denial by the City Council. If dedications or offers of dedication are required, the provisions of Section 16.16.080 of this chapter shall apply. 
E.  Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the parcel map by the Planning Commission or City Council, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and the subdivider(s) shall forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map to the County Recorder for recordation. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.100 - Approval of reversion to acreage map. 
Reversion to Acreage Maps submitted for final approval prior to recordation, shall be subject to review and approval as specified above for final or Parcel Maps, as the case may be. In addition, except as provided in subdivision (e) of Section 66445 of the Map Act, a certificate shall accompany the parcel map, acknowledge by all parties having any record title interest in the land being reverted, consenting to the preparation and filing of the parcel map. The Planning Commission shall approve such requests, only upon making the following finding: 
A.  That the proposed division of land complies with all city requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and all other applicable provisions of the city's general plan, zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.16.110 - Multiple final maps. 
Pursuant to Section 66456.1 of the Map Act, multiple final maps may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if: 
A.  The subdivider informs the city at the time of filing of the tentative map of his or her intention to file multiple final maps; or 
B.  After the filing of the tentative map, the subdivider and the city agree to the filing of multiple final maps. In providing such notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed final maps. The city may impose reasonable conditions relating to the filing of multiple final maps. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.18 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT 
Sections: 
 
16.18.010 - Definition. 
A lot line adjustment pursuant to Section 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act is where the land, in total, taken from one parcel and added to an adjacent parcel, does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the parcel from which it is taken and where the same number of parcels as originally existed are the resultant. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.18.020 - Required map and information. 
When the owner or owners of contiguous properties desire to obtain approval of a boundary line adjustment, the original and three (3) copies of an eight and one-half (8 ½) inch by eleven (11) inch map, prepared on vellum or drafting linen with a one-inch border, shall be prepared and submitted to the City Engineer and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of owner(s) whose properties are shown on the map; 
B.  North arrow; 
C.  Scale of map; 
D.  Date of preparation; 
E.  Name, location and width of all streets and alleys abutting the property; 
F.  Tract and lot identification, lot lines, bearings and dimensions of each of the two lots; 
G.  Approximate location of existing improvements, buildings and permanent; 
H.  Structures; 
I.  Location and width of all easements upon or abutting the property; 
J.  Location of the proposed lot boundary line adjustment, together with all 
K.  Applicable dimensions and bearings; 
L.  Signatures of all owners of lots involved in such boundary line adjustment; and 
M.  A complete survey of both parcels involved. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.18.030 - Fees. 
Fees shall be paid in accordance with Section 16.36.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.18.040 - Review and approval. 
The City Engineer and Planning Services Manager shall review and approve a lot line adjustment map if the following conditions exist: 
A.  No street or alley dedication or subdivision improvement is necessary to properly service the properties involved in the proposed boundary adjustment; 
B.  The lots, as proposed by the boundary line adjustment, will conform in all respects to the provisions for minimum lot size established in Chapter 16.26. 
C.  The lots, as proposed by the boundary line adjustment, are in accordance with established neighborhood lot design patterns and do not violate any statute, ordinance, regulation or good planning practice. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.18.050 - Filing with County Recorder. 
Upon approval of the lot line adjustment by the City Engineer and Planning Services Manager, the applicant shall cause to be filed record certificates of compliance, containing the descriptions of the parcel as they exist after adjustment pursuant to the applicable provisions of this title and the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.18.060 - Denial and appeal. 
If the City Engineer or Planning Services Manager denies a requested lot line adjustment, the applicant thereof shall be notified. Said notice shall be by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the last known address and shall contain reasons for denial. Within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of denial the applicant may appeal the decision to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.20 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE AND PARCEL MERGER BY DOCUMENT ADJUSTMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - General. 
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of this title and Chapter 6, Article 1 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.020 - Initiation of proceedings. 
Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by the Planning Commission on its own motion or by petition of all of the owners of record of real property within the subdivision. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.030 - Contents of petition. 
The petition shall be accompanied by the following: 
A.  Evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision. 
B.  A statement of the reasons for the proposed merger. 
C.  Form and contents of such maps shall be specified for a final or parcel map, pursuant to Chapter 16.16 of this title. 
D.  Other pertinent information as deemed necessary by the City Engineer and Planning Services Manager. 
E.  The required filing fee, in accordance with the fees and charges pursuant to Section 16.36.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.040 - Submittal of petition to the Planning Service Manager. 
A.  The final map or parcel map for the revision, together with all other data as required by this chapter shall be submitted to the Planning Services Manager for review. 
B.  Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of this title and the Map Act, the Planning Services Manager shall submit the final map or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval, conditional approval, or denial of the reversion to acreage, to the Planning Commission for their consideration. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.050 - Approval by Planning Commission. 
A.  A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on all petitions for initiation for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 16.10.080 of this chapter and Section 66451.3 of the Map Act. The Planning Services Manager may give such other notice deemed necessary or advisable. 
B.  The Planning Commission may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that the provisions of Section 66499.16 of the Map Act have been satisfied. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall require those conditions of reversion specified in Section 66499.17 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.060 - Filing with County Recorder. 
A.  Following approval of a reversion to acreage by the Planning Commission, the petitioner(s) shall be responsible for submitting the final or parcel map, prepared in accordance with Chapter 16.16 of this title to the Los Angeles County Recorder for recordation. 
B.  The reversion shall be effective only after recordation of the final or parcel map pursuant to Section 66499.18 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.070 - Merging and resubdividing without reversion. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 66499.20 ½ of the Map Act, subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage. Such merging and resubdividing may be accomplished upon completion of all standard requirements for approval of tentative and final maps or parcel maps, as stated herein. 
B.  Any unused fees or deposits previously made pursuant to a request for merger and resubdivision pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the same purposes which are applicable at the time of filing a new request. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.080 - Merger without reversion application requirements. 
Requests for merger and resubdivision as defined above, must be submitted to the City Engineer and shall include the following: 
A.  Evidence of title to the real property involved. 
B.  A statement of the reasons for the proposed merger. 
C.  A tentative tract or tentative parcel map, unless certain information requirements are waived by the City Engineer. 
D.  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Engineer or the Planning Services Manager. 
E.  The required filing fee, in accordance with the fees and charges pursuant to Section 16.36.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.090 - Merger without reversion review and approval. 
Requests for merger and resubdivision, as defined above, shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission in the same manner as prescribed for a tentative tract or parcel map as stated herein. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.100 - Merger without reversion filing with County Recorder. 
Following approval, the owner or his or her authorized representative shall file a certificate of compliance, approved by the City Engineer as to form and content, evidencing the merger, with the Los Angeles County Recorder. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.110 - Merger of contiguous parcel by document. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 66499.20 ¾ of the Map Act, the owner of contiguous parcels may request a merger of the parcels, without reverting to acreage, to be recorded by a document approved by the City Engineer as to form and content properly describing the merged parcels. 
B.  Prior to approval of a merger by document each parcel to be merged shall conform to the current minimum lot standards 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.120 - Merger by document application requirements. 
Applications for requests as defined above must be submitted to the City Engineer and shall include the following: 
A.  Adequate evidence of title to the real property involved. 
B.  A statement of the reasons for the proposed merger. 
C.  The information required for a parcel map, as specified in Chapter 16.12 of this title, unless certain information requirements are waived by the City Engineer. 
D.  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Engineer or Planning Services Manager. 
E.  The required filing fee, as established pursuant to Section 16.36.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.130 - Merger by document review and approval. 
Requests for merger by document, as defined above, shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and the Planning Services Manager. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.140 - Merger by document filing with County Recorder. 
Following approval, the owner or an authorized representative shall file a certificate of compliance, approved by the City Engineer as to form and content, evidencing the merger, with the Los Angeles County Recorder. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.20.150 - Appeals of decision. 
The owner of the affected parcels or any other directly affected party may file a written appeal of the City Engineer, Planning Services Manager, or Planning Commission action, to the appropriate body within ten (10) days of receipt of the decision. The appeal procedure shall be as specified in this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.22 - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 
Sections: 
 
16.22.010 - Request. 
Pursuant to Section 66499.35 of the Map Act, any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale may request the issuance of a certificate of compliance, stating that such real property (or any division thereof) complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Such request shall be filed with the City Engineer upon such forms, and accompanied by a fee in accordance with Section 16.36.020 of this title, and such information as may be prescribed by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.22.020 - Determination. 
A.  Based upon the criteria set forth in Section 66499.35 of the Map Act, the City Engineer shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a request for a certificate of compliance. 
B.  The determination of the City Engineer may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission, within ten days of the determination by the City Engineer. Such appeals shall be in writing and accompanied by the standard appeal fee in accordance with Section 16.36.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.22.030 - Recordation. 
The certificate of compliance shall be filed with the County Recorder pursuant to the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.24 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - General. 
The requirements and procedures for tentative and parcel maps and final maps (Chapters 16.10, 16.12 and 16.16 of this title) regarding map format, contents, review and approval, shall apply to conversions of existing rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperative and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.24.020 - Notice to existing tenants. 
Notice shall be provided in the manner required in Chapters 16.10 or 16.12 of this title. An additional notice shall be given to all tenants one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the filing of the tentative or parcel map, in the manner prescribed in 66452.9 (b) of the Map Act. Copies of the actual notice shall also be submitted to the city at the time of filing of the map. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.24.030 - Notice of prospective tenants. 
Upon serving notice to the tenants as required in Section 16.24.020, the subdivider or their agent shall also provide written notice as required in 66452.8 (b) of the Map Act to prospective tenants prior to acceptance of any rent or deposit. Failure to provide the required notice shall subject the subdivider to the following: 
A.  Actual moving expenses incurred by the tenant when moving to and from the subject property. 
B.  The first's month rent on the tenant's new rental unit, if any, immediately after moving from the subject property. 
C.  Cash payment in an amount equal to the above can also be made subject to the tenants concurrence. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.24.040 - Reports required. 
A.  The applicant shall submit a property report describing the age and condition of each of the following elements of each structure situated within the project proposed for conversion: foundations, exterior walls, fire walls, roof, stairways and exits, interior insulation (sound and thermal), heating and air conditioning, fire and earthquake safety provisions, security provisions, interior common or public areas, landscaping and trash control. Such report shall be prepared by an appropriately licensed civil engineer or an architect registered in California, and shall contain recommendations for the correction or improvement of any deficiencies noted. 
B.  The applicant shall submit a structural pest report. Such report shall be prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator pursuant to Section 8516 of the Business and Professions Code, relating to written reports on the absence or presence of wood-destroying pests or organisms. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.24.050 - Improvements required. 
All residences proposed for conversion to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  All current zoning and development requirements of Title 17 of this code. 
B.  Wall and floor-ceiling assemblies shall conform to the sound insulation performance criteria promulgated in Uniform Building Code, 1997 Edition, or its successor, and Regulations Establishing Energy Conservation Standards promulgated by the California Energy Commission. 
C.  The consumption of gas and electricity within each dwelling unit shall be separately metered. A water shut-off valve shall be provided for each unit. Each dwelling unit shall have a separate hot water heater. 
D.  All ovens, ranges, dishwashers, garbage disposals, hot water heaters, heating and air-conditioning shall be in good working order and the developer shall provide a one year warranty for each item. 
E.  Approval of a certificate of occupancy shall be required for any such conversion. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of occupancy, the Building Official shall cause an inspection to be made of all buildings and structures in the proposed condominium, community apartment project or stock cooperative. The Building Official shall prepare an inspection report identifying all items not in conformance with the current city building, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing codes, and any additional equipment and facilities the building official determines to be deteriorated or hazardous. The developer shall repair, replace or add any equipment or facilities determined to be in violation of any such city codes or to be deteriorated or hazardous. 
F.  The applicant shall provide a schedule of proposed improvements which shall be made to the project prior to the sale of any of the units. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.24.060 - Exceptions. 
Recognizing that condominium conversions present unique problems with respect to meeting current requirements, the Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may grant, exceptions to Section 16.24.050 with regard to a particular conversion proposal upon finding that the exception will not contravene the intent and purpose of this division. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Division 3. - Design, Standards, Improvements And Security  
Chapter 16.26 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
16.26.010 - Compliance required. 
A.  The standards and requirements specified in this title shall apply to all final maps. 
B.  The requirements applicable to a parcel map, parcel map waiver, lot line adjustment, conditional certificate of compliance and parcel merger, shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements and the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcel being created. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.26.020 - Design standards. 
A.  Streets and Highways. Street right-of-way, alignment and design specifications shall conform to the standards set by the City Engineer and Director of Public Works. 
B.  Alleys. Alley alignment and design specifications shall conform to the standards set by the City Engineer, in accordance with the adopted studies, or other standards adopted by the City Council. In the event that standards have not been adopted, the Director of Public Works shall establish the standards which decision may be appealed to the City Council. 
C.  Traffic Control and Safety Devices. The subdivider shall install all required traffic control and safety devices, in accordance with the standards and recommendations of the City Engineer, the Director of Public Works and Ordinance Number 2297. 
D.  City Blocks. Blocks shall be two (2) lots deep and not less than two hundred (200) feet in depth, measured from the frontage on one street to the frontage on the closest parallel street. Where lots back up to a street or highway and where it is intended that there shall be no access from said lot to the street or highway against which they back, a six (6) foot high masonry wall shall be erected in accordance with the standards of the City Engineer on the rear property line as a physical separation between the lot and the street or highway. 
E.  Super Blocks. Super blocks may be submitted to the Commission for approval when such blocks propose special design features which will provide for greater amenities than those set forth in the minimum standard provisions of this title and where no hardship is wrought on the community as a whole by the approval of such super block plans. 
F.  Walkways. The subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve walkways to standards prescribed by the Planning Commission across blocks greater than nine hundred (900) feet in length, in order to provide more convenient access to school, park or other public arm. 
G.  Lots. Minimum frontage and depth. All lots, except those in a Planned Residential Development, shall have a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet, on a dedicated public street, and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet and shall in all ways conform to the standards established in Title 17, (Zoning Regulations) of this code. 
H.  Minimum Area—Residentially Zoned Lots. All residentially zoned lots, except those in a planned development, shall have a minimum area of six thousand (6,000) square feet. Easements over any such lot for public utility purposes shall not be considered as a reduction from the required lot area; provided, however, that said easements shall not cover more than one-sixth (?) of the total area of such lot. The provisions of this Section 16.26.020.H. shall not apply to a parcel of land subdivided for use or ownership by a public agency. 
I.  Minimum Area—Commercially Zoned Lots. All commercially zoned lots shall have a minimum area of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet and a minimum depth of two hundred (200) feet. Smaller, individually owned parcels within these larger commercial subdivisions are permitted if the overall size of the project parcel is a minimum of five (5) acres (two hundred seventeen thousand eight hundred (217,800) square feet) and the size of the smaller parcel is no less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage along a public street. A maximum of three (3) individually owned parcels are permitted for those developments measuring between five (5) and ten (10) acres and an additional parcel is permitted for every five (5) additional acres thereafter. Smaller parcels within a larger commercial development are subject to covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) which tie them to the design and development standards of the larger development plan and/or subdivision and expressly address common or reciprocal access, parking, landscaping, maintenance, design, signage and other operational standards. The provisions of this Section 16.26.020.I. shall not apply to a parcel of land subdivided for use or ownership by a public agency. 
J.  Industrially Zoned Lots. All industrially zoned lots shall have a minimum area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet with a frontage of two hundred (200) feet and a depth of two hundred (200) feet. The provisions of this Section 16.26.020.J. shall not apply to a parcel of land subdivided for use or ownership by a public agency. 
K.  Determining Block Face to be Considered Frontage. On major traffic, collector and local streets, all lots shall front upon the street that parallels the long dimension of the block. In the case of square blocks, the commission shall determine on the basis of the exiting uses which block face shall be considered as frontage. 
L.  Flag Lots. Flag lots are prohibited. 
M.  Double Frontage. Double frontage lots are prohibited. 
N.  Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines of rectangular lots shall be as nearly perpendicular to the centerline of the street upon which the lot fronts as is practical; side lot lines of lots fronting on curved streets shall be as nearly radial as is practical. 
O.  Exceptions. In cases where more than fifty (50) percent of the frontage on the same side of the street between intersecting streets is already subdivided into lots, which lots are already built upon, the Commission may approve the predominant width of the existing lots in this frontage as the minimum standard; provided, however, that in no case shall the Commission approve the creation of any lot with an average width less than forty-five (45) feet and with less than thirty-five (35) feet of frontage on a dedicated street. 
P.  Corner lots shall be at least ten (10) percent wider than the minimum requirements for interior lots in any zone, in order to maintain required building lines on both side and front streets. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. No. 2879, § 2, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2914, §§ 13—15, 7-18-2017)  
Chapter 16.28 - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - General requirements. 
A.  The dedication, completion and/or upgrading of all abutting and/or affected public rights-of-way and on- and off-site public improvements shall be required as a condition of all proposed developments. 
B.  The entire contiguous property ownership on which the proposed development is placed shall be considered unless there is a defined and definite separation and change in land use. 
C.  The subdivider shall make all public improvements required in this or any other chapter, prior to approval of final, parcel, or reversion to acreage maps; lot line adjustments; or conditional certificates of compliance; except when an undertaking agreement has been approved pursuant to Section 16.32.010 of this title. 
D.  Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans and specification therefor, prepared in accordance with approved standards, have been submitted to and approved by the City Engineer. Plans and specifications shall be required prior to approval of the final map and shall become the property of the city. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 66456.2 of the Map Act, the city shall review and act upon improvement plans within sixty (60) working days of its submittal, except that at least fifteen (15) working days shall be provided for processing any resubmitted improvement plan. The sixty (60) working-day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the applicant for correction, has been subject to review by agencies other than the city or, following that review, has been returned to the applicant for correction. These time limits may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the City Engineer. 
F.  The city may also contract with other private entities or persons to review the improvement plans, if it determines that it is unable to meet the above-specified time limits. The city may charge the subdivider for all costs directly attributable to employing or contracting with other entities to perform the improvement plan checking services. 
G.  All required improvements shall be constructed to permanent line and grade under the inspection of and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. The number and classification of inspectors and engineers necessary to adequately inspect and control the various phases of the work shall be determined by the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall keep a complete record of all inspections, laboratory, supervision and appurtenant costs which shall include overhead. The City Clerk shall submit monthly to the subdivider a detailed statement of such costs. The subdivider shall pay all such costs within fifteen days after receipt of such detailed statement. The work will not be accepted by the city until all such costs have been paid. The subdivider shall agree to pay for all such costs. 
H.  The subdivider shall provide all necessary field engineering for the purpose of establishing lines and trades during installation of all required improvements. 
I.  The subdivider shall provide all monuments, ties, calculations, notes and other survey data required by Chapter 16.30 prior to approval of the final map, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 16.32. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.020 - Streets. 
All streets, highways, ways and alleys shall be graded and paved to widths, grades, and structural sections, as approved by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall improve the extension of all subdivision streets, highways, ways or alleys to the intercepting paving line of any city street or alley, country road or state highway. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.030 - Underground utilities. 
All underground utilities, both public and private, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets, service roads, alleys, or highways. Connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be laid to such lengths as will obviate the necessity of disturbing the street or alley improvements when service connections thereto are made. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.040 - Structures. 
Structures shall be installed as deemed necessary by the City Engineer, for drainage, access, and/or public safety. Such structures shall be placed to grades and shall be of a design approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.050 - Curbs and gutters, storm drains and culverts. 
Curbs and gutters, storm drains and culverts shall be installed to the specifications of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.060 - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be installed to grades and widths approved by the City Engineer provided that exceptions to this provision may be granted by the City Engineer where topographical conditions make the installation of sidewalks impractical. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.070 - Grade of lots. 
Lots shall be graded as required per Chapter 15.40 (Grading and Erosion Control) of the El Monte Municipal Code and approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2933, § 3, 8-21-2018)  
16.28.080 - Sewers. 
Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system shall be installed to serve each lot in a land subdivision and each unit in a condominium project subdivision or community apartment project subdivision in accordance with the standards of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.090 - Drainage. 
Adequate provision for drainage shall be made and storm drains and facilities shall be installed to grade and sizes approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.100 - Water. 
Water mains and fire hydrants, connecting to the public water system serving the city, shall be installed as required by the City Engineer and shall be approved by the designated agent of the Los Angeles County Fire Department. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.110 - Telephone and electrical services. 
A.  Utility lines, including but not limited to electric, communications, and cable television, shall be required to be placed underground. Appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to surface-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts in an underground system, may be placed above ground. The City Engineer or Planning Services Manager may recommend to the Planning Commission or City Council may waive the requirements of this section of topographical, soil, or any other conditions make such underground installation unreasonable or impractical. This section shall not apply, to overhead lines of a continuous lead crossing or abutting any portion of the subdivision boundaries, or to any other overhead lines which do not provide service to the area being subdivided or developed. 
B.  The developer or subdivider shall reimburse the telephone corporation or cable television system for all costs incurred by such entities for replacement, underground or relocation of such facilities, caused by construction of the subdivision improvements, as specified in Section 66473.6 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.120 - Removal and/or relocation of utility facilities. 
When the approval of private property developments requires the improvement of public streets and such street improvements will result in the removal and/or relocation of facilities including, but not limited to electric, gas, water or telephone fines, the land developer shall bear the cost of such removal or relocating of facilities and otherwise meet the requirements of the serving utilities. Prior to the final approval of the development plans, the owner/developer shall provide the city's Department of Public Works with a letter of compliance from the servicing utility. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.130 - Gas. 
Gas facilities connecting to gas mains serving the city shall be provided in a manner deemed appropriate by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.140 - Street trees. 
Street trees shall be installed per the type and size shown on the El Monte tree planting plan and planted in locations approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.150 - Planting of cut and fill slopes. 
Wherever land has been cut or filled as part of the development of hillside areas, slopes exceeding a grade of one foot in the vertical direction to three feet in the horizontal direction (3:1 slope) or which exceed three feet in height, shall be planted with approved landscape material and maintained for purposes of retaining the slope from erosion or movement. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.160 - Street name signs. 
Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the city. Street names shall be provided by the city. In the case of private streets, there shall be installed at or near the entrance of each intersection of a private street with a dedicated public street, a sign posted to which is attached a sign having a minimum size of two (2) feet by three (3) feet, upon which is printed clearly and legibly in at least two and one-half (2 ½) inch high letters the following: 
(NAME OF STREET) 
PRIVATE STREET 
NOT DEDICATED FOR PUBLIC USE 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.170 - Street lighting. 
Street lighting shall be required and shall be provided for by the subdivider. The street lighting system shall consist of a city-owned underground system. The installation of a street lighting system shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.180 - Railroad crossings. 
Provision shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the State of California Public Utilities Commission for the establishment and improvement of the crossings. The subdivider may be required to bear the full cost of the crossing improvement. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.190 - Safety devices. 
Safety devices such as traffic islands, street signs, reflectors, traffic signals and safety lighting shall be installed where deemed necessary by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.200 - Demolition, moving, altering or conversion. 
The subdivider shall perform all work required by the Commission and/or City Council in connection with the demolition, moving, alerting or conversion of any structure or facility either wholly or partially within the subdivision or affected thereby. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.210 - Supplemental size of improvements. 
The city may require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity, length, or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvement be dedicated to the public, and the subdivider shall be reimbursed for the supplemental costs, pursuant to Sections 66485, 66486, and 66487 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.220 - Other improvements. 
The subdivider shall make such other improvements where deemed necessary by the Commission and/or Council, for the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.28.230 - Designated remainder parcel improvements. 
The subdivider or developer shall not be required to provide required improvements for a designated remainder parcel, except as specified in Section 66424.6 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.30 - SURVEY AND MONUMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.30.010 - Survey procedures. 
The procedures and practices for all survey work done in conjunction with the preparation of the map shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 15 of the Business and Professions Code (the Land Surveyor's Act of the State of California), and shall have an allowable error of closure on any portion thereof not to exceed 1/10,000. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.30.020 - Durable monuments required. 
Pursuant to Section 66495 of the Map Act, durable monuments shall be set at the time of making the survey for the final map or parcel map. Such monuments shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches O.P. & T. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.30.030 - Subdivision boundaries. 
Durable monuments shall be set at all angle and curve points on the exterior boundary of subdivisions, and at points not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart in cases where exterior boundaries between any two (2) angle or curve points exceed said distance. Monuments shall be set as follows: 
A.  All monuments shall be tagged or marked with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signed the map. 
B.  A boundary monument shall not be less substantial than an iron pipe of a two (2) inch outside diameter, not less than thirty (30) inches in length, with the concrete plug and tag, and set no higher than flush with the surface of the ground—two (2) inches I.P. & T. If the tag is not secured by the concrete, a brass tack shall secure the tag. In areas subject to dishing, pipes must be set no less than six (6) feet deep, and in areas subject to commercial cultivation, no less than twelve (12) inches deep. 
C.  Acceptable substitute monuments are: 
1.  A lead, brass tack and tag set in concrete—L.T. & T.; 
2.  A six (6) inch spike, stamped washer and tin set in A.C.—S.W. & T.; 
3.  Any other substitutes shall be approved in writing by the City Engineer before setting; 
4.  State depth of all two (2) inch I.P. & T.'s set on the map or use a depth of monument note. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.30.040 - Parcel/lot corners. 
A durable monument shall be set at each angle and curve point in the boundary of each lot, which portion is not covered in Section 16.30.030. Monuments shall be set as follows: 
A.  All monuments shall be tagged or marked with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signed the map. 
B.  Each monument shall not be less substantial than a one inch I.P., eighteen (18) feet long set as described under Section 16.30.020. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.30.050 - Street centerline. 
A.  Centerline monument shall be placed at the following locations: 
1.  All points of intersection with the centerline of other streets or alleys; 
2.  All points of beginning and end of curves, or at the points of intersection of tangents or semi-tangents of curves; 
3.  All points of intersection with the subdivision boundary except where said subdivision boundary is a street sideline. In cases where a street terminates at the subdivision boundary and is planned for future extension, the terminal centerline monument shall be set on an offset no less than three (3) feet and no greater than five (5) feet along the centerline inside the subdivision boundary; 
4.  All angle points. 
B.  All monuments shall be tagged or marked with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signed the map. 
C.  Each centerline monument shall be not less durable than: 
1.  A six (6) inch monument spike, marked washer and tin in A.C.; 
2.  A lead, brass tack and tag in concrete or cement concrete; 
3.  An iron pipe of a two (2) inch outside diameter, not less than thirty (30) inches in length, with concrete plug and tag no less than six (6) inches deep in unimproved, gaveled or oiled surface. If the tag is not secured by the concrete, a brass tack shall secure the tag; 
4.  Any substitute monument shall be approved in writing by the City Engineer before setting. 
D.  Centerline Ties. 
1.  If the intersection is improved with concrete curbs, set four L. & T.'s (using brass tacks) as tangent ties on curbs; 
2.  If the intersection is not improved with concrete curbs, set four (4) tangent ties, no less than four (4) feet from the centerline monument. 
a.  If the ties fall on the pavement, they shall be set approximately two feet from the edge of pavement. 
b.  If in A.C., use six (6) inch monument spikes and tins. 
c.  If in concrete, use brass tacks set in lead. 
d.  If the ties must be set off of the pavement, use iron pipes of a two (2) inch outside diameter, thirty (30) inches in length, with concrete plugs and brass tacks, set in natural ground no closer than two feet from the edge of pavement, and no less than six (6) inches deep; 
3.  Any substitute centerline tie should be approved in writing by the City Engineer before setting; 
4.  If it is impractical to set tangent ties, the City Engineer may approve, in writing, deviation from tangent ties; 
5.  Notes showing centerline ties are to be filed in the office of the City Engineer after inspection. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.30.060 - Notification of set monuments. 
Pursuant to Section 66497 of the Map Act, within five (5) days after the final setting of all monuments. The engineer or surveyor shall provide written notice to the subdivider and to the City Engineer that the final monuments have been set. The written notice shall contain information on the number and location of the monument set. The notice shall be signed by the engineer and surveyor and shall bear his/her stamp. This document shall be recorded. All monuments shall be set prior to obtaining a grading and building permit. If the applicant wishes to delay the establishment of the monument a five hundred dollar ($500.00) deposit per monument shall be provided to the city. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.32 - IMPROVEMENT SECURITY 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Undertaking agreement. 
Any act or obligation (improvement) required as a condition of approval of a final or parcel map, reversion to acreage map, a parcel map waiver, parcel merger, lot line adjustment or a conditional certificate of compliance, which has not been completed prior to final approval, shall be guaranteed by an undertaking agreement, between the subdivider and the city, which satisfies the requirements of Section 66462 of the Map Act. The form of the undertaking agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney prior to consideration by the City Council, Planning Commission or City Engineer. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.32.020 - Supplemental improvement reimbursement agreement. 
Where the subdivider is required to install supplemental improvements pursuant to Section 16.28.220 herein, the city shall enter into an agreement to reimburse the subdivider pursuant to Section 66486 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.32.030 - Improvement security. 
A.  Any liability upon the security given for the faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be limited, as specified in Section 66499.9 of the Map Act. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 66499, 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the Map Act, improvement securities shall be required to be posted by the subdivider as a guarantee of the performance of any act, improvement, or obligation required as a condition of approval of any final or parcel map, parcel map waiver, lot line adjustment, conditional certificate of compliance, or parcel merger. All such improvement securities shall be provided in a form subject to the approval of the City Engineer and the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.32.040 - Amount of security. 
Security to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement shall be in the following amounts, pursuant to Section 66499.3 of the Subdivision Map Act: 
A.  An amount determined by the City Engineer equal to one hundred (100) percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement. The total estimated cost of the improvement shall provide for increase or projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction. 
B.  An additional amount determined by the City Engineer equal to fifty (50) percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement, or the performance of the required act, securing payment to the contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for the improvement of the performance of the required act. 
C.  An additional amount equal to ten (10) percent of the estimated cost of the improvements for the guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished. 
D.  Required security for subdividers who are California nonprofit corporations, funded by the United States of America or one of its agencies, or funded by the state or one of its agencies, shall be established in accordance with Section 66499.3 of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.32.045 - Alternative security for certain subdivisions. 
A.  In lieu of executing an undertaking agreement as set forth in Section 16.32.010, the subdivider may deliver alternate improvement security in favor of the city as provided in this Section 16.32.045 guaranteeing the performance of any act, public improvement or obligation (collectively herein, the "work") which has been required by the city as a condition of approval for such subdivision, or a revision to acreage, parcel merger, lot line adjustment or a conditional certification of subdivision compliance. 
B.  This Section 16.32.045 shall apply at the written request of the subdivider when the City Engineer has confirmed either: 
1.  The estimated cost of completing the installation of any required work as set forth in Chapter 16.28 in connection with a subdivision, including any survey monument as set forth in Chapter 16.30, is less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000); or 
2.  The estimated cost of completing the installation of any required work as set forth in Chapter 16.28 in connection with a subdivision, including any survey monument as set forth in Chapter 16.30, is between twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). 
C.  The subdivider/owner of the property may initiate the alternate security provisions authorized by this Section 16.032.045 prior to the recordation of a final tract map, parcel map, reversion to acreage map, parcel merger, lot line adjustment or conditional certificate of compliance upon the delivery to the City Engineer of a written application for approval of alternate security which references Section 16.32.045 and includes the following: 
1.  A current title report for the subject property, which has been issued by a title insurance company within not more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the subdivider's request to the City Engineer; 
2.  Complete plans and specification for the proposed construction and installation of the work; 
3.  A suitably detailed subdivider's estimate of the cost to complete the construction and installation of the work; 
4.  A completed form of the Notice of Subdivision Security Agreement as provided in Section 6.32.045.G., signed in recordable form by the owner of the property in the event that the subdivider estimates that the cost of the work may exceed the sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00.) 
The City Engineer shall acknowledge the city's receipt of such written application within thirty (30) days of receipt from the subdivider and such acknowledgment shall confirm whether the provisions of 16.32.045.D., or 16.32.045.E., shall be applicable to the work. The City Engineer may determine that the alternate security provisions of this Section 16.32.045 do not apply to the subdivision in light of unusual or special conditions applicable to the work, in which case the City Engineer shall so inform the subdivider in writing that the undertaking agreement for the work shall conform to Section 16.32.010. 
D.  If the City Engineer confirms that Section 16.32.045.B.1, applies to the Work, then the subdivider shall deliver cash to the City in the amount as so determined by the City Engineer; provided however, that the minimum amount of such a cash deposit regardless of the City Engineer's estimate of the cost of the work shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The city shall deposit such sum with other funds of the city as a cash security for the completion of such work by the subdivider. The City Engineer is authorized to release the cash security upon completion of the Work as provided in Section 16.32.045.F., or cause such cash security to be forfeit to the city in the event that the work has not been completed within two (2) years following the date of the city's receipt of such cash security. 
E.  If the City Engineer confirms that Section 16.32.045.B.2, applies to the work, then the subdivider shall deliver two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to the city together with a Notice of Security Agreement substantially in the form as provided in Section 16.32.045.G., in recordable form executed by the subdivider/owner of the subdivided lands. The city shall deposit such sum with other funds of the city as a partial cash security for the completion of such work by the subdivider. The City Engineer is authorized to release the partial cash security and record a release of the Notice of Security Agreement Work as provided in Section 16.32.045.F., or cause such partial cash security to be forfeit to the city in the event that the work has not been completed within two (2) years following the date of the city's receipt of such partial cash security. 
F.  The city shall release the security for the work upon written request delivered to the City Engineer in which the subdivider certifies that the construction and installation of the work has been completed as evidenced by the recordation by the subdivider of a certificate of completion for the work as provided in Civil Code Section 8182(c)(1), and subject to the confirmation by the City Engineer that all of the other requirements of Section 16.32.090 with respect to the completion of the work have been satisfied, the City Engineer shall release the security for the work in favor of the subdivider. 
G.  The general form of the Notice of Security Agreement as required under Section 16.32.095.B.2, shall be substantially as follows: 
  
RECORDING REQUESTED BY 
[insert name of subdivider] 
AND WHEN RECORDED MAIL TO: 
City of El Monte 
City Hall — West 
11333 Valley Boulevard 
El Monte, California 91731 
Attn: City Engineer 
_____
[Space above this line for Recorder's use] 
NOTICE OF SECURITY AGREEMENT 
(CITY OF EL MONTE) 
(CITY OF EL MONTE> 
TO ALL INTERESTED PERSONS 
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE 
______________________ (the "Subdivider") is the owner of the land situated in the City of El Monte which is more particularly described in Exhibit "A" (the "Property"). 
The City of El Monte (the "City") has approved the subdivision and improvement of the Property as provided in El Monte Planning Commission Resolution No. _____, dated ________________, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions including a condition that the Subdivider design, construction, install and complete certain public improvements (the "Work") as part of the subdivision and improvement of the Property. 
The Subdivider has requested the City accept certain alternate subdivision improvement security for the construction, installation and completion of the Work as authorized by El Monte Municipal Code Section 16.32.045. 
PLEASE TAKE FURTHER NOTICE that the Subdivider covenants in favor of the City and agrees that until such time as the Work has been completed by the Subdivider and the City has accepted the Work as completed as provided in El Monte Municipal Code Section 16.32.090, that the City shall have no duty to approve or authorize the occupancy of any structure on the Property as otherwise provided in El Monte Municipal Code Section 17.16. 
Upon the acceptance of the Work by the City as provided in El Monte Municipal Code Section 16.32.090, the City Engineer shall cause to be recorded a written release of this Notice of Security Agreement. 
This Notice of Security Agreement has been executed by the Subdivider and the City as evidenced by the signatures of the officers of each of them whose signatures appear below. 
  ;hg;SUBDIVIDER 
  
By: _____
  
ACCEPTED BY CITY OF EL MONTE 
  
By: _____
  
 City Manager 
 City of El Monte 
  
By: _____
  
 City Engineer 
 City of El Monte 
APPROVED AS TO FORM 
      City Attorney 	
 	 
[FORM OF NOTICE OF SECURITY AGREEMENT] 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 11, 10-16-2018)  
16.32.050 - Reduction in performance security. 
The City Engineer may authorize, in writing, the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses, upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than fifty (50) percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be as determined by the City Engineer; however, in no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by this title, the Map Act, or the improvement agreement. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.32.060 - Release of improvement securities. 
A.  Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only following acceptance of the improvement by the city and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the city. 
B.  Material, Labor and Equipment Security. Any security for the payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code and after acceptance of the work, by the City Council, be reduced to an amount equal to the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the legislative body, and if no such claims have been recorded, the security shall be released in full. 
The release shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period required by Section 66499.9 for the Map Act for the guarantee or warranty nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the local agency for such guarantee and warranty period nor to costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys fees. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.32.070 - Forfeiture. 
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any improvement, acts, or obligations within the time specified in the improvement agreement, or upon failure of the subdivider to faithfully comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter or any improvement security given thereby, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten (10) days served upon the person responsible for the performance thereof or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty (20) days, served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of such person, determine that the foregoing have not been complied with or said work has not been completed, and may cause to be forfeited to the city such portion of said improvement security given for the performance of the foregoing. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.32.080 - Default in infrastructure bonds due to initiative. 
A.  If the City Council finds, based upon substantial evidence in the record, that any project for which a tentative map, parcel map or a vesting tentative map has been approved will be affected by a previously enacted initiative measure to the extent that there is likely to be a default on land-secured bonds issued to finance infrastructure on the project, the City Council shall allow that portion of the project served by the infrastructure to proceed in a manner consistent with the approved tentative map or vesting tentative map. 
B.  For purposes of this division, land-secured bond means any bond issued pursuant to the Improvement Act of 1911 (Division 7 [commencing with Section 5000] of the Streets and Highways Code), the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 (Division 12 [commencing with Section 10000] of the Streets and Highways Code), the Improvement Bond Act of 1915 (Division 10 [commencing with Section 85001 of the Streets and Highways Code), or the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (Chapter 2.5 [commencing with Section 53311] of Part I of Division 2 of Title 5, so long as the bond was issued and sold at least ninety (90) days before the proposed initiative was adopted by either popular vote at an election or by ordinance adopted by the legislative body. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the City Council may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement if it determines any of the following: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law. 
D.  An approved or conditionally approved tentative or vesting tentative map shall be subject to the periods of time set forth in Section 66452.6 of the Map Act. 
E.  The rights conferred by this division shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the tentative map or of the vesting tentative map. 
F.  An approved or conditionally approved tentative map or vesting tentative map shall not limit the Planning Commission from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits necessary for the development and authorized by the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 66474.2 or 66498.1 or other applicable provisions of the Map Act. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2937, § 12, 10-16-2018)  
16.32.090 - Acceptance of improvements. 
Construction of required improvements shall not commence until required improvement plans have been approved by the City Engineer. 
A.  General. All improvements are subject to inspection and testing by the City Engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the standards and specifications specified and required by this title. 
B.  Pre-Construction Conference. Prior to commencing any construction, the developer shall arrange for a pre-construction conference with the City Engineer or the City Engineer's authorized personnel. 
C.  The City Engineer and his or her authorized representatives shall have the right to stop any work, refuse to inspect any work, or reject any and all work and construction if it is found that the work is unauthorized, is unsafe in any way to the workmen or the public, is inferior in materials or workmanship, was performed without inspection, or does not meet or comply with the city standards, specifications, or city-approved construction plans. 
D.  All work and improvements must be found to conform to the specified standards and specifications as a condition of the city's acceptance of them and the release of any improvement securities held therefore. 
When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans filed, the subdivision improvements shall be considered for acceptance by the city. The City Engineer shall be responsible for the acceptance of improvements for all divisions of land by tract map, divisions of land by parcel map, lot line adjustments, reversions to acreage or conditional certificates of compliance. Upon such acceptance, the City Engineer shall recommend that the City Council take final action to accept the improvements. The council shall take action on such matters within ten (10) days following recommendation by the City Engineer, or at the next available City Council meeting, whichever occurs later. 
Acceptance of the improvements shall only imply that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the city may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the City Engineer. The improvements will be accepted by the city only if it finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. 
Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the developer from any other requirements imposed by this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Division 4. - Dedications and Fees  
Chapter 16.34 - DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND FEES 
Sections: 
 
16.34.010 - Dedications. 
A.  As a condition of approval for a proposed subdivision for which a tentative tract or parcel map is required by this chapter, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision, which are needed for vehicular, rail or bicycle transit; drainage casements; water, sewer, natural gas, electricity and cable television facility casements; sunlight, open space; scenic easements; and other public purpose easements of rights-of-way deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, upon recommendation by the City Engineer and/or Planning Services Manager. 
B.  The Planning Commission may, pursuant to Section 66476 of the Map Act, impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on the map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.34.020 - Certificates. 
A.  Dedications or offers to dedicate interests in real property as described above, shall be made by certificate of a final map, pursuant to Section 66439 of the Map Act, and by certificate on or separate instrument with a parcel map, pursuant to Section 66447 of the Map Act. 
B.  In addition, pursuant to Section 66476 of the Map Act, the final or parcel map shall contain a certificate stating the approval or rejection of the dedications or offers of dedication, by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.34.030 - Parkland dedication. 
Pursuant to Section 66477 of the California Government Code (hereinafter, the "Quimby Act"), the subdivider shall be required to dedicate land, pay fees in lieu thereof, or pay and dedicate a combination of both, for park and/or recreational purposes, including open space purposes. The standards for land dedication or in-lieu fees are established in City Council Ordinance No. 2663 copies of which can be obtained from the City Clerk as a public record. 
(Ord. 2663 § 11, 2006: Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.34.040 - Elementary school site dedication. 
Pursuant to Section 66478 of the Map Act, subdivider shall be required to dedicate land for an elementary school site. The standards and procedures for such dedication shall be established by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.34.050 - Public use site dedication. 
Pursuant to Section 66479 of the Map Act, and subject to conditions subdivider shall be required to reserve specific sites for a park, recreational facility, police or fire station, library or other public use. The standards and procedures for such dedication shall be established by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.34.060 - Fees for storm drainage and sanitary sewer off-site improvements. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 66483 of the Map Act and subject to conditions, subdivider shall pay fees for required storm drainage and sewer improvements. The City Council shall establish procedures and standards for determining the appropriate fees. 
B.  In addition, pursuant to Section 66488 of the Map Act, the City Council may establish benefit areas for drainage and sanitary sewer facilities and may impose a reasonable charge on properties within the benefit areas, which charges shall be paid to the city, or to the subdivider, through a reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.34.070 - Fees for bridges and major thoroughfares. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 66484 of the Map Act and subject to conditions, subdivider shall pay fees for purposes of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges or other major thoroughfares. The City Council shall establish procedures and standards for determining the appropriate fees. 
B.  In addition, pursuant to Section 66489 of the Map Act, the City Council may establish benefit areas for bridges or major thoroughfares and may impose a reasonable charge on properties within the benefit areas, which charges shall be paid to the city, or to the subdivider, through a reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.34.080 - Fees for review of covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
Following approval of the tentative tract map or parcel map, the subdivider shall submit to the city for review and approval the covenants, conditions and restrictions as directed by the Planning Commission and prepared in accordance with the guidelines prepared by the City Attorney's office for such development projects. Each submission shall be accompanied by a review fee in accordance with Section 16.36.020 of this title. Covenants, conditions and restrictions that are returned by the city because they were not done in accordance with the guidelines, or do not contain all of the conditions of the Planning Commission shall pay a resubmittal fee based upon actual cost. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.36 - FEES AND CHARGES—GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - General. 
Fees shall be established for the purpose of defraying the expenditure incidental to the proceedings described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.36.020 - Fee schedule. 
A.  The City Council, from time to time, shall by resolution establish fees in accordance with Section 16.38.030 of this title. Such fees shall not be refunded whether or not the application is granted or denied. 
B.  Fees shall be due and payable in advance to the city, and shall be collected by the Department of Planning and Community Development, unless otherwise noted, before accepting any such application for filing. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.36.030 - Annual report. 
The Planning Services Manager and the Director of Public Works shall submit a joint written report annually to the City Council, at the close of the fiscal year, which identifies the amount of the fees, costs and charges as collected by the Planning Division and Public Works Department for their respective review of development permits and other land use entitlements. Such report shall also contain any recommendation for modifications, adjustments or additions to the fees, charges and costs as specified in this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 16.38 - FEES—MODIFICATION AND AMENDMENT 
Sections: 
 
16.38.010 - General purposes. 
Various sections of this title provide for the payment by the applicant for a specific development or land use approval, entitlement or permit of certain fees, costs and charges of the city as may be associated with the review of an application for such development or land use approval, entitlement or permit. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure whereby the fees, costs and charges of the city as associated with the submission of an application for each development or land use approval, entitlement or permit may be created, modified or amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council upon receipt of a written recommendation of the Planning Services Manager. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.38.020 - Fees superseded by this chapter. 
All fees, costs and charges as associated with the submission of an application for each development of land use approval, entitlement or permit as specified in this title as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title are superseded by the fees, costs and charges as created, modified or amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.38.030 - Resolution of the City Council creating, modifying or amending fees. 
A.  The City Council may from time to time adopt resolutions which create, modify or amend one or more of the fees, costs and charges associated with a development and land use approval, entitlement or permit as provided in this title as the same exists as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as provided in this title as any provision thereof may hereafter be amended by ordinance of the City Council. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing prior to the adoption of any such resolution and shall cause notice of such public hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with Government Code Section 6062a. 
B.  Prior to setting any proposal for the creation, modification or amendment of any fee, cost or charge as authorized under this title for public hearing, the Planning Services Manager shall prepare a written report which identifies the proposed fee, cost or charge and describes (1) the purpose of the fee; (2) the use to which the fee is to be put, and (3) the relationship between the amount of the fee and the estimated cost to the city of providing for the administration of the applicable development or land use regulation. During the public hearing, the City Council shall consider all relevant evidence as presented and shall receive and file the report of the Planning Services Manager together with any changes or modifications as may be appropriate. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall adopt a resolution which refers to this chapter as authority for procedures applicable to the creation, modification or amendment of the fee, cost or charge by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
16.38.040 - Annual report of the Planning Services Manager. 
The Planning Services Manager shall submit a written report to the City Council each year commencing on June 1, 1991, which identifies the amount of the fees, costs and charges as collected by the Planning Department for the review of applications for development and land use approvals, entitlements and permits as performed under this title during the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the report. Such report shall also contain any recommendations as the Planning Services Manager may deem appropriate regarding modifications, adjustments or additions to the fees, charges and costs as specified in this title. 
(Ord. 2533 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.02 - INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE 
Sections: 
 
17.02.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance is to consolidate and coordinate all existing zoning regulations and provisions into one comprehensive zoning plan in order to designate, regulate and control the location and use of buildings, structures and land; to regulate the height, number of stories and size of buildings and structures hereafter erected or altered; to regulate and determine the size of yards and other open spaces and to regulate and limit the density of population; and for said purposes to divide the city into zones of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and to provide for the enforcement thereof. This chapter is also intended to implement the provisions of The Planning and Zoning Law of the State of California; Division 1 (Planning and Zoning) of Title 7 (Planning and Land Use) of the California Government Code. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.02.010)  
17.02.020 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the official "City of El Monte Zoning Ordinance," hereinafter referred to as the zoning ordinance. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.02.020)  
Chapter 17.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Purpose. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this title, certain terms and words are herein defined and they shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows. Headings contained in this chapter shall not be construed to govern, modify, limit or in any manner affect the scope, meaning and/or intent of any definition thereof. When not inconsistent with the context, words used are in the present, words in the plural number include the singular number, and the masculine includes the feminine. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. "Used" or "occupied" includes designated or arranged to be used or occupied. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.04.010) 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 5, 1-22-2013)  
17.04.020 - Definitions. 
"Accessory building" means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land, and which is located on the same lot with the main building or use. Accessory buildings are not to be used for habitation. 
"Accessory dwelling unit" means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. It shall include the following: (i) an efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1; and (ii) a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007. 
"Accessory use" means a use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the main use of the premises. 
"Adult day care program" means any community-based facility or program, licensed by the California Department of Social Services, that provides care to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining activities of daily living for the protection of these individuals on a less than twenty-four-hour basis, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 1502(a)(2). 
"Adult entertainment establishments." See definition in Section 17.76.020 of this title. 
"Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility" means any premises, place, or building approved and licensed by the State Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs that provides twenty-four-hour residential nonmedical services to adults who are recovering from problems related to alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug misuse or abuse, and who need alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug recovery treatment or detoxification services, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 11834.02. 
"Alley" means a public way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to an abutting property. 
"Alternative financial service establishments" mean establishments that offer financial services outside traditional federally insured financial institutions, including, but not limited to check cashing outlets, payday lenders, pawnbrokers, and vehicle title lenders. 
"Animal keeping" means providing food, water, or shelter to horses or large animals and includes the possessing, housing, controlling, exercising, maintaining, grazing, riding, leading, tying, tethering, hitching, stabling, harboring of such horses or large animals and the allowance of such horses or large animals to run at-large. 
"Arcade" means any building or portion thereof designed, intended and equipped with five (5) or more electric or mechanical game machines or combination thereof except that a business with a valid certificate of occupancy and business license for another permitted use and with no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of said business devoted to arcade machines shall not be classified as an arcade. 
"Automobile parts and accessory store" means a retail place of business selling or furnishing automobile supplies and parts. No repair work of any kind may be conducted in conjunction with such use. 
"Automobile rental or leasing" means a place of business used for the storage and display of complete and operative automobiles for the purpose of renting or leasing said vehicles on a short or long term basis. 
"Automobile repair garage" means a business conducted within a fully enclosed building which services and repairs motor vehicles, but exclusive of all body and fender repair or painting, steam cleaning, mechanical and nonmechanical car washing, recapping of tires, engine or transmission overhauling or replacement and other major repairs. 
"Automobile service station" means a retail place of business selling or furnishing automotive supplies and minor automobile parts and minor services, conducted within a fully enclosed building, essential to the customary operation of automobiles, including the dispensing of gasoline and motor oil, the sale and servicing of tires, batteries and automotive accessories and minor replacement items; the lubrication of automobiles; the polishing and hand washing of automobiles, but exclusive of all body and fender repair or painting, steam-cleaning, car washing by mechanical equipment, recapping of tires, engine or transmission overhauling or replacement and other major motor repairs. 
"Basement" means a story partly or wholly under ground. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement where more than one-half (½) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground. 
"Billboard" means a sign, signboard, or outdoor advertising display, as defined in the California Outdoor Advertising Act, including electronic billboards, which is used for advertising purposes or display purposes, except advertising displays used exclusively: (i) to advertise the sale or lease of the property upon which such advertising displays are to be placed; (ii) to designate the name of the owner or the occupant of the premises upon which such advertising display is placed or to identify such premises; or (iii) to advertise good manufactured, produced, or for sale or services rendered on the property upon which such advertising is placed. 
"Boarding or rooming house" means a residence or dwelling wherein three (3) or more rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities under two (2) or more written or oral agreements or leases whether or not an owner, agent, or rental manager is in residence, in accordance with California Attorney General Opinion No. 01-402. Excludes licensed alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities. 
"Buffer use" means a use adjacent to a more intensive/predominant use either within the city or adjacent jurisdiction (at boundary). The purpose of the buffer use is to minimize, subject to proper safeguards, conflicts and frictions between transitioning uses. The objective to be achieved is stability — of land use, of desirability and of values — through minimizing adverse influences and impacts of two (2) dissimilar districts or uses. The City Council may conditionally permit buffer uses by making required findings as outlined in Section 17.24.050 of the Municipal Code. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
"Building frontage" means that face of the building that is parallel to or is at a near parallel angle to the street. 
"Building height" means a vertical distance measured from the average finished ground level of the site to the highest point of the structure. 
"Cafe" means an establishment where tables and/or chairs are provided for patrons, and the principal business activity is the sale of brewed coffees and teas and other nonalcoholic beverage for on-site consumption. A limited menu of snacks or finger foods either packaged or fresh, may also be available for consumption at the establishment. Entertainment may also be provided pursuant to the appropriate sections of the El Monte Municipal Code. Cafes include, but are not limited to, coffeehouses, beverage houses and similar uses. 
"Carport" means a permanent roofed structure with not more than two (2) enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage. 
"Child family day care" means a facility for children under the age of eighteen (18) that is limited to a home that regularly provides care, protection and supervision for fourteen (14) or fewer children, in the provider's home, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day while the parents or guardians are away, in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.70. 
"City Council" means the City Council of the city of El Monte. 
"City Planning Commission" means the City Planning Commission of the city of El Monte. 
"Collection Facility, Large." "Large collection facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public and is greater than four hundred (400) square feet in total area and occupies more than two (2) parking spaces. 
"Collection Facility, Small." "Small collection facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment, occupies no more than four hundred (400) square feet in total area and not more than two (2) parking spaces and is located on the same parcel as the host use. 
"Computer gaming and/or internet access center" means any facility within the city containing five (5) or more computers for the purpose of offering use of the computers to the public for: 
1.  Playing computer game software on those computers. Such play may be solo, or with or against other patrons, or with or against other players who are at other physical locations or on-line games by using the Internet or a proprietary network; or 
2.  Accessing the Internet and/or the world wide web on the computers. 
"Community care facility" means a facility licensed by the California Department of Social Services pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 1500, et seq. where non-medical care and supervision are provided for children or adults in need of personal services and who are often mentally or developmentally disabled. Community care facilities serving adults provide care and supervision for persons between eighteen (18)—fifty-nine (59) years of age who need a supportive living environment. Services provided may include assistance in dressing and bathing; supervision of client activities; monitoring of food intake; or oversight of the client's property as set forth in California Code of Regulations Section 80001(c). Does not include adult day care programs or social rehabilitation facilities. 
"Corral" means an area or yard that is enclosed to adequately confine animals. 
"Correctional facility" means a facility, whether owned and/or operated by an individual, a for-profit, or not-for-profit entity used for housing or provision of services for persons who either (i) are serving a sentence from a federal, state or county court and are under restraint, supervision, or security (ii) have served a sentence or have been released from a federal, state or county prison or jail but are living under government supervision by a government funded program. 
"Day nurseries" means any type of group daycare program, including nurseries for children of working mothers, nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools, parent cooperative schools and programs covering after school care for school children; provided such establishment is licensed by the state and in accordance with state and city requirements. 
"Department store" means any retail store with a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet operated by a single tenant. 
"Digital billboard" shall mean a billboard utilizing digital message technology, capable of changing the static message or copy on the sign electronically or wirelessly via computer. This includes, without limitation, billboards also known as electronic billboards or LED billboards. 
"Disabled person" means a person who has a medical, physical or mental condition that limits a major life activity, as those terms are defined in California Government Code Section 12926. 
"Disability" means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of individuals, and there is a record of such impairment or the individual is regarded as having such impairment, but the term does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance. The foregoing and related terms shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the same or similar terms set forth in Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 28, Section 35.104, as amended. 
"Driveway" means that area of the lot or parcel covered by pavement extending from the abutting public right-of-way to a required garage or parking space. 
"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for residential purposes and approved by the city and improved with full utility services including connection to a public sewer or local septic tank. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a dwelling which are designed for and occupied by, or available for occupancy by, a single household, but not including guest rooms in hotels, motels or boarding and lodging houses. A dwelling unit is further defined as having only one kitchen. 
"Educational institution" means an institution of learning giving general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed the State Board of Education. 
"Emergency shelter" means a facility that provides immediate and short term housing and supplemental services to homeless persons or families. Supplemental services may include food, counseling, and access to other social programs (per Health and Safety Code Section 50801). 
"Fair housing laws" means the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act. 
"Family" means one or more persons, related or unrelated, living together as a single integrated household in a dwelling unit. 
"Fast food" means an eating establishment that is designed, intended, arranged and operated with seating for twelve (12) or fewer patrons and seating/waiting area which does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet. 
"Financial institution" means a bank, savings and loan or other federal or state regulated financial institution which offers predominantly banking type services to its customers. 
"Flag lot" means a lot in the approximate configuration of a flag pole or sign post, with the pole or post functioning primarily as an access way to the main body of the lot from the street of access. 
"Floor area/gross or gross floor area" means (i) for projects subject to the R development standards: the floor area between the floor and roof above it, as measured from the outside edge of the exterior walls of the main structure and all enclosed accessory structures, excluding required parking and any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six (6) feet, and with any portion of a structure, including stairwells, over seventeen (17) feet in interior height counted twice; or (ii) for all other projects: the total enclosed area of all floors of a building measured to the inside face of the exterior walls, including halls, stairways, elevator shafts at each floor level, service and mechanical equiopment rooms, and basement or attic areas having a height of more than seven fee, but excluding areas used exclusively for vehicle parking or loading. 
"Floor area ratio" means the ratio of the total gross floor area of a development to the total site area of the property on which the development is located. 
"Freeway overlay zone" shall mean a zone that overlays the areas adjacent to the 1-10 Freeway and shown on the official freeway overlay zone map adopted by the El Monte City Council and, which allows for the placement of new and relocated billboards that conform to Chapter 17.88 (Freeway Overlay Zone) and the California Outdoor Advertising Act. 
"Garage" means a building or portion of a building which is enclosed on three (3) sides and which has an openable garage door, in which motor vehicles used by the occupants or tenants of the main building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept. 
"Ground level" means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within the five (5) feet of a sidewalk, said ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
"Guest house" means a detached accessory building located on the same lot as the main building with no utilities metered separately from those furnished to the main building, having no kitchen facilities, not used as a separate dwelling unit, and used only by the household occupying the main building, or by temporary guests of such main building occupant without charge or valuable consideration for such use. 
"Home occupation" means an activity for compensation carried on in a residential zone by the occupant of a dwelling as a secondary use in connection with which there is no display, no stock in trade, no commodity sold upon the premises, no person employed upon the premises, and no mechanical equipment used except such as is necessary or customary for housekeeping purposes. Furthermore, these activities are restricted to receipt of mail and use of telephone and facsimile only. Activities excluded are as follows: hairdressing, manicuring, barbering, laundering of clothes or other articles, massaging, physiotherapy, carpentry, automobile repairing, manufacturing and parts assembly. These activities are not home occupations if to any extent engaged in or carried on for profit or for anything of value, or if any of the products thereof are sold or exchanged for anything of value. 
"Hospital" means an institution staffed and equipped to provide the various types of intensified hospital care, including, but not limited to, in-patient care, short-term care in acute medical, surgical, obstetrical services; the treatment of drug addiction, alcoholism and other psychiatric and psychological care. 
"Host use" means an existing commercial use or community service facility in compliance with zoning, building and fire codes on which a recycling facility or large collection facilities is located. 
"Hotel" means a building portion thereof with access provided through a common entrance, lobby, or hallway to one or more guest rooms, designed to be rented out for a period of between one and thirty (30) days, and which may include other facilities such as restaurants and meeting rooms. "Hotel" shall include bed and breakfast establishments and inns. 
"Impound yard" means an area of land which is used for the short term storage of motor vehicles, not to exceed ninety (90) days. Vehicles stored in such lots shall be limited to those removed from public rights-of-way by public agencies, insurance companies, financial institutions, or other persons who may claim a property or security interest in the vehicle. 
"Integrated household" means one or more persons living together who function as a united group. 
"Karaoke" means an establishment or business where patrons sing along to musical and/or video tracks. The patrons may be in an open main room such as a bar or lobby or within smaller private rooms. Karaoke includes but is not limited to, Karaoke and K-TV. 
"Kennel" means any lot, premises, building or structure in or on which four (4) or more dogs or cats over the age of four (4) months are kept, maintained or permitted. 
"Lease space" means the floor area of a building or development which is occupied by a specific tenant. 
"Lot" means a parcel of real property shown with a separate and distinct number on a plot or map recorded or filed with the Recorder of the county, or as otherwise deemed under the Subdivision Map Act. 
Lot, Area. "Lot area" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot, Key. "Key lot" means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot whether or not separated by an alley. 
Lot, Reversed Corner. "Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
Lot, Through. "Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Lot Line, Front. "Front lot line" means the property line dividing a lot from a street, where the property is bounded by more than one street, the front shall be the narrowest portion of the lot. 
Lot Line, Rear. "Rear lot line" means the property line opposite the front lot line. 
Lot Line, Side. "Side lot line" means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
"Manufactured home" means a manufactured home as defined by Section 18007 of the California Health and Safety Code, generally defined as a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation system when connected to the required utilities. 
"Massage establishment" means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definition of "massage" in Chapter 5.56 of Title 5 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Medical marijuana" is defined as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
"Medical marijuana cooperative or collective" is where two (2) or more persons associate to collectively or cooperatively cultivate, use, transport, possess, administer, deliver, or give away medical marijuana. 
"Medical marijuana cultivation" is defined as the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof. 
"Medical marijuana dispensary" means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where medical marijuana is made available to or distributed by or distributed to one or more of the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card. The terms "primary caregiver," "qualified patient" and "person with an identification card" as used within this definition shall be identified in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., inclusive of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise regulated by the El Monte Municipal Code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a healthcare facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as such use complies strictly with applicable law, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
"Mini-mall" means the subdivision of the floor area of a single business occupancy into multiple business occupancies whereby each occupant or tenant requires a separate certificate of occupancy and business license excluding those subdivisions whereby the primary occupant or tenant occupies a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the gross floor area. 
"Mixed use development" means an area of development containing two (2) or more of the following uses: office, commercial, residential, restaurant, rapid transit facility, hotel or entertainment. 
"Mobilehome" means a mobilehome as defined by Section 18008 of the California Health and Safety Code, generally defined as a structure constructed prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation system when connected to the required utilities. It also includes a recreation vehicle, as defined in Section 799.24 of the Civil Code and Section 18010 of the California Health and Safety Code. Mobilehome does not include a commercial coach as defined in Section 18001.8 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Mobilehome park" means any lot designated, used, or intended to be used for the parking of two (2) or more mobilehomes. Mobilehome park includes trailer park. 
"Motel" means a building or group of buildings including but not limited to buildings designated as motor hotels, hostels, auto courts, tourist courts, auto cabins, and motor courts containing individual sleeping units intended to be used solely to provide sleeping accommodations for short-term occupancy by transient travelers as defined in Section 3.16.010 of this Code. The portions of such buildings providing sleeping accommodations shall not be provided with cooking facilities and no cooking facilities shall be permitted therein, except in those rooms designated for the sole use by the manager of such facility, and except those portions of the building designed and used by the owner or lessee of the premises to prepare at a central location for all persons desiring the same. 
"Multiple tenant development" means any nonresidential development site which is improved with multiple uses, retail sales, retail services, restaurants or a combination thereof. A commercial project which is designed and devoted to office use exclusively or which is designed and devoted to manufacturing and industrial use exclusively is exempt from this definition. 
"Nonconforming." See definitions in Section 17.14.020 of this title. 
"Occupancy, Change of." "Change of occupancy" is a discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution thereof of a different kind of use. 
"Occupied" means arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented or leased, or intended to be occupied. 
"Off-sale liquor establishment" means a business engaged in the retail side of alcoholic beverages, with or without other products, all alcoholic beverage items for consumption off the premises. 
"On-sale liquor establishment" means a business engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises whether or not accompanied by the sale, dispensing or consumption of food, where less than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the building is designed, intended, equipped and used exclusively for the storage and preparation of food and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
"Open space" means land which is free of buildings, surface parking for vehicles or other improvements except for walkways less than four (4) feet wide or recreation facilities. 
"Outdoor advertising structure" means a structure of any kind or character, including a billboard or digital billboard, erected or maintained by a state-licensed outdoor advertising company for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, picture, statuary, symbol, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed and, which: 
1.  Solicits public support or directs public attention to the sale, lease, hiring, or use of any objects, products, or services not produced, sold or otherwise available on the premises where such advertising sign is erected and maintained; or 
2.  Contains a visual message to the general public concerning candidates for public office, matters relating to elections, public service announcements or is placed by a public service agency for the purpose of fulfilling its public service mission. 
"Personal care facility" means a business use of property in which there may be as part of the services provided or performed direct physical contact between the patron and the proprietor and/or any employee. Personal care facilities include but are not limited to barbers, beauticians, cosmetologists, nail salons, skin care operators, tanning salons and personal fitness and training facilities. Personal care facilities shall not, however, include the offices or businesses of California state-licensed chiropractors, doctors, dentists and other state-licensed medical professionals. Personal care facilities do not include massage establishments as the term is defined under Section 17.04.020. 
"Planning Services Manager" shall mean and refer to the City Planner. 
Note— Such definition shall apply to any and all references to the "Planning Services Manager" throughout this Code. 
"Pool hall" means any building or portion thereof designed, intended and equipped with five (5) or more pool tables, billiard tables or snooker tables or combination thereof except that a business with a valid certificate of occupancy and business license for another permitted use and with no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the business devoted to pool tables, billiard tables or snooker tables shall not be classified as a pool hall. 
"Reasonable accommodation" means a change in rules, policies, practices or services that such a disabled person will have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a residential use. 
"Recyclable material" means reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, cardboard and plastic which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(B)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Recyclable processing facility" means a separate property not appurtenant to a host use, not meeting the criteria of a reverse or bulk vending machine or mobile recycling unit. A processing facility may include power driven and nonpower driven processing, compacting, baking, shredding or outdoor storage activity and recycling. 
"Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. Recycling facilities include large and small collection facilities, single-feed reverse and bulk reverse vending machines and mobile recycling units. 
Recycling Unit, Mobile. "Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. 
"Religious institution" means a building or structure and/or use, or group of buildings of structures, including, but not limited to, temples, rectories, monasteries, and convents, which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith. Religious institutions shall include, but are not limited to, chapels, churches, mosques, synagogues and temples. 
"Residential care facility for the elderly" means a housing arrangement licensed by the California Department of Social Services chosen voluntarily by persons sixty (60) years of age or over, or their authorized representative, where varying levels and intensities of care and supervision, protective supervision, personal care or health-related services are provided, based upon residents' varying needs as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 1569 et seq. A residential care facility for the elderly may house residents less than sixty (60) years of age with compatible needs pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.316 and provide health-related services pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.70. 
"Restaurant" means an establishment engaged in the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises, and alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and where at least twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the building is designed, equipped and used exclusively for the storage and preparation of food and nonalcoholic beverages, and where at least fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the building is designed, equipped and used exclusively for seating of patrons for the purpose of serving meals. Meals means the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day. Patrons means persons who come to a bona fide public eating place for the purpose of actually ordering and obtaining a meal therein. A maximum of thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area may be devoted to incidental uses including on-premise sale of alcoholic beverage, live entertainment, pool tables, restrooms and offices. The area designated for incidental use shall be physically separated from all dining and kitchen facilities. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental to the sale of food. 
"Reverse vending machine" means an automated mechanical device occupying twenty-four (24) square feet or less of floor space which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value of not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. 
Reverse Vending Machine, Bulk. "Bulk reverse vending machine" means a reverse vending machine that occupies no more than fifty (50) square feet of floor space, is designed to accept more than one container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
"Satellite dish antenna" means any parabolic (bowl-shaped) antenna which: (i) has a diameter greater than two (2) feet; (ii) is designed to receive satellite transmissions; (iii) is incapable of transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to radio frequency signals; and (iv) is external to or attached to the exterior of any building. 
School. "Elementary school or high school" means an institution of learning which offers introduction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the state. High schools include junior high school and senior high school. 
School, Trade. "Trade school" means a building, tenant space in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet and seating more than ten (10) individuals used for the training or teaching of any personal improvement, professional or trade instructional services, including but not limited to photography, art, crafts, music, dance, driving, business and trade, reducing salons, health or fitness spas. 
"Self-service laundry" means any establishment for laundering where there is no pickup or delivery service and no steam or hand laundry of any type. 
"Single-room occupancy units (SRO)" means housing consisting of single-room dwelling units typically with no more than four hundred (400) square feet of habitable space that is the primary residence of its occupant or occupants. The unit must contain either food preparation or sanitary facilities (and may contain both). An accessory structure (i.e. garage) does not qualify as an SRO. Also known as "efficiency units." 
"Social rehabilitation facility" means any residential facility licensed by the California Department of Social Services that provides social rehabilitation services for no more than eighteen (18) months in a group setting to adults recovering from mental illness who temporarily need assistance, guidance, or counseling. The foregoing and related terms shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the same or similar terms set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1502(7). 
"Spiritual specialty shop" means any establishment whose primary business is the sale of, or providing instruction on the use of natural herbs, dry goods, health products, charms, non-pharmaceutical medicinal type products, and religious or spiritual items. Spiritual specialty shop includes, but is not limited to, botanicas, herbal medicine stores with sales of spiritual items, and similar uses. 
"Stable" means a building, portion of a building, or corrals designed or used to shelter and feed horses, ponies, or other large animals which are of the property of which the stable is situated. Private stables are stables that are not rented, used, or boarded on a commercial basis for compensation. 
"Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
"Structurally altered" means to have had an alteration of any structural element, floor, frame, wall, or roof or any other stress bearing portion of a building and excludes alterations to or additions of interior nonbearing partitions and interior remodeling which does not affect the structural system. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground, but not including fences, or walls used as fences, less than six (6) feet in height. 
"Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community (per Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14(b)). 
"Taxi service" means a place of business that has vehicles which provide private transportation to customers for compensation. Taxi service may have vehicle storage for operable taxis when not in use and may have associated minor repair, conducted within a fully enclosed building, and washing of taxis. 
"Theater" means that portion of a building or other enclosure permanently enclosed on two (2) or more sides and equipped with a device for the projecting of moving pictures upon a screen for viewing by patrons admitted thereto for anything of value. Every such portion of a building or other enclosure thus equipped shall constitute a separate moving picture theater. 
"Target population" means adults with low-income having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may, among other populations, include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people (per Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14(b)(3)). 
"Top plate height" means the horizontal framing member that caps an exterior wall and supports rafters or roof framing. 
"Transitional housing" and "transitional housing development" means temporary rental housing intended for occupancy by target populations transitioning to permanent housing that is operated under program requirements calling for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months (per Health and Safety Code 50675.2(h)). 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained. 
"Yard" means an open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied or unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Yard, Front. "Front yard" means an area extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel to the main building closest to the front of the lot. 
Yard, Rear. "Rear yard" means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of a main building towards the nearest point of the rear lot line. 
Yard, Side. "Side yard" means an area between the main building and the side lot line extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard and the width of which side yard shall be measured horizontally from, and at right angles to, the nearest point of a side lot line towards the nearest part of a main building. 
Yard, Street Side. "Street side yard" means an area between the main building and any adjacent public street right-of-way. 
"Zoning clearance" means a ministerial certificate issued by the Planning Division prior to issuance of any building permit to ensure that the proposed improvement complies with all of the provisions of the zone in which it is located, as well as all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
"Zoning map" means the officially adopted map of the city of El Monte showing zoning designations for all parcels of land. 
(Ord. 2687 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2672 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2594 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2522 § 3, 2000; zoning ordinance §§ 17.04.020—17.04.465) 
(Ord. No. 2739, § 5, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2779, §§ 7, 8, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. 2813, § 3, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2812, § 6, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. D), (Exh. E), (Exh. G), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2838, § 2, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2878, § 5, 4-15-2016; Ord. No. 2883, § 14, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2910, § 3, 4-18-2017; Ord. No. 2914, §§ 2, 3, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2920, § 3, 8-1-2017; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 2, 3, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 17.06 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.06.010 - General. 
The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the following interpretation, application and exceptions specified in the following sections and subsections: 
A.  No building or structure shall be erected, and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than a use listed in this title as permitted in the respective zone in which such land, building or premises is located. No business, occupation or activity which is or may lawfully be conducted shall be altered, expanded or enlarged in any manner so as to make it nonconforming to any provision of law, ordinance or resolution applicable to the premises or to the property or the business or activity conducted thereon. 
B.  No building or structure shall be erected nor any existing building or structure be moved, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit established by this title for the zone in which such building or structure is located. 
C.  No building or structure shall be erected nor shall any existing building or structure be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the building site requirements and the area and yard regulations established by this title for the zone in which such building is located. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.010)  
17.06.020 - Consistency with other plans. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of any land use entitlement the Planning Division must determine that the proposed building, structure or use is consistent with any applicable redevelopment plan, specific plan, and the city of El Monte general plan. 
B.  Where any provision of this title imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance the provisions of this title shall govern. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.015)  
17.06.030 - Residential density. 
For the purpose of constructing residential units, the density shall be based upon the lot area after dedication, if any. The number of units permitted shall always be rounded down to the nearest whole number (e.g. 3.8 units = 3.0 units). 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.020)  
17.06.040 - Less restrictive uses prohibited. 
The express enumeration and authorization in this title of a particular class of building, structure, premises or use in a designated zone shall be deemed a prohibition of such building, structure, premises or use in all zones of more restrictive classification, except as otherwise specified. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.025)  
17.06.050 - Additional permitted uses. 
Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this title as uses permitted in each of the zones may be permitted therein, provided such uses are similar to those mentioned, and are in the opinion of the Community Development Director, not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the permitted uses specifically mentioned in the respective zones. The decision of the Community Development Director may be appealed to the City Planning Commission. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.030)  
17.06.060 - Height of buildings. 
A.  No penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment, towers, steeples, or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this title. Radio and television masts, flagpoles, chimneys and smokestacks may extend not more than twenty (20) feet above the height limit provided in this title, provided that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. 
B.  With the exception of roof structures to the extent and height specifically authorized by any section of this title, no portion of any structure located less than one hundred (100) feet from property classified in zone R-2 or any more restrictive zone shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.035)  
17.06.070 - Accessory building regulations. 
The regulations specified below shall apply to the location of accessory buildings unless otherwise provided in this title: 
A.  Accessory buildings located in any residential zone hall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height or six hundred and fifty (650) square feet total. Furthermore, plumbing is prohibited in accessory buildings with the exception of washer and dryer hookups and as may be permitted in subsection D. of this section. 
B.  Accessory buildings located in any residential zone shall not be located at a distance less than fifty (50) percent of the depth of the lot from the front property line, or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less. 
C.  On a corner lot accessory buildings located in any residential zone shall not be located at a distance less than ten (10) feet from the street side property line. 
D.  Bathrooms are permitted as part of an accessory structure located in R1-B and R1-C zones, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The lot is a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet; 
2.  The lot meets all required enclosed and open parking requirements; 
3.  The bathroom does not contain a bathtub. Only a toilet, shower, and sink are permitted; 
4.  The bathroom is a maximum of forty (40) square feet; 
5.  The property is developed with only one single-family dwelling. The property may not be part of a Planned Residential Development, contain an accessory dwelling unit, or have a legal nonconforming guest house with a kitchen or bathroom; 
6.  The structure is consistent with the design of the dwelling and complies with all other requirements of Section 17.06.070; and 
7.  A covenant is signed and recorded against the property by the property owner stating that the structure will not be converted to a sleeping/living quarter. 
E.  See Chapter 17.37 (Rurban Homestead Overlay District) of this title for additional standards and requirements for accessory buildings within the Rurban Homestead Overlay District (RHOD). 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.040; Ord. No. 2883, § 12, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 4—6, 5-15-2018)  
17.06.080 - Through lots. 
On through lots the minimum yard setback from the public right-of-way shall be the average of the yards on adjoining lots, if adjoining lots are undeveloped, the minimum yard setback shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the property is located. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.045)  
17.06.085 - Floor area ratio. 
The maximum gross floor area for a single-family dwelling or for any buildings used for dwelling purposes when located on any lot or parcel, excluding garage and similar accessory structures, shall not exceed the floor area ratio specified in the following subsection: 
A.  Maximum allowable floor area ratio in specified zone: 
1.  R1-A 	= 	0.35 
2.  R1-B, R-1C and RHOD 	= 	0.35 for properties with a lot size of up to 10,000 square feet; 
0.30 or 3,500 square feet, whichever is greater, for properties with a lot size of 10,001 to 15,000 square feet; 
0.25 for 4,500 square feet, whichever is greater, for properties with a lot size of 15,001 to 20,000 square feet; and 
0.20 or 5,000 square feet, whichever is greater, for properties with a lot size of 20,001 square feet or greater. 
3.  Reserved 
4.  R-2 	= 	0.35 for lots less than 10,000 square feet; and 0.40 for lots greater than 10,000 square feet 
5.  R-3 	= 	0.35 for lots less than 9,500 square feet; and 0.40 for lots greater than 9,500 square feet 
6.  R-4 	= 	0.35 for lots less than 9,500 square feet; and 0.40 for lots greater than 9,500 square feet 
 
(Ord. 2662 § 5(A)(part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 6, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2883, § 13, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, § 7, 5-15-2018) 
_____ 
17.06.090 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum coverage of all buildings and structures on a lot for all residential zones shall not exceed the lot coverage specified in the following subsection: 
A.  Maximum allowable lot coverage in specified zone: 
1. R1-A 	= 	40 percent 
2. R1-B 	= 	40 percent 
3. R1-C and ROHD 	= 	40 percent 
4. R-2 	= 	45 percent 
5. R-3 	= 	45 percent 
6. R-4 	= 	45 percent 
 
(Ord. 2662 § 5(A)(part), 2006; Ord. No. 2928, § 8, 5-15-2018)  
17.06.095 - Yard encroachments. 
When yards are required in this title, they shall be not less in depth or width than the minimum dimension specified for any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as permitted by the following subsections: 
A.  Cornices, chimney, canopies, bay windows, eaves, or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into a required front, side or rear yard not to exceed two (2) feet. 
B.  Mechanical equipment located in the interior side or rear yard may be no closer than three (3) feet to the property line. Mechanical equipment in the front or street side yard shall comply with the setbacks for structures in the respective zone. 
(Ord. 2662 § 5(A)(part), 2006: zoning ordinance § 17.06.050)  
17.06.100 - Outdoor storage in commercial zones. 
In all commercial zones, the outdoor storage of material and equipment shall be permitted only when such storage is incidental to the proper use of an office, retail store, or other commercial building located on the front portion of the same lot, and upon condition that the following requirements be complied with at all times. 
A.  Storage shall not occupy any of the required parking or loading spaces. 
B.  Such storage shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot and shall occupy no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the entire lot area. 
C.  The storage area shall be completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall (with necessary gates constructed with approved screening material) not less than six (6) feet in height. 
D.  No material or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.055)  
17.06.110 - Outside storage in industrial zones. 
In all industrial zones, the outside storage of products, materials, and equipment shall be permitted only when such storage is incidental to a permitted or conditionally permitted use for the zone in which it is located, except where storage is the permitted use as in a contractor's storage yard. All outside storage, including storage yards shall comply with the following requirements at all times. 
A.  Storage shall not occupy any of the required parking or loading spaces. 
B.  The storage area shall be completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall (with necessary gates constructed with approved screening materials) not less than six (6) feet in height. 
C.  No material or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.060)  
17.06.120 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.  For all residential uses no fence, wall or hedge located in the rear or interior side yards shall exceed a height of six (6) feet. Furthermore, no solid fence, solid wall or hedge located in the required front yard of such parcel shall exceed a height of four (4) feet. Except that a maximum five-foot fence may be constructed provided that it is at least fifty (50) percent decorative wrought iron with decorative block pilasters. 
B.  For all residential uses, fences located within the ten (10) feet of a street side yard shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet. Except that a maximum five-foot fence may be constructed provided that it is at least fifty (50) percent decorative wrought iron with decorative block pilasters. 
C.  For all residential uses no barbed, pointed, spiked, razor, piercing or other similar materials may be attached to any wall or fence. 
D.  Barbed, pointed, spiked, razor, piercing or other similar type wire may be attached to walls and fences of commercial zoned and used property or industrial zoned and used property except along, parallel to, and/or within twenty-five (25) feet of any public right-of-way. Where such zones or uses abut any residentially zoned property the above referenced materials are prohibited. The overall height of any wall or fence and wire shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
E.  In all commercial, office and industrial zones, fences and/or walls located along the front or street side property line shall be located behind the required landscaping. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.065)  
17.06.130 - Security bars and gates. 
A.  Security bars, gates, and similar security devices for all commercial and industrial buildings and/or uses must be located in the interior of buildings whenever possible. If gates or grills are located on the exterior of buildings, they shall be retractable during business hours and they shall be decorative in style. 
B.  Commercial and industrial buildings and/or uses are prohibited from having security window grills installed, located and/or maintained on the exterior of a building. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.070)  
17.06.140 - Commercial and industrial separation. 
A.  When a commercial or industrial use abuts a property classified or used for residential purposes it shall be separated therefrom by a solid masonry wall six (6) feet in height, using an average grade between adjacent lots. Separation walls located along the front property line of the abutting R-classified property shall be four (4) feet in height. 
B.  All fences located in the required front and street side yards for commercial and industrial uses shall be solid masonry or wrought iron. All fencing shall be set back from any street property line a minimum of seven (7) feet clear and the seven (7) foot strip shall be landscaped and maintained and an underground irrigation system shall be installed. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.075)  
17.06.150 - Satellite dish antenna. 
Every satellite dish antenna as defined under Section 17.04.020 of Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) of this title shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  For all residential uses satellite dish antennas with a diameter greater than two (2) feet shall not be attached to the roof or wall of any building; no pole mounted antennas are permitted; no ground mounted dish antennas shall be located in the area between the main building and the front property line or between the building and the side property line on the street side of a corner lot; no ground level satellite dish antenna shall exceed sixteen (16) feet in height; guy wires shall not be anchored within any front yard of any lot or within any side yard on the street side of a corner lot; dish antennas shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way with dense landscaping or other material approved by the Planning Services Manager. 
B.  For all nonresidential uses satellite dish antennas with bases attached on or to a building shall be located within the middle one-third of the roof of the building and shall be completely screened from view from any public right-of-way; dish antennas with bases of attachment on a building shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height above the grade of the roof; no ground-mounted dish antenna shall be located in the area between the main building and the front property line or between the main building and the side property line on the street side of a corner lot; all ground-mounted satellite dish antennas and supporting bases shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way with dense landscaping or other material approved by the Planning Services Manager; no pole-mounted dish antennas are permitted which exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.080) 
(Ord. No. 2739, § 2, 3-17-2009)  
17.06.155 - Physical cart containment measures. 
A.  General Requirement. Any business establishment that uses carts in its operations, or that provides, or otherwise makes available carts for use by its customers, shall be required to employ and/or install physical containment devices and/or equipment designed to prevent the unauthorized removal of such carts from premises where they are located. 
B.  Containment Options. In the furtherance of subsection A of this section, each business establishment shall be required to employ and/or install one or more of the following physical containment measures: 
1.  Equipping all carts with a wheel locking or stopping mechanism used in conjunction with an electronic or magnetic barrier running along or within the perimeter of the premises. Such wheel locking or stopping mechanism must activate when the shopping cart crosses the electronic or magnetic barrier; 
2.  Equipping all carts with devices and/or equipment which physically prevents the carts from being removed from the interior of any building or structure in which they are used; 
3.  Installing physical barriers within all buildings or structures which physically prevent carts from being removed from the interior of any building or structure in which they are used; 
4.  Installing a physical barrier system designed to reliably prevent the removal of carts from the territorial boundaries of the premises, provided, however, that such barrier system be designed to be architecturally and aesthetically consistent and compatible with other on premise improvements. 
Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the El Monte Planning Commission, or the El Monte City Council on appeal, from requiring one or more of the containment measures enumerated above, or any other physical containment measures which are not so enumerated, as mitigating conditions for the approval of any discretionary land use authorization (e.g., conditional use permits, modifications, variances, design review approvals, subdivision maps, parcel maps and the like). 
C.  Approval by Planning Services Manager. Commencing upon the effective date of this section, below, every new or existing business establishment must either: (i) submit documentation which to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Services Manager proves that the business establishment has installed any one or more of the measures set forth under subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section and that such system is operational and in good working condition; or (ii) submit to the Planning Services Manager a proposal for the installation and construction of a barrier system as contemplated under subsection (B)(4) of this section. The Planning Services Manager shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the date of submission to review any proposal for a barrier system contemplated under subsection (B)(4) of this section and may thereafter approve the proposal as proposed; deny the proposal as proposed; or approve the proposal subject to modifications and amendments aimed at enhancing its cart containment reliability and/or its architectural and aesthetic consistency with other on-premises improvements to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Services Manager. No new business establishment shall be issued a certificate of occupancy until the requirements of this section are satisfied. No existing business shall be issued a business permit as contemplated under Chapter 5.25 (Use of Shopping and Laundry Carts) of this Code until the requirements of this section are satisfied. 
D.  Implementation of Supplemental Measures. In addition to the physical containment option set forth under subsection (B)(4) of this section, the Permit Committee may require the employment and/or installation of any one of the options set forth under subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section, if the Permit Committee finds that the option set forth under subsection (B)(4) does not reliably prevent the removal of carts from the premises. If the number of carts removed from the premises, or otherwise found abandoned, exceeds eight (8) carts per month during any ten (10) months of the calendar year following the installation of the containment measure contemplated under subsection (B)(4) of this section, such containment measure shall not be considered reliable for purposes of this subsection. The Permit Committee may direct the employment and/or installation of the additional measures in the course of any renewal of a business permit or in the course of any revocation proceedings as both processes are set forth under Chapter 5.25 of this Code. 
E.  Compliance Period. All business establishments subject to subsection B of this section which are already in operation as of the effective date of this section, shall be required to comply with its provisions within twelve (12) months from the effective date of this section. Any premises or other real property occupied, or otherwise used by, a noncompliant business establishment shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued for a period of twelve (12) months following the effective date of this section. After such twelve (12) month period all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated except to the limited extent an extension of time has been granted in accordance with subsection F of this section, below. 
F.  Extension of Compliance Period. A business establishment and the owner of the premises upon which the business establishment is located (if different from the owner of the business establishment) may apply for an extension of time within which to comply with the mandate of subsection B of this section as follows: 
1.  Applicant. The application must be submitted by (i) the owner of the business establishment; or (ii) jointly by the owner of the business establishment and the owner of the premises upon which the business establishment is located, if different from the owner of the business establishment. 
2.  Time and Manner of Application. The application must be filed with the Planning Services Manager care of the City Clerk at least sixty (60) days but no more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the twelve (12) month noncompliance period authorized under subsection E of this section. Upon the filing of a complete application, the Planning Services Manager shall designate a hearing officer to conduct a hearing on the extension request, make findings and issue a ruling thereupon. 
3.  Content of Application. The application shall (i) state the amount of additional time needed, provided such request does not exceed a period of four (4) additional months; (ii) state the specific basis for requesting an extension; and (iii) identify all substantive and tangible steps taken by the applicant(s) as of the date of the application to bring business establishment closer to compliance. The City Council may establish and from time to time amend fees for the processing of such applications. An application which fails to address any of the foregoing matters, shall be returned to the applicant, as incomplete and non-responsive, together with the application fee less any administrative costs of processing the application. 
4.  Hearing Procedure. The hearing to consider the extension of the twelve (12) month, noncompliance period shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence shall not be applicable. The applicant(s) may be represented by legal counsel or any other duly designated representative(s). The hearing shall be conducted within thirty (30) days from the date a hearing officer is designated by the Planning Services Manager. 
5.  Approval of Extension. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time not to exceed four (4) additional months. The hearing officer may grant the extension request as proposed; deny the extension request as proposed; or grant a modified extension, provided any such modified extension does not exceed four (4) additional months. In rendering its decision the hearing officer may consider (i) the written request of the applicant(s); (ii) the written reports or other communications of city staff and other commissions or committees of the city which are offered to the hearing officer for consideration, provided copies of such material are also made available to the applicant at or before the hearing; (iii) any written points and authorities submitted by the applicant(s) or the city, provided copies of such written points and authorities are filed with the hearing officer and served upon the opposing party no less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing; and (iv) the oral argument and testimony of the applicant and its representatives or consultants, the Planning Services Manager, and such other representatives or consultants as may be designated by the Planning Services Manager to speak on behalf of the city. 
6.  Findings. The hearing officer may grant an extension (including a modified extension) if all of the following is found by a preponderance of the evidence: (i) the applicant(s) would suffer undue hardship absent the grant of an extension; (ii) the applicant(s) has made a substantial and tangible effort to bring the business establishment and the premises closer to full compliance with the requirements of this section as of the date of the application; (iii) the applicant is not in violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 5.25 of this Code or any cart containment plan approved thereunder; and (iv) authorizing an extension of time for a period not exceeding four (4) additional months would not unduly threaten the public health, safety or welfare in light of applicants compliance efforts to date. 
7.  Decision and Order. The decision of the hearing officer and supporting finding shall be in the form of a written order and shall be served upon the applicant(s) personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten (10) days after the decision is rendered. 
G.  Routine Cart Collection. All carts located on the premises of the business establishment (other than an establishment open for business twenty-four (24) hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the business establishment and shall be collectively confined in a secure manner at a designated cart confinement area until the commencement of the next business day. All carts located on the premises of any business establishment open for business twenty-four (24) hours per day, other than carts then currently in use by a customer, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to the designated cart confinement area on the premises at least twice per calendar day between the hours of one p.m. and five p.m. and the hours of eight p.m. and one a.m. for each day the business establishment is open for business. The provisions of this element shall not apply to carts which are physically confined within an enclosed building. 
H.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below: 
Business Establishment. The term "business establishment" refers to any person, as defined herein, engaged in for-profit or non-profit enterprise, undertaking or activity for which a city of El Monte business license and/or business permit is required, including, but not limited to, any for-profit commercial retail business or enterprise. 
Cart. The term "cart" means either a shopping cart or a laundry cart as defined herein. 
City Council. The term "City Council" means the City Council of the city of El Monte. 
Laundry Cart. The term "laundry cart" means any basket or other like container of any size, dimension or material construction which is mounted on wheels and used in a cash operated laundry or dry cleaning business establishment by the customer, agents, employees typically, but not necessarily exclusively, for the purpose of transporting clothing, fabrics and/or the supplies necessary to process them. 
Parking Area. The term "parking area" means any area within the perimeter of a premises as defined herein that is designated or otherwise used for the parking, stopping, loading or unloading of vehicles, including but not limited to any and all motor vehicles used by customers of the business establishment located on the premises. 
Permit Committee. The term "Permit Committee" means the El Monte Permit Committee organized under Chapter 5.12 (Business Permits Generally) of this Code. 
Person. The term "person" means and includes, but is not limited to, any natural person, individual, firm, association, organization, sole proprietorship, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, business trust, living trust, joint venture or any other legal entity. The term "person" as applied under this chapter is to be given the broadest possible meaning and is inclusive of any business establishment or cart owner. 
Planning Services Manager. The term "Planning Services Manager" means the Planning Services Manager of the El Monte Planning Division or designee. 
Premises. The term "premises" means the lot area or portion thereof owned, leased, managed, maintained, occupied or otherwise used by a business establishment, including all buildings, structures parking areas, public areas, common areas owned, leased, managed, maintained, occupied or otherwise used by the business establishment or the customers, agents or employees of a business establishment in connection with, or in the furtherance of, its operations. 
Public Area. The term "public area" means any real property within the territorial boundaries of the city of El Monte that is open to, or otherwise accessible by, members of the general public, including, but not limited to, any public right-of-way, any public street and those areas of privately owned real property that are customarily open to, or otherwise accessible by, members of the general public such as the parking areas or common areas within a premises as defined herein. 
Shopping Cart. The term "shopping cart" means any basket or other like container of any size, dimension or material construction which is mounted on wheels or a similar device and is typically (but not necessarily exclusively) used by the customers, agents or employees of a retail business establishment for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. 
(Ord. 2692 § 1, 2007)  
17.06.160 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2924, § 2, adopted November 8, 2017, repealed § 17.06.160. Former § 17.06.160 pertain to medical marijuana dispensaries, cooperatives, collectives and cultivation prohibited in all zones and derived from Ord. 2687 adopted in 2007; and Ord. No. 2838, adopted May 27, 2014.  
17.06.165 - Accessory dwelling units (ADUs). 
A.  Purpose. The accessory dwelling units regulations set forth in this section 17.06.165 are established to comply with the state standards and requirements set forth in Section 65852.2 of the California Government Code. All provisions set forth in this section 65852.2 shall be subject to the applicable preemptive limitations set forth in such Government Code Section 65852.2. 
B.  Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). As set forth in El Monte Municipal Code Section 17.04.020, an "accessory dwelling unit," or ADU, means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. It shall include the following: (i) an efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1; and (ii) a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007. A trailer, motor vehicle, or other recreational vehicle may not be used as an ADU or maintained as a habitable unit or living area on a residential lot. 
C.  Permitted Locations/Zones. ADUs shall be permitted only in R-1 (One-Family Dwelling) zones, inclusive of R-1A, R-1B, and R-1C zones. 
D.  One ADU per Lot/Existing Single-Family Dwelling Required. 
1.  A maximum of one ADU shall be permitted for an R-1 zoned lot. Such lot shall contain an existing single-family detached dwelling at the time an application for one ADU is submitted unless such ADU application may be made in conjunction with the development of a single-family dwelling. 
2.  No ADU shall be permitted on a lot where a guesthouse, dwelling, or other structure, other than an existing single-family dwelling, is used for habitation. 
3.  ADUs shall be prohibited on the following lot types: 
a.  Lots within a planned residential development (PRD) or condominium development; 
b.  Lots developed with more than one existing dwelling unit; or 
c.  Lots developed or subdivide having primary vehicular access form a common private drive, private access easement, or private street, including the lot at the front of such development that may or may not have primary access to and from a public street. 
E.  Applications. The City shall consider ADU applications ministerially without discretionary review or a hearing within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after receiving a completed ADU application. 
F.  Impact Fees. The property owner shall pay all applicable impact fees related to an ADU, including but not limited to, parks, traffic, water and sewer impact fees. 
G.  Zoning Clearance. Proposed ADUs shall be subject to zoning clearance review under El Monte Municipal Code Chapter 17.18. 
H.  Design. The architectural design and color of an ADU shall be similar and compatible to the architectural design and color of the existing single-family dwelling on the same lot. 
I.  Building Codes. City Building Code requirements shall apply to ADUs. 
J.  Configuration. 
1.  An ADU may be either attached to the existing dwelling or located within the living area of the existing dwelling or detached from the existing dwelling unit so long that it is located on the same lot as the existing dwelling. "Living area" as used within the established ADU regulations means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit including basements and attics meeting habitable space requirements of EMMC Title 15 (Building Code) but does not include a garage or accessory structure. 
2.  An attached ADU may have a separate entrance, which may be facing the side or the rear yards; provided, however, in no event shall any entry for the ADU be visible from the primary street on which the property fronts. 
3.  Notwithstanding Section 17.06.165(J)(1), above, pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.2(e), the city shall ministerially approve an application for a building permit to create, within a single-family residential zone, one ADU per single-family lot if the ADU is contained within the existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure, has independent exterior access form the existing residence, and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety. 
K.  Floor area/Unit size. 
1.  The floor area of an attached ADU shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the existing living area of the existing dwelling or eight hundred (800) square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  The total floor area for a detached ADU shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet. 
3.  An ADU shall have no more than two (2) bedrooms. 
4.  Notwithstanding Section 17.06.165(K)(1) and (K)(2), above, and as required under state law, an efficiency unit, meeting the criteria defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1 shall be permitted so long as constructed in compliance with local standards and other applicable City requirements. For purposes of this section 17.06.165(K)(3), an efficiency unit is a unit for occupancy by no more than two (2) persons which has a minimum floor area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and which may also have partial kitchen or bathroom facilities. (Health & Saf. Code, 17958.1.) 
L.  Lot Coverage/Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The square footage of an ADU shall be included in the maximum lot coverage and FAR limits from the underlying zoning shall apply. 
M.  Building Height. The overall height of an ADU constructed above a garage shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet as measured from natural grade to the top of roof peak. No detached ADU shall exceed the height of fifteen (15) feet or the existing single-family dwelling on the same lot, whichever is less. 
N.  Minimum Structure Separation for a Detached ADU. A minimum ten (10) foot separation must be maintained between the ADU and the existing single-family dwelling or accessory structure on the same lot. 
O.  Setbacks. 
1.  ADUs attached to an existing structure shall comply with the setback requirements applicable to the existing single-family dwelling on the same lot. Detached ADUs must have rear and side setbacks consistent with the setback requirements applicable to the zone in which the ADU is located. No detached ADU shall be located within a distance less than fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the lot from the front property line, or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less. In no cases may a detached ADU be located forward of the primary unit. The foregoing notwithstanding, the following setbacks shall apply to ADUs built above a garage or resulting from a converted garage: 
a.  For an ADU constructed above a garage, the minimum setback from the rear and side property lines is five (5) feet. 
b.  For an ADU converted from an existing garage, no additional setbacks beyond the existing garage setbacks shall be required beyond those set forth in the local building and fire codes. 
2.  When an existing detached or attached garage is proposed to be converted to an ADU, no additional setbacks shall be required subject to meeting the requirements of El Monte Municipal Code, Title 15, including but not limited to life safety, emergency egress, and Fire Code requirements set forth therein. 
3.  Subject to applicable Building Code requirements, a setback of no more than five (5) feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an ADU that is constructed above an existing garage. 
P.  Parking. 
1.  One parking space shall be required for each ADU bedroom or ADU unit, whichever is greater. Such required parking shall supplement additional parking requirements for the existing single-family dwelling. Required street setbacks, yard, and landscaped areas may not be utilized for vehicular parking. Such space may be provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway. 
2.  Off-street parking shall be permitted through tandem parking. 
3.  When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished, or required parking otherwise ceases to exist, in conjunction with the construction of an ADU, replacement of the lost off-street covered parking shall be replaced on the same lot as the ADU as originally configured. 
4.  The parking standards set forth above in Section 17.06.165(P)(1) shall not apply to ADUs in the following circumstances: 
a.  The ADU is located within one-half mile of public transit; 
b.  The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district; 
c.  The ADU is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure; 
d.  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU; and 
e.  When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the ADU. 
Q.  Driveways. A property developed with an ADU, whether located on a corner lot or an interior lot may only maintain one driveway approach and one driveway. When a property is accessible by both a public street and a public alley right-of-way at the rear or side property line, one additional driveway opening may be maintained only from the alley right-of-way. 
R.  Passageways. A separate passageway shall not be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. "Passageway" means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the ADU. 
S.  Sprinklers. ADUs shall not be required to install fire sprinklers if they are not required for the existing single-family dwelling. 
T.  Utility Connections. The property owner may be required by the city to install a new or separate utility connection between the ADU and the existing single-family and pay all applicable connection fees or capacity charges unless the ADU is of the type described in Section 17.06.165(J)(2). 
U.  Owner Occupancy and Restrictive Covenant. Either the existing single-family dwelling or the ADU on a lot shall be occupied by the owner of the lot. The property owner shall enter into a restrictive covenant with the city that applies to the owner and all successors in interest, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney that shall be recorded on the subject property. Such restrictive covenant shall: 
1.  Specify that the property owner must reside in either the existing single-family dwelling or the ADU; 
2.  Expressly prohibit the rental of both units at the same time; 
3.  Limit ADU rentals to terms longer than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days; 
4.  Prohibit ADUs from being sold or conveyed separately from the primary residence; 
5.  Require the property owner and all successors in interest to maintain the ADU and surrounding property in accordance with this section 17.06.165; and 
6.  Require that any future sale of residential lots with ADUs shall require, prior to the close of escrow, an inspection by the Building Official, or designee, to ensure that all onsite residential structures have been maintained in compliance with applicable zoning and building code requirements. 
(Ord. 2634 § 13 (part), 2004: Ord. 2585 § 9, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 7, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2910, § 4, 4-18-2017)  
17.06.170 - Failure to comply. 
A.  Any individual, entity, company or corporation who fails at any time to comply with, or violates the provisions of this chapter and/or any requirements imposed as a condition of being granted a land use entitlement, shall be subject to the enforcement provisions as enumerated in Chapter 17.28 of this title. 
B.  Failure to properly and completely construct or install all improvements required as a condition of being granted a land use entitlement, or to correct any violations of this chapter prior to occupying a building or structure and/or commencing operation of the use, shall be subject to the enforcement provisions as enumerated in Chapter 17.28 et seq. of this title. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.06.100)  
Chapter 17.08 - PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Purpose. 
These off-street parking requirements are established to provide properly designated parking areas adequate in design, capacity and location to prevent traffic congestion and avoid hazards to the public's safety and welfare. Off-street parking areas are to be established in proportion to the needs of the facilities served and in such a manner as to ensure their usefulness, protect the public safety and, where appropriate, buffer adjacent land uses from their impact. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.08.010)  
17.08.020 - General requirements. 
A.  Any parking spaces or loading zones that were required when the building was originally constructed or subsequently expanded shall be continually maintained. 
B.  All parking areas shall be permanently maintained in a safe and clean condition free of physical obstructions and in good condition. All areas, including landscaping, shall be kept free of trash and weeds. Landscaped planters shall be permanently maintained with healthy nursery stock. Any alteration, enlargement, maintenance or repairs shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  In all zones, parking plans for off-street parking facilities shall be submitted for approval to the Planning Division prior to the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. All plans shall clearly indicate the proposed development, including parking location, size, design, lighting, landscaping, curb cuts, ingress and egress. 
D.  Any restriping or other changes made to a parking lot shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Division prior to such work being commenced. 
E.  Required parking spaces shall not be rented separately. 
F.  In lieu of providing on-site parking the Planning Commission may, on a project by project basis, establish a fee equivalent to the cost of acquiring the required parking. These fees shall be used for the acquisition and the construction of parking facilities in the immediate vicinity of the project, and/or for the acquisition and improvement of accessways to parking facilities in the immediate vicinity of the project. 
G.  Parking shall be based upon gross floor area, except for office buildings in excess of one story, the parking ratio shall be based on net floor area, which is gross floor area minus elevator shafts, stairwells, open courtyards and balconies. Fractional spaces may be rounded to the nearest whole parking space. 
H.  Whenever a nonresidential structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, or when a change in use creates an increase in the amount of off-street parking or loading area required, additional spaces shall be provided. Furthermore, for all existing uses or structures, including residential, hereafter expanded by twenty-five (25) percent or more of the existing gross floor area, the required off-street parking for the entire property or development shall conform to the most current parking standards. 
I.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the collective use of space for off-street parking, provided such collectively used space is equal to the sum of the requirements of each individual establishment participating in such collective use. 
J.  All required parking spaces shall be used exclusively for operable, currently licensed motor vehicles of tenants, occupants, or visitors of the property. 
K.  No parking area shall be counted as both a required parking stall and a loading space. 
L.  Requirements for uses not specifically listed in this chapter shall be determined by the City Planner, based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon particular characteristics of the use. Additional parking over and above that required in this chapter, may be required upon determination of the Planning Commission that the specific type of business or user generates a greater demand for more parking than the requirement in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2662 § 5(B), 2006; Ord. 2576 § 3 (part), 2002; zoning ordinance § 17.08.015)  
17.08.030 - Parking lot design. 
A.  All off-street parking facilities shall be designed so as to provide safe and reasonable maneuverability for vehicles within the parking area and enable a vehicle entering the parking area to move from one location to any other location within the parking area without entering a public street. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed in accordance with the city parking standards. 
B.  Where off-street parking facilities abut any property zoned or used for residential purposes, such facilities shall be separated therefrom by a solid masonry wall six (6) feet in height, provided the wall shall be four (4) feet in height from the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard setback for the abutting residential zone. 
C.  All parking lots and driveways shall be surfaced with asphaltic concrete to a minimum thickness of three (3) inches over a minimum aggregate base of six (6) inches or surfaced with Portland Cement concrete with a minimum thickness of five (5) inches over a three (3) inch aggregate base. After review of the probable vehicular traffic and the soils report for the project, additional material may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer. 
D.  All paved parking areas shall be sloped to drain to a public street, alley, storm drain or natural drainage course and shall not pass over a public sidewalk. Where a drain beneath a sidewalk is used, such drain shall conform to the most recently adopted Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. 
E.  All parking areas shall be provided with exterior lighting at one footcandle for the entire surface area. Lighting shall be designed, arranged and installed so as to confine direct rays on to the premises and to direct light away from adjacent structures, premises or streets. Lighting fixtures shall be of an energy saving type. 
F.  Concrete wheel stops or a six (6) inch high concrete curb shall be installed where parking stalls abut fences, walls or buildings. 
G.  Directional arrows shall be required for all parking areas in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
H.  All parking areas shall be screened from any street through the use of a minimum seven (7) foot planter. 
I.  In all zones no vehicle, other than a vehicle emerging from a single-family dwelling site, shall have to back into any public street. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.08.020)  
17.08.040 - Parking stall size. 
A. Open stalls 	The minimum size for each space shall be not less than 8 feet 6 inches in width by 18 feet in length. 
B. Enclosed stalls 	The minimum size for each enclosed parking space shall be not less than 10 feet in width by 20 feet in length. 
C. Open spaces adjacent to walls in excess of 30 inches in height 	Increase above stall width by 2 feet. 
D. Space over-hanging landscaping 	May be reduced by 2 feet with a minimum 7-foot wide planter. 
E. Turning radius and aisle width 	See city of El Monte parking standards sheet, as amended from time to time by resolution of the Planning Commission. 
 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.08.025; Ord. 2576 §§ 2, 3 (part), 2002; Ord. No. 2883, § 15, 6-21-2016)  
17.08.050 - Parking location. 
A.  Parking spaces provided for residential uses shall be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the unit served. For projects with more than one unit on a lot the garage shall not face or open onto a public street. 
B.  No vehicle shall overhang a public right-of-way or encroach into any public or private easement utilized for ingress or egress. Neither a required side yard abutting a street nor a required front yard shall be used for off-street parking. Where no street side yard setback is required, vehicles shall be parked no closer than six (6) feet to the right-of-way. 
C.  All required off-street parking shall be located on the same property as the use it serves, except where joint use or reciprocal parking and access agreements have been approved by the Planning Commission. 
D.  All vehicles must park on paved or otherwise improved surfaces. Surfaces that are paved with materials other than asphalt concrete or Portland Cement concrete are subject to approval by the City Engineer. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.08.030)  
17.08.060 - Vehicle location and storage. 
A.  For all property zoned and/or used for residential purposes, no person shall park any recreational vehicle (including but not limited to, motor home, dune buggy, camper, camper bus, RV trailer) in any required front or street side yard areas except upon an approved paved driveway access to the garage/carport structure or upon any other approved paved area in the front or street side yard area. A maximum of one recreational vehicle may be parked in the required front or street side yard area; all recreational vehicles must have a valid registration and be registered to the location where stored or parked and shall be in an operable condition; and no vehicle shall park on or extend over any public sidewalk, parkway right-of-way, or any public right-of-way. Notwithstanding the above, no recreational vehicle (including but not limited to, motor home, dune buggy, camper, camper bus, RV trailer) shall be approved for storage in any required front or street side yard setback if there is room and access to the rear yard for that vehicle. However, in no case shall vehicle access to the garage be obstructed. The use of recreational vehicle for dwelling purposes during storage on a residential property and the connection of utilities, water, or plumbing to a recreational vehicle, except for temporary maintenance purposes, are strictly prohibited. 
B.  For all property zoned and/or used for residential purposes, no person shall park any automobile in any required front or street side yard areas except upon an approved paved driveway access to the garage/carport structure or upon any other paved area in the front or street side yard area. The paved area including driveways shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total area of the required front or street side yard area; no vehicle shall be parked on, or extend over any public sidewalk or parkway right-of-way. 
C.  For all property zoned and/or used for residential purposes, no person shall use the front yard or required street side yard areas for the placement of any of the following: 
1.  Any motor vehicle in an inoperable condition, whether assembled or disassembled; 
2.  Any boat, trailer, camper, truck camper shell; 
3.  Storage of construction-related equipment, building products or other materials for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours, unless a valid building permit is in effect for construction on the premises. 
D.  No owner or occupant of property zoned and/or used for residential purposes shall maintain or permit to remain on the site: (1) a mobile vendor vehicle, or (2) any commercial vehicle with a manufacturer's specified gross vehicle weight greater than six thousand four hundred (6,400) pounds. 
E.  For all property zoned and/or used for residential purposes, inoperable vehicles must be located, parked or stored on such parcel of property within an enclosed garage building, with the exception that one inoperable vehicle may be located in the area between the main building and the rear lot line, provided the inoperable vehicle is screened from view from any public, street or residentially used property. 
(Ord. 2638 § 5, 2004; zoning ordinance § 17.08.035)  
17.08.070 - Driveways. 
A.  Driveways serving one dwelling unit shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in unobstructed width. Driveways serving two (2) to four (4) dwelling units shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width; with an unobstructed height of not less than thirteen and one-half (13.5) feet. Driveways serving five (5) or more dwelling units shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width; with an unobstructed height of not less than thirteen and one-half (13.5) feet. However, if the distance between the curb face and the rear most structure is greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet the driveway width shall increase to twenty (20) feet. 
B.  Ingress/egress for commercial or industrial uses shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet in unobstructed width. Along major arterials, as designated in the circulation element of the general plan, the minimum shall be increased to thirty (30) feet. 
C.  Each entrance and exit to an off-street parking facility shall be constructed and maintained so that any vehicle entering or leaving the parking area shall be clearly visible at a distance of not less than ten (10) feet to a pedestrian approaching such entrance or exit. 
D.  Driveway entrances and drive aisles shall be broken up through the use of stamped concrete or different pavement colors or textures. 
E.  Driveways used exclusively for ingress and egress shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent slope. Parking stalls and vehicle maneuvering areas shall not exceed five (5) percent slope. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.08.040; Ord. No. 2883, § 16, 6-21-2016)  
17.08.080 - Handicapped parking and access. 
Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
Total Spaces Required 	Handicapped Stalls 
Required 
1—40 	1 
41—80 	2 
81—120 	3 
121—160 	4 
161—300 	5 
 
Spaces shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide, with a five-foot wide landing, by eighteen (18) feet in length. Additionally, the project must comply with all applicable handicapped parking requirements of the State of California Building Code, Title 24 and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.08.045; Ord. No. 2883, § 17, 6-21-2016)  
17.08.090 - Parking requirements for specific land uses. 
Auditorium/multi-purpose room 	1 space per 75 square feet of usable assembly area. 
General retail/office 	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area for the first 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, 1 space per 400 square feet of floor area for the next 30,000 square feet of gross floor area and 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area after the first 50,000 square feet. 
Group occupancies 	1 space per 2 guest rooms in rooming houses and dormitories. 
Health institution 	1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area for office/administrative use plus 0.5 spaces per bed, for hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent homes and homes for the aged. 
Hotel/motel 	1 space shall be provided for each living or sleeping unit of each auto court, tourist court, motel, hotel or other transient occupancy. 
Indoor entertainment 	1 space per 3 seats for movie theaters or 1 space per 75 square feet of usable floor area for other uses where no fixed seating is provided (dance halls, clubs, etc.) 
Industrial/warehouse 	Square Feet of GFA 	Parking Ratio 
	Up to 5,000 	1 to 400 = 13 
	5,001 to 10,000 	1 to 500 = 10 
	10,001 to 25,000 	1 to 750 = 20 
	25,001 and up 	1 to 1,500 
	(This is a cumulative requirement: for example a 25,000 sq. ft. building requires 13 + 10 + 20 = 43 spaces) 
	(Offices not occupying more than 25% of the total floor area are counted as industrial/warehouse space) 
Off-street loading 	For nonresidential uses, one 15-foot by 25-foot space shall be required for every building over 25,000 square feet, 1 full size loading space (15 feet wide, 40 feet long with a 14-foot clearance) per 25,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be required. Full size loading spaces shall be screened from view of adjacent streets. 
On-sale liquor establishment 	1 space per 50 square feet of gross floor area. 
Outdoor display 	1 space per 2,500 square feet of open area devoted to display, rental or sales. A minimum of 2 off-street spaces shall be required. This requirement applies, but is not limited to, plant nurseries, garden centers, equipment rentals and contractor storage yards. 
Religious institution 	1 space per 40 square feet of main assembly area. Additional spaces are required at a rate of 1 space per additional 250 square feet of gross floor area or portion thereof. 
Residential second unit 	In addition to the required parking for the principal dwelling, a minimum of 2 uncovered off-street parking spaces shall be provided for an attached or detached residential second unit. The parking spaces shall be adjacent to the second unit or to the existing enclosed parking structure provided for the principal dwelling. The parking spaces may be provided in tandem with each other or at a location approved by the City Planner. Access to and from all required enclosed and open parking spaces for the principal dwelling as well as the residential second unit shall not block one another and be accessible at all times. No parking shall be permitted within the front setback area. 
Residential use: 	
R-1A 	Two (2) parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage for the first 1,200 square feet of gross floor area. A 3-car garage is required for a dwelling unit with an area of 1,200—1,500 square feet. For units greater than 1,500 square feet of gross floor area additional parking spaces are required at a rate of one (1) space per each additional 300 square feet of gross floor area or portion thereof. 
R-1B & R-1C 	Two (2) parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage for the first 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. A three-car garage is required for a dwelling unit with a gross floor area greater than 2,000 square feet or having more than four bedrooms. For units with more than four bedrooms, one (1) open parking space shall be required for each bedroom after the first four bedrooms. 
R-2, R-3, R-4 	Two (2) parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage for the first 1,200 square feet of gross floor area. Additional parking spaces are required at a rate of 1 space per each additional 300 square feet of gross floor area or portion thereof. For multi-family developments of 10 or more units in R-3 and R-4 zones, ten (10) percent of the total required parking shall be reserved for guest parking. 
RHOD 	Two (2) parking spaces within a fully enclosed garage. One (1) additional open parking space is required for a dwelling unit with a gross floor area greater than 2,000 square feet or having more than four bedrooms. For units with more than four bedrooms, one (1) open parking space shall be required for each bedroom after the first four bedrooms. 
	Furthermore, for all residential zones all garages shall have an automatic garage door opener. For single-family homes, either on separate lots or within a planned development, the additional spaces may be located on the garage apron for the dwelling unit provided that the space does not interfere with the common driveway and each additional space is a minimum of 9 feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep. 
Restaurant 	1 space per 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
Self-storage 	Parking shall be provided along 30-foot-wide parking/driving lanes adjacent to the storage buildings and a minimum of 10 spaces adjacent to the leasing office. 
Senior housing 	1.0 spaces per unit for developments of 30 units or less. For developments of 31 units or more, the parking shall be 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit, or 30 space, whichever is greater. For developments of 10 or more units, ten (10) percent of the total required parking shall be reserved for guest parking. 
Very low and low income housing units 	1.0 space per very low or low income unit. This parking ratio only applies to those units which are designated for very low or low income. For developments of 10 or more units, ten (10) percent of the total required parking shall be reserved for guest parking. 
Vehicle related use: 
Auto repair 	1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
Auto sales/leasing 	1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area of building plus 1 space per 2,500 square feet of outdoor display and storage area. 
RVs and related 	1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per 2,500 square feet of outdoor display and storage area. 
 
(Ord. 2634 § 13 (part), 2004; Ord. 2585 § 11, 2003; zoning ordinance § 17.08.050) 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 7, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2883, § 18, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, § 9, 5-15-2018)  
17.08.100 - Reduction of required spaces. 
A.  The alternating use of parking facilities may be approved in cases where parties wish to cooperatively establish and operate parking facilities and where these uses generate parking demands primarily during hours when the remaining uses are not in operation (for example, if one use operates during the daytime or on weekends and the other use operates during the evenings or weekdays only). The burden of proof for a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces, however, shall remain with the applicant, and documentation shall be submitted substantiating the reasons for these requested parking reductions. An alternating use agreement may be approved by the City Planning Commission upon finding that such a reduction is appropriate and only under the following circumstances: 
1.  That a sufficient number of spaces shall be provided to meet the greatest parking demand of the alternating uses; 
2.  That satisfactory statements have been submitted by the parties operating such facilities, describing the nature of the uses and times when such uses operate so as to indicate the lack of conflict between them; 
3.  That additional documents or agreements as may be deemed necessary in each particular case to assure provision for and the maintenance of the required parking spaces have been provided; and 
4.  That a deed restriction is placed upon the property specifying permitted uses and other restrictions as deemed appropriate. 
B.  Parking requirements for a secondary use within the same building as the primary use (for example, a restaurant in a hotel or a shop within a sport facility) may be reduced by up to one-half, upon the determination by the Planning Division that such a reduction is justified. 
C.  The City Planning Commission may reduce the number of parking spaces required for senior housing by up to fifty (50) percent based upon a finding that the proposed development is located in proximity to commercial activities and services, and is adequately served by public transportation systems. 
D.  The City Planning Commission may permit up to one-half of the required parking spaces to be uncovered for dwelling units provided exclusively for low- and moderate-income and senior citizen households. 
E.  The City Planning Commission, based upon a finding that such is appropriate, may count city-owned public parking facilities within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of a use, measured from the use's nearest public access to such parking, in waiving all or part of the parking requirements if the sum of the required parking for such facilities is less than the existing parking provided. 
F.  See also Section 17.14.90, Parking and expansion or remodeling of structure, or change in use in the nonconforming provisions, Chapter 17.14. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.08.055; Ord. No. 2883, § 19, 6-21-2016)  
Chapter 17.10 - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose. 
A.  To establish a procedure to review landscape and irrigation plans consistently; 
B.  To establish landscape development standards, irrigation methods and suggested plant species to develop a measure of uniformity in overall landscaping design; 
C.  To promote the value and long-term benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible; 
D.  To establish a structure for designing, installing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes for expansion of the existing buildings and new projects. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.10.10)  
17.10.020 - General provisions. 
A.  The city does not have a required list of planting materials, however, the city encourages the use of native or indigenous plant material and does have a suggested plant list which is consistent with the city's goal for water efficient landscapes. 
B.  Landscape and irrigation plans shall be required for all projects involving new building construction or expansions to buildings over fifty (50) percent of existing floor area, with the exception of additions to existing single-family residences, for which landscape and irrigation plans shall be required for new building construction or expansions to buildings over one hundred (100) percent of existing floor area or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less. Such plans shall be submitted for approval to the Planning Division. 
C.  Installation of all landscaping and irrigation in accordance with the approved plans is required prior to final occupancy approval. 
D.  Landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect or other person qualified by education or experience as being capable of preparing such plans. 
E.  Landscaping shall consist of combinations of trees, shrubs and ground covers with careful consideration given to eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability, and adaptability to existing soil and climatic conditions. 
F.  Landscaping shall be maintained in an orderly and healthy condition. This shall include proper pruning, staking, sowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and regular watering. 
G.  No tree shall be planted within five (5) feet of any structure, or under any eave, overhang or balcony. 
H.  Landscape materials shall not be located such that at maturity: (1) they interfere with safe site distances for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic; (2) they conflict with overhead utility lines. 
I.  All required setbacks including interior and side yards fronting a public right-of-way shall be landscaped (except for walks and driveways which provide access from a public right-of-way). 
J.  Trees, shrubs, walls, berms and planting islands should be used as much as possible to beautify and break up large expansive parking areas, while at the same time help to channelize traffic. 
K.  All landscaping shall be separated from parking and vehicular circulation areas by a raised, continuous six (6) inch Portland Cement concrete curb. Other materials which accomplish the same purpose may be approved by the Planning Division. 
L.  Additional landscaping, in excess of the minimum area required herein, may be deemed necessary to: 
1.  Screen adjacent uses from parking or storage areas, trash enclosures, on-site utilities, and other similar land uses or elements that could cause a negative impact on adjacent uses based on aesthetics, noise, odors, etc.; or 
2.  Provide landscaping which is compatible with neighboring uses; 
3.  Relieve solid, unbroken elevations and soften continuous wall expanse. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.10.15) 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 8, 1-19-2010)  
17.10.030 - General landscape requirements. 
A.  Residential Requirements. 
1.  All required front yard setbacks, entry patios and rear setbacks, excepting those driveway areas providing ingress and egress, shall be landscaped with a mixture of trees and ground covering, and a plumbing stub out for a future irrigation system. 
2.  All required private open space shall contain one twenty-four (24) inch box size tree for every six hundred (600) square feet, or portion thereof; and one five (5) gallon shrub for every fifty (50) square feet of planter area, or portion thereof. 
3.  A three (3) foot wide driveway planter shall be planted with low growth, wide-spreading ground cover material or clustered five (5) gallon dwarf evergreen shrubs. Trees may be planted only if the driveway planter is six (6) or more feet in width. 
4.  A minimum of one twenty-four (24) inch box specimen tree shall be planted along the required front yard and street side yard setback for every forty (40) lineal feet of lot frontage, or portion thereof, including driveways. 
B.  Commercial/Industrial Requirements (Except Auto Dealerships). 
1.  For parking lots with ten (10) spaces or more, a minimum of five (5) percent of the total off-street parking area shall be landscaped with a mixture of trees, shrubs, and ground cover. Said landscaping shall be distributed throughout the parking area and shall be in addition to the required street setback landscaping. All landscape planters shall be a minimum clear width of four (4) feet. 
2.  The depth of parking stalls may be reduced by two (2) feet if the minimum planter width is six (6) feet, or seven (7) feet if two (2) rows of vehicles are overhanging the planter. 
C.  Plants. 
1.  Trees. 
a.  A minimum of one twenty-four (24) inch box specimen tree of a two and one-fourth (2 ¼) inch caliper trunk diameter, ten (10) feet in height and five-foot head diameter, shall be required for every ten (10) parking spaces, or portion thereof, and shall be located throughout the parking area; 
b.  A minimum of one twenty-four (24) inch box specimen tree shall be required for every twenty-four (24) linear feet of lot frontage, including driveways. Such twenty-four (24) inch box trees shall be planted in a planter having no less than ten (10) feet in width; and 
c.  A sixty (60) inch box specimen tree of a ten (10) inch caliper trunk diameter, twenty (20) feet in height and ten (10) foot head diameter, shall be required as a replacement for every fully mature and established tree, which is damaged or is destroyed during construction. 
2.  Shrubs. 
a.  A minimum of one shrub shall be provided for every twenty (20) square feet of landscaped area or other turf areas. Seventy-five (75) percent of the required shrubs shall be a minimum of five (5) gallons. 
b.  The number of required shrubs may be reduced by the Planning Services Manager when it is determined that an alternative design will meet the intent of the landscaping requirements. 
c.  All five (5) gallon size shrubs, when planted as high ground cover, shall be of low, spreading type evergreen shrubs placed eighteen (18) inches on center. 
d.  All one gallon size shrubs, when planted as high ground cover, shall be of low, spreading type evergreen shrubs placed eighteen (18) inches on center. 
3.  Ground Covers. 
a.  Materials such as crushed rock, redwood chips, pebbles and stones are not satisfactory substitutes for live plant materials although their limited use may be approved by the Planning Services Manager. 
b.  Artificial plant material is not acceptable. 
c.  Depending on the type of ground cover planted, ground cover should be spaced at a maximum of one foot on center. 
d.  Ground cover areas shall be planted with well rooted cuttings or container stock. Turf areas shall be planted with field-grown established sod or hydroseed. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.10.20)  
17.10.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed § 17.10.040 which pertained to water efficient landscape requirements and derived from § 17.10.25 of the zoning ordinance. See ch. 17.11.  
17.10.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed § 17.10.050 which pertained to water efficient landscape definitions and derived from § 17.10.30 of the zoning ordinance.  
17.10.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed § 17.10.060 which pertained to landscape documentation package and derived from § 17.10.35 of the zoning ordinance.  
17.10.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed § 17.10.070 which pertained to water efficient landscape criteria and derived from § 17.10.40 of the zoning ordinance.  
17.10.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed § 17.10.080 which pertained to existing landscape and derived from § 17.10.45 of the zoning ordinance.  
17.10.090 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed § 17.10.090 which pertained to minor deviations and derived from § 17.10.50 of the zoning ordinance.  
17.10.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2751, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 2010, repealed § 17.10.100 which pertained to waivers and derived from § 17.10.55 of the zoning ordinance.  
Chapter 17.11 - WATER EFFICIENCY 
Sections: 
 
17.11.010 - Purpose. 
(a)  The state legislature has found that: 
(1)  The waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands; 
(2)  The continuation of California's economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses; 
(3)  It is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource; 
(4)  Landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development; and 
(5)  Landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; and 
(6)  Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use. 
(b)  Consistent with these legislative findings, the purpose of this model ordinance is to: 
(1)  Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water; 
(2)  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible; 
(3)  Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; 
(4)  Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; 
(5)  Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies; 
(6)  Encourage local agencies and water purveyors to use economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a tiered-rate structure; and 
(7)  Encourage local agencies to designate the necessary authority that implements and enforces the provisions of the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance or its local landscape ordinance. 
(c)  Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and maintained with the watershed based approach can improve California's environmental conditions and provide benefits and realize sustainability goals. Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient in the face of climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purpose of the Ordinance, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by: 
(1)  Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen production, shade, habitat and esthetic benefits. 
(2)  Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements, reducing reliance on petroleum based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting climate appropriate shade trees in urban areas. 
(3)  Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and graywater wherever possible and selecting climate appropriate plants that need minimal supplemental water after establishment. 
(4)  Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials, and using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion. 
(5)  Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing local native plants, climate adapted non-natives and avoiding invasive plants. Utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first course of action. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, §§ 2, 3, 6-21-2016) 
Authority cited: Section 65593, Government Code. 
Reference: Sections 65591, 65593, 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.020 - Applicability. 
(a)  After December 1, 2015, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this section shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
(1)  New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
(2)  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review; 
(3)  Existing landscapes limited to Sections 17.11.220, 17.11.230, and 17.11.240; and 
(4)  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 17.11.080, 17.11.150, and 17.11.160; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 17.11.220, 17.11.230, and 17.11.240. 
(b)  For local land use agencies working together to develop a regional water efficient landscape ordinance, the reporting requirements of this section shall become effective December 1, 2015 and the remainder of this section shall be effective no later than February 1, 2016. 
(c)  Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this section or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix D. 
(d)  For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) sq. ft. of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Appendix D section (5). This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
(2)  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
(3)  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
(4)  Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 4, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.030 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this section have the meaning set forth below: 
"Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Automatic irrigation controller" means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Certificate of completion" means the document required under Section 17.11.130. 
"Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Watersense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association's Certified Irrigation Designer program. 
"Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Watersense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor program. 
"Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
"Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Compost" means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth. 
"Conversion factor (0.62)" means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. 
"Distribution uniformity" means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area. 
"Drip irrigation" means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall" (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. 
"Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
"Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth. 
"Establishment period of the plants" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two (2) years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three (3) to five (5) years for establishment. 
"Estimated Total Water Use" (ETWU) means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 17.11.080. 
"ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two (2) major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for a new and existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
"Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. 
"Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
"Flow sensor" means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter. 
"Friable" means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
"Fuel Modification Plan Guideline" means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone. 
"Graywater" means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Graywater" includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12. 
"Hardscapes" means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious). 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
"Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database. 
"Irrigation audit" means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency "Watersense" labeled auditing program. 
"Irrigation efficiency" (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this section are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
"Irrigation survey" means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system. 
"Irrigation water use analysis" means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
"Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615. 
"Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
"Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
"Landscape documentation package" means the documents required under Section 17.11.070. 
"Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this section, meeting requirements under Section 17.11.050. 
"Landscape water meter" means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use. 
"Lateral line" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
"Local agency" means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is responsible for adopting and implementing the section. The local agency is also responsible for the enforcement of this section, including but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project. 
"Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service. 
"Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
"Master shut-off valve" is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve. 
"Maximum Applied Water Allowance" (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 17.11.080. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF × LA) + (1-ETAF) × SLA)] 
"Median" is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses. 
"Microclimate" means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
"New construction" means, for the purposes of this section, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
"Non-residential landscape" means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas. 
"Operating pressure" means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
"Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" or "overhead spray irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
"Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
"Parkway" means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress. 
"Permit" means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
"Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
"Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this section, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 00.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this section are derived from the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species." Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
"Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a Landscape Documentation Package required under Section 17.11.070, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee. 
"Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
"Record drawing" or "as-built" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
"Recreational area" means areas, excluding private single family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens. 
"Recycled water," "reclaimed water," or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
"Regional water efficient landscape ordinance" means a local ordinance adopted by two (2) or more local agencies, water suppliers and other stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 17.11.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
"Residential landscape" means landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes. 
"Run off" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, run off may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. 
"Soil moisture sensing device" or "soil moisture sensor" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event, 
"Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay. 
"Special Landscape Area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water. 
"Sprinkler head" or "spray head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
"Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
"Swing joint" means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
"Submeter" means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter. 
"Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses, Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum; St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
"Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor. 
"Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
"Watering window" means the time of day irrigation is allowed. 
"WUCOLS" means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources 2014. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 5, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Sections 65592, 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.040 - Provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
A local agency may designate by mutual agreement, another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this section. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 6, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.050 - Compliance with landscape documentation package. 
(a)  Prior to construction, the local agency shall: 
(1)  Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks, or design reviews; 
(2)  Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project applicant; 
(3)  Approve or deny the landscape documentation package; 
(4)  Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and 
(5)  Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
(b)  Prior to construction, the project applicant shall: 
(1)  Submit a landscape documentation package to the local agency. 
(c)  Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the local agency, the project applicant shall: 
(1)  Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion; 
(2)  Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee; and 
(3)  Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.060 - Penalties. 
A local agency may establish and administer penalties to the project applicant for non-compliance with the ordinance to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.070 - Elements of the landscape documentation package. 
(a)  The landscape documentation package shall include the following six (6) elements: 
(1)  Project information: 
(A)  Date; 
(B)  Project applicant; 
(C)  Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)); 
(D)  Total landscape area (square feet); 
(E)  Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed); 
(F)  Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well; 
(G)  Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package; 
(H)  Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner; 
(I)  Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete landscape documentation package"; 
(2)  Water efficient landscape worksheet: 
(A)  hydrozone information table; 
(B)  water budget calculations; 
1.  Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA); 
2.  Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU); 
(3)  Soil management report; 
(4)  Landscape design plan; 
(5)  Irrigation design plan; and 
(6)  Grading design plan. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.080 - Water efficient landscape worksheet. 
(a)  A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet in Appendix B which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA. 
(1)  In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table in Appendix A. For geographic areas not covered in Appendix A, use data from other cities located nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in the CIMIS reference evapotranspiration zones map, Department of Water Resources, 1999. 
(b)  Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
(1)  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
(2)  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
(3)  All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in Appendix B. 
(4)  ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 7, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.090 - Soil management report. 
(a)  In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows: 
(1)  Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations. 
(A)  Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. 
(B)  The soil analysis shall include: 
1.  Soil texture; 
2.  Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table; 
3.  pH; 
4.  Total soluble salts; 
5.  Sodium; 
6.  Percent organic matter; and 
7.  Recommendations. 
(C)  In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e. production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven (7) lots or approximately fifteen (15) percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven (7) lots. 
(2)  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following: 
(A)  If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape documentation package; or 
(B)  If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the certificate of completion. 
(3)  The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans. 
(4)  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the local agency with certificate of completion. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 8, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.100 - Landscape design plan. 
(a)  For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
(1)  Plant Material. 
(A)  Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
1.  Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation; 
2.  Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants; 
3.  Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance; 
4.  Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area; and 
5.  Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists. 
6.  Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines. 
(B)  Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Subsection 17.11.110(a)(2)(D). 
(C)  Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
1.  Use the sunset western climate zone system which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate; 
2.  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and 
3.  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
(D)  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five (25) percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four (4) feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run × 100 = slope percent). 
(E)  High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians. 
(F)  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local fuel modification plan guidelines. 
(G)  The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged. 
(H)  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
(2)  Water Features. 
(A)  Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features. 
(B)  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
(C)  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
(D)  Pool and spa covers shall be used when pool or spa is not in use to minimize the loss of water due to evaporation. 
(3)  Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments. 
(A)  Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement. 
(B)  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 17.11.090). 
(C)  For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six (6) percent organic matter in the top six (6) inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling. 
(D)  A minimum three inch (3) layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five (5) percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such. 
(E)  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards. 
(F)  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
(G)  Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances. 
(b)  The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall: 
(1)  Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method; 
(2)  Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation; 
(3)  Identify recreational areas; 
(4)  Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants; 
(5)  Identify areas irrigated with recycled water; 
(6)  Identify type of mulch and application depth; 
(7)  Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity; 
(8)  Identify type and surface area of water features; 
(9)  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious); 
(10)  Identify location, and installation details, and 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples are provided in Section 17.11.190. 
(11)  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies, as discussed in Section 17.11.190 and their 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity; 
(12)  Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution; 
(13)  Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan;" and 
(14)  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code). 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 9, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code and Section 1351, Civil Code.  
17.11.110 - Irrigation design plan. 
(a)  This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
(1)  System. 
(A)  Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand (1,000) sq. ft. but not more than five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. or greater. A landscape water meter may be either: 
1.  A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or 
2.  A privately owned meter or submeter. 
(B)  Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems. 
(C)  If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
1.  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
2.  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
(D)  Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain. 
(E)  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. 
(F)  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements. 
(G)  Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. or larger. 
(H)  Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features. 
(I)  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
(J)  Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
(K)  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
(L)  The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 17.11.080 regarding the maximum applied water allowance. 
(M)  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard." All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014. 
(N)  It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system. 
(O)  In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. 
(P)  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Q)  Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(R)  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass. 
(S)  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur. 
(T)  Areas less than ten (10) feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray. 
(U)  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four (24) inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
1.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
2.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or 
3.  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Subsection 17.11.110 (a)(1)(H), (I). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
(V)  Slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
(2)  Hydrozone. 
(A)  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
(B)  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
(C)  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree. 
(D)  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if: 
1.  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
2.  The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. 
(E)  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
(F)  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone information table (see Appendix B Section A). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller. 
(b)  The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain: 
(1)  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape; 
(2)  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices; 
(3)  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
(4)  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station; 
(5)  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 17.11.180; 
(6)  The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and 
(7)  The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 10, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.120 - Grading design plan. 
(a)  For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement. 
(1)  The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including: 
(A)  Height of graded slopes; 
(B)  Drainage patterns; 
(C)  Pad elevations; 
(D)  Finish grade; and 
(E)  Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable. 
(2)  To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants: 
(A)  Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes; 
(B)  Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and 
(C)  Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas. 
(3)  The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.130 - Certificate of completion. 
(a)  The certificate of completion (see Appendix C for a sample certificate) shall include the following six (6) elements: 
(1)  Project information sheet that contains: 
(A)  Date; 
(B)  Project name; 
(C)  Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address; 
(D)  Project address and location; and 
(E)  Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address; 
(2)  Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package; 
(A)  Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these "as-built" or record drawings shall be included with the certification; 
(B)  A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes. 
(3)  Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 17.11.140). 
(4)  Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 17.11.150). 
(5)  Irrigation audit report (see Section 17.11.160); and 
(6)  Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 17.11.090). 
(b)  The project applicant shall: 
(1)  submit the signed certificate of completion to the local agency for review; 
(2)  ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her designee. 
(c)  The local agency shall: 
(1)  Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant; 
(2)  Approve or deny the Certificate of Completion. If the Certificate of Completion is denied, the local agency shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 11, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.140 - Irrigation scheduling. 
(a)  For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. 
(2)  Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
(3)  For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data. 
(4)  Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following: 
(A)  The plant establishment period; 
(B)  The established landscape; and 
(C)  Temporarily irrigated areas. 
(5)  Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply: 
(A)  Irrigation interval (days between irrigation); 
(B)  Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff); 
(C)  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff; 
(D)  Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis; 
(E)  Application rate setting; 
(F)  Root depth setting; 
(G)  Plant type setting; 
(H)  Soil type; 
(I)  Slope factor setting; 
(J)  Shade factor setting; and 
(K)  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.150 - Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. 
(a)  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. 
(b)  A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing and obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance, 
(c)  Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency. 
(d)  A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices or environmentally-friendly practices for all landscape maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 12, 13, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.160 - Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis. 
(a)  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a local agency landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape. 
(b)  In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e. production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven (7) lots or approximately fifteen (15) percent will satisfy this requirement. 
(c)  For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as described in Section 17.11.020: 
(1)  The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the local agency that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming; 
(2)  The local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 14, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.170 - Irrigation efficiency. 
For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 15, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.180 - Recycled water. 
(a)  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water. 
(b)  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws. 
(c)  Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 16, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.186 - Graywater systems. 
(a)  Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to Subsection 17.11.020(d) for the applicability of this section to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater. 
(Ord. No. 2884, § 17, 6-21-2016)  
17.11.190 - Stormwater management and rainwater retention. 
(a)  Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged. 
(b)  Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. 
(c)  All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to Subsection 17.11.100(a)(3). 
(d)  It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e. roof and paved areas) from either: (1) the one-inch, twenty-four-hour rain event or (2) the 85th percentile, twenty-four-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation. 
(e)  It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and use: 
•  Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas. 
•  Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways. 
•  Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff. 
•  Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse. 
•  Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems. 
•  Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil. 
•  Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 18, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.200 - Public education. 
(a)  Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community. 
(1)  A local agency or water supplier/purveyor shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget. 
(b)  Model Homes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this section. 
(1)  Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems. 
(2)  Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 19, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.210 - Environmental review. 
The local agency must comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010) 
Authority Cited: Section 21082, Public Resources Code. 
Reference: Sections 21080, 21082, Public Resources Code.  
17.11.220 - Provisions for existing landscapes. 
A local agency may, by mutual agreement, designate another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this section. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 20, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.230 - Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis. 
(a)  This Section 17.11.230 shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size: 
(1)  For all landscapes in Subsection 17.11.230(a) that have a water meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8)(ETo)(LA)(0.62). 
(2)  For all landscapes in Subsection 17.11.230(a), that do not have a meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste. 
(b)  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 21, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.240 - Water waste prevention. 
(a)  Local agencies shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be established locally. 
(b)  Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if: 
(1)  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
(2)  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010) 
Authority Cited: Section 65594, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.250 - Effective precipitation. 
A local agency may consider effective precipitation (twenty-five (25) percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance: MAWA = (ETo-Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 × LA) + (0.45 × SLA)] for residential areas. MAWA = (ETo-EPPT) (0.62) [(0.45 × LA) + (0.55 × SLA)] for non-residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 22, 6-21-2016) 
Authority Cited: Section 65595, Government Code. 
Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.  
17.11.260 - Reporting. 
(a)  Local agencies shall report on implementation and enforcement by December 31, 2015. Local agencies responsible for administering individual ordinances shall report on their updated ordinance, while those agencies developing a regional ordinance shall report on their existing ordinance. Those agencies crafting a regional ordinance shall also report on their new ordinance by March 1, 2016. Subsequently, reporting for all agencies will be due by January 31 of each year. Reports shall be submitted to the Department of Water Resources. 
(b)  The local agencies are to address the following: 
(1)  State whether you are adopting a single agency ordinance or a regional agency alliance ordinance, and the date of adoption or anticipated date of adoption. 
(2)  Define the reporting period. The reporting period shall commence on December 1, 2015 and the end on December 28, 2015. For local agencies crafting regional ordinances with other agencies, there shall be an additional reporting period commencing on February 1, 2016 and ending on February 28, 2016. In subsequent years, all local agency reporting will be for the calendar year. 
(3)  State if using a locally modified Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (WELO) or the MWELO. If using a locally modified WELO, how is it different than MWELO, is it at least as efficient as MWELO, and are there any exemptions specified? 
(4)  State the entity responsible for implementing the ordinance. 
(5)  State number and types of projects subject to the ordinance during the specified reporting period. 
(6)  State the total area (in square feet or acres) subject to the ordinance over the reporting period, if available. 
(7)  Provide the number of new housing starts, new commercial projects, and landscape retrofits during the reporting period. 
(8)  Describe the procedure for review of projects subject to the ordinance. 
(9)  Describe actions taken to verify compliance. Is a plan check performed; if so, by what entity? Is a site inspection performed; if so, by what entity? Is a post-installation audit required; if so, by whom? 
(10)  Describe enforcement measures. 
(11)  Explain challenges to implementing and enforcing the ordinance. 
(12)  Describe educational and other needs to properly apply the section. 
(Ord. No. 2884, § 23, 6-21-2016) 
Appendix A. Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table* 
County and City 	Jan 	Feb 	Mar 	Apr 	May 	Jun 	Jul 	Aug 	Sep 	Oct 	Nov 	Dec 	Annual 
ETo 
ALAMEDA 
Fremont 	1.5 	1.9 	3.4 	4.7 	5.4 	6.3 	6.7 	6.0 	4.5 	3.4 	1.8 	1.5 	47.0 
Livermore 	1.2 	1.5 	2.9 	4.4 	5.9 	6.6 	7.4 	6.4 	5.3 	3.2 	1.5 	0.9 	47.2 
Oakland 	1.5 	1.5 	2.8 	3.9 	5.1 	5.3 	6.0 	5.5 	4.8 	3.1 	1.4 	0.9 	41.8 
Oakland Foothills 	1.1 	1.4 	2.7 	3.7 	5.1 	6.4 	5.8 	4.9 	3.6 	2.6 	1.4 	1.0 	39.6 
Pleasanton 	0.8 	1.5 	2.9 	4.4 	5.6 	6.7 	7.4 	6.4 	4.7 	3.3 	1.5 	1.0 	46.2 
Union City 	1.4 	1.8 	3.1 	4.2 	5.4 	5.9 	6.4 	5.7 	4.4 	3.1 	1.5 	1.2 	44.2 
ALPINE 
Markleeville 	0.7 	0.9 	2.0 	3.5 	5.0 	6.1 	7.3 	6.4 	4.4 	2.6 	1.2 	0.5 	40.6 
AMADOR 
Jackson 	1.2 	1.5 	2.8 	4.4 	6.0 	7.2 	7.9 	7.2 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.9 	48.9 
Shanandoah Valley 	1.0 	1.7 	2.9 	4.4 	5.6 	6.8 	7.9 	7.1 	5.2 	3.6 	1.7 	1.0 	48.8 
BUTTE 
Chico 	1.2 	1.8 	2.9 	4.7 	6.1 	7.4 	8.5 	7.3 	5.4 	3.7 	1.7 	1.0 	51.7 
Durham 	1.1 	1.8 	3.2 	5.0 	6.5 	7.4 	7.8 	6.9 	5.3 	3.6 	1.7 	1.0 	51.1 
Gridley 	1.2 	1.8 	3.0 	4.7 	6.1 	7.7 	8.5 	7.1 	5.4 	3.7 	1.7 	1.0 	51.9 
Oroville 	1.2 	1.7 	2.8 	4.7 	6.1 	7.6 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.7 	1.7 	1.0 	51.5 
CALAVERAS 
San Andreas 	1.2 	1.5 	2.8 	4.4 	6.0 	7.3 	7.9 	7.0 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.7 	48.8 
COLUSA 
Colusa 	1.0 	1.7 	3.4 	5.0 	6.4 	7.6 	8.3 	7.2 	5.4 	3.8 	1.8 	1.1 	52.8 
Williams 	1.2 	1.7 	2.9 	4.5 	6.1 	7.2 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.6 	1.0 	50.8 
CONTRA COSTA 
Brentwood 	1.0 	1.5 	2.9 	4.5 	6.1 	7.1 	7.9 	6.7 	5.2 	3.2 	1.4 	0.7 	48.3 
Concord 	1.1 	1.4 	2.4 	4.0 	5.5 	5.9 	7.0 	6.0 	4.8 	3.2 	1.3 	0.7 	43.4 
Courtland 	0.9 	1.5 	2.9 	4.4 	6.1 	6.9 	7.9 	6.7 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.7 	48.0 
Martinez 	1.2 	1.4 	2.4 	3.9 	5.3 	5.6 	6.7 	5.6 	4.7 	3.1 	1.2 	0.7 	41.8 
Moraga 	1.2 	1.5 	3.4 	4.2 	5.5 	6.1 	6.7 	5.9 	4.6 	3.2 	1.6 	1.0 	44.9 
Pittsburg 	1.0 	1.5 	2.8 	4.1 	5.6 	6.4 	7.4 	6.4 	5.0 	3.2 	1.3 	0.7 	45.4 
Walnut Creek 	0.8 	1.5 	2.9 	4.4 	5.6 	6.7 	7.4 	6.4 	4.7 	3.3 	1.5 	1.0 	46.2 
DEL NORTE 
Crescent City 	0.5 	0.9 	2.0 	3.0 	3.7 	3.5 	4.3 	3.7 	3.0 	2.0 	0.9 	0.5 	27.7 
EL DORADO 
Camino 	0.9 	1.7 	2.5 	3.9 	5.9 	7.2 	7.8 	6.8 	5.1 	3.1 	1.5 	0.9 	47.3 
FRESNO 
Clovis 	1.0 	1.5 	3.2 	4.8 	6.4 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.4 
Coalinga 	1.2 	1.7 	3.1 	4.6 	6.2 	7.2 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.6 	0.7 	50.9 
Firebaugh 	1.0 	1.8 	3.7 	5.7 	7.3 	8.1 	8.2 	7.2 	5.5 	3.9 	2.0 	1. 1 	55.4 
Five Points 	1.3 	2.0 	4.0 	6.1 	7.7 	8.5 	8.7 	8.0 	6.2 	4.5 	2.4 	1.2 	60.4 
Fresno 	0.9 	1.7 	3.3 	4.8 	6.7 	7.8 	8.4 	7.1 	5.2 	3.2 	1.4 	0.6 	51.l 
Fresno State 	0.9 	1.6 	3.2 	5.2 	7.0 	8.0 	8.7 	7.6 	5.4 	3.6 	1.7 	0.9 	53.7 
Friant 	1.2 	1.5 	3.1 	4.7 	6.4 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.3 
Kerman 	0.9 	1.5 	3.2 	4.8 	6.6 	7.7 	8.4 	7.2 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.2 
Kingsburg 	1.0 	1.5 	3.4 	4.8 	6.6 	7.7 	8.4 	7.2 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.6 
Mendota 	1.5 	2.5 	4.6 	62 	7.9 	8.6 	8.8 	7.5 	5.9 	4.5 	2.4 	1.5 	61.7 
Orange Cove 	1.2 	1.9 	3.5 	4.7 	7.4 	8.5 	8.9 	7.9 	5.9 	3.7 	1.8 	1.2 	56.7 
Panache 	1.1 	2.0 	4.0 	5.6 	7.8 	8.5 	8.3 	7.3 	5.6 	3.9 	1.8 	1.2 	57.2 
Parlier 	1.0 	1.9 	3.6 	5.2 	6.8 	7.6 	8.1 	7.0 	5.1 	3.4 	1.7 	0.9 	52.0 
Reedley 	1.1 	1.5 	3.2 	4.7 	6.4 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.3 
Westlands 	0.9 	1.7 	3.8 	6.3 	8.0 	8.6 	8.6 	7.8 	5.9 	4.3 	2.1 	1.1 	58.8 
GLENN 
Orland 	1.1 	1.8 	3.4 	5.0 	6.4 	7.5 	7.9 	6.7 	5.3 	3.9 	1.8 	1.4 	52.l 
Willows 	1.2 	1.7 	2.9 	4.7 	6.1 	7.2 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.6 	1.7 	1.0 	51.3 
HUMBOLDT 
Eureka 	0.5 	1.1 	2.0 	3.0 	3.7 	3.7 	3.7 	3.7 	3.0 	2.0 	0.9 	0.5 	27.5 
Ferndale 	0.5 	1.1 	2.0 	3.0 	3.7 	3.7 	3.7 	3.7 	3.0 	2.0 	0.9 	0.5 	27.5 
Garberville 	0.6 	1.2 	2.2 	3.1 	4.5 	5.0 	5.5 	4.9 	3.8 	2.4 	1.0 	0.7 	34.9 
Hoopa 	0.5 	1.1 	2.1 	3.0 	4.4 	5.4 	6.1 	5.1 	3.8 	2.4 	0.9 	0.7 	35.6 
IMPERIAL 
Brawley 	2.8 	3.8 	5.9 	8.0 	10.4 	1l.5 	11.7 	10.0 	8.4 	6.2 	3.5 	2.1 	84.2 
Calipatria/Mulberry 	2.4 	3.2 	5.1 	6.8 	8.6 	9.2 	9.2 	8.6 	7.0 	5.2 	3.1 	2.3 	70.7 
El Centro 	2.7 	3.5 	5.6 	7.9 	10.1 	11.1 	1l.6 	9.5 	8.3 	6.1 	3.3 	2.0 	81.7 
Holtville 	2.8 	3.8 	5.9 	7.9 	10.4 	1l.6 	12.0 	10.0 	8.6 	6.2 	3.5 	2.1 	84.7 
Meloland 	2.5 	3.2 	5.5 	7.5 	8.9 	9.2 	9.0 	8.5 	6.8 	5.3 	3.1 	2.2 	71.6 
Palo Verde II 	2.5 	3.3 	5.7 	6.9 	8.5 	8.9 	8.6 	7.9 	6.2 	4.5 	2.9 	2.3 	68.2 
Seeley 	2.7 	3.5 	5.9 	7.7 	9.7 	10.1 	9.3 	8.3 	6.9 	5.5 	3.4 	2.2 	75.4 
Westmoreland 	2.4 	3.3 	5.3 	6.9 	8.7 	9.6 	9.6 	8.7 	6.9 	5.0 	3.0 	2.2 	71.4 
Yuma 	2.5 	3.4 	5.3 	6.9 	8.7 	9.6 	9.6 	8.7 	6.9 	5.0 	3.0 	2.2 	71.6 
INYO 
Bishop 	1.7 	2.7 	4.8 	6.7 	8.2 	10.9 	7.4 	9.6 	7.4 	4.8 	2.5 	1.6 	68.3 
Death Valley Jct 	2.2 	3.3 	5.4 	7.7 	9.8 	11.1 	11.4 	10.1 	8.3 	5.4 	2.9 	1.7 	79.1 
Independence 	1.7 	2.7 	3.4 	6.6 	8.5 	9.5 	9.8 	8.5 	7.1 	3.9 	2.0 	1.5 	65.2 
Lower Halwee Res. 	1.8 	2.7 	4.4 	7.1 	8.5 	9.5 	9.8 	8.5 	7.1 	4.2 	2.6 	1.5 	67.6 
Oasis 	2.7 	2.8 	5.9 	8.0 	10.4 	11.7 	11.6 	10.0 	8.4 	6.2 	3.4 	2.1 	83.1 
KERN 
Arvin 	1.2 	1.8 	3.5 	4.7 	6.6 	7.4 	8.1 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.7 	1.0 	51.9 
Bakersfield 	1.0 	1.8 	3.5 	4.7 	6.6 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.5 	1.6 	0.9 	52.4 
Bakersfield/Bonanza 	1.2 	2.2 	3.7 	5.7 	7.4 	8.2 	8.7 	7.8 	5.7 	4.0 	2.1 	1.2 	57.9 
Bakersfield/Greenlee 	1.2 	2.2 	3.7 	5.7 	7.4 	8.2 	8.7 	7.8 	5.7 	4.0 	2.1 	1.2 	57.9 
Belridge 	1.4 	2.2 	4.1 	5.5 	7.7 	8.5 	8.6 	7.8 	6.0 	3.8 	2.0 	1.5 	59.2 
Blackwells Corner 	1.4 	2.1 	3.8 	5.4 	7.0 	7.8 	8.5 	7.7 	5.8 	3.9 	1.9 	1.2 	56.6 
Buttonwillow 	1.0 	1.8 	3.2 	4.7 	6.6 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.4 	3.4 	1.5 	0.9 	52.0 
China Lake 	2.1 	3.2 	5.3 	7.7 	9.2 	10.0 	11.0 	9.8 	7.3 	4.9 	2.7 	1.7 	74.8 
Delano 	0.9 	1.8 	3.4 	4.7 	6.6 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.4 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	52.0 
Famoso 	1.3 	1.9 	3.5 	4.8 	6.7 	7.6 	8.0 	7.3 	5.5 	3.5 	1.7 	1.3 	53.1 
Grapevine 	1.3 	1.8 	3.1 	4.4 	5.6 	6.8 	7.6 	6.8 	5.9 	3.4 	1.9 	1.0 	49.5 
Inyokern 	2.0 	3.1 	4.9 	7.3 	8.5 	9.7 	1l.0 	9.4 	7.1 	5.1 	2.6 	1.7 	72.4 
Isabella Dam 	1.2 	1.4 	2.8 	4.4 	5.8 	7.3 	7.9 	7.0 	5.0 	3.2 	1.7 	0.9 	48.4 
Lamont 	1.3 	2.4 	4.4 	4.6 	6.5 	7.0 	8.8 	7.6 	5.7 	3.7 	1.6 	0.8 	54.4 
Lost Hills 	1.6 	2.2 	3.7 	5.1 	6.8 	7.8 	8.7 	7.8 	5.7 	4.0 	2.1 	1.6 	57.1 
McFarland/Kern 	1.2 	2.1 	3.7 	5.6 	7.3 	8.0 	8.3 	7.4 	5.6 	4.1 	2.0 	1.2 	56.5 
Shafter 	1.0 	1.7 	3.4 	5.0 	6.6 	7.7 	8.3 	7.3 	5.4 	3.4 	1.5 	0.9 	52.1 
Taft 	1.3 	1.8 	3.1 	4.3 	6.2 	7.3 	8.5 	7.3 	5.4 	3.4 	1.7 	1.0 	51.2 
Tehachapi 	1.4 	1.8 	3.2 	5.0 	6.1 	7.7 	7.9 	7.3 	5.9 	3.4 	2.1 	1.2 	52.9 
KINGS 
Caruthers 	1.6 	2.5 	4.0 	5.7 	7.8 	8.7 	9.3 	8.4 	6.3 	4.4 	2.4 	1.6 	62.7 
Corcoran 	1.6 	2.2 	3.7 	5.1 	6.8 	7.8 	8.7 	7.8 	5.7 	4.0 	2.1 	1.6 	57.1 
Hanford 	0.9 	1.5 	3.4 	5.0 	6.6 	7.7 	8.3 	7.2 	5.4 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.5 
Kettlemen 	1.1 	2.0 	4.0 	6.0 	7.5 	8.5 	9.1 	8.2 	6.1 	4.5 	2.2 	1.1 	60.2 
Lemoore 	0.9 	1.5 	3.4 	5.0 	6.6 	7.7 	8.3 	7.3 	5.4 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.7 
Stratford 	0.9 	1.9 	3.9 	6.1 	7.8 	8.6 	8.8 	7.7 	5.9 	4.1 	2.1 	1.0 	58.7 
LAKE 
Lakeport 	1.1 	1.3 	2.6 	3.5 	5.1 	6.0 	7.3 	6.1 	4.7 	2.9 	1.2 	0.9 	42.8 
Lower Lake 	1.2 	1.4 	2.7 	4.5 	5.3 	6.3 	7.4 	6.4 	5.0 	3.1 	1.3 	0.9 	45.4 
LASSEN 
Buntingville 	1.0 	1.7 	3.5 	4.9 	6.2 	7.3 	8.4 	7.5 	5.4 	3.4 	1.5 	0.9 	51.8 
Ravendale 	0.6 	1.1 	2.3 	4.1 	5.6 	6.7 	7.9 	7.3 	4.7 	2.8 	1.2 	0.5 	44.9 
Susanville 	0.7 	1.0 	2.2 	4.1 	5.6 	6.5 	7.8 	7.0 	4.6 	2.8 	1.2 	0.5 	44.0 
LOS ANGELES 
Burbank 	2.1 	2.8 	3.7 	4.7 	5.1 	6.0 	6.6 	6.7 	5.4 	4.0 	2.6 	2.0 	51.7 
Claremont 	2.0 	2.3 	3.4 	4.6 	5.0 	6.0 	7.0 	7.0 	5.3 	4.0 	2.7 	2.1 	51.3 
El Dorado 	1.7 	2.2 	3.6 	4.8 	5.1 	5.7 	5.9 	5.9 	4.4 	3.2 	2.2 	1.7 	46.3 
Glendale 	2.0 	2.2 	3.3 	3.8 	4.7 	4.8 	5.7 	5.6 	4.3 	3.3 	2.2 	1.8 	43.7 
Glendora 	2.0 	2.5 	3.6 	4.9 	5.4 	6.1 	7.3 	6.8 	5.7 	4.2 	2.6 	2.0 	53.1 
Gorman 	1.6 	2.2 	3.4 	4.6 	5.5 	7.4 	7.7 	7.1 	5.9 	3.6 	2.4 	1.1 	52.4 
Hollywood Hills 	2.1 	2.2 	3.8 	5.4 	6.0 	6.5 	6.7 	6.4 	5.2 	3.7 	2.8 	2.1 	52.8 
Lancaster 	2.1 	3.0 	4.6 	5.9 	8.5 	9.7 	11.0 	9.8 	7.3 	4.6 	2.8 	1.7 	71.1 
Long Beach 	1.8 	2.1 	3.3 	3.9 	4.5 	4.3 	5.3 	4.7 	3.7 	2.8 	1.8 	1.5 	39.7 
Los Angeles 	2.2 	2.7 	3.7 	4.7 	5.5 	5.8 	6.2 	5.9 	5.0 	3.9 	2.6 	1.9 	50.1 
Monrovia 	2.2 	2.3 	3.8 	4.3 	5.5 	5.9 	6.9 	6.4 	5.1 	3.2 	2.5 	2.0 	50.2 
Palmdale 	2.0 	2.6 	4.6 	6.2 	7.3 	8.9 	9.8 	9.0 	6.5 	4.7 	2.7 	2.1 	66.2 
Pasadena 	2.1 	2.7 	3.7 	4.7 	5.1 	6.0 	7.1 	6.7 	5.6 	4.2 	2.6 	2.0 	52.3 
Pearblossom 	1.7 	2.4 	3.7 	4.7 	7.3 	7.7 	9.9 	7.9 	6.4 	4.0 	2.6 	1.6 	59.9 
Pomona 	1.7 	2.0 	3.4 	4.5 	5.0 	5.8 	6.5 	6.4 	4.7 	3.5 	2.3 	1.7 	47.5 
Redondo Beach 	2.2 	2.4 	3.3 	3.8 	4.5 	4.7 	5.4 	4.8 	4.4 	2.8 	2.4 	2.0 	42.6 
San Fernando 	2.0 	2.7 	3.5 	4.6 	5.5 	5.9 	7.3 	6.7 	5.3 	3.9 	2.6 	2.0 	52.0 
Santa Clarita 	2.8 	2.8 	4.1 	5.6 	6.0 	6.8 	7.6 	7.8 	5.8 	5.2 	3.7 	3.2 	61.5 
Santa Monica 	1.8 	2.1 	3.3 	4.5 	4.7 	5.0 	5.4 	5.4 	3.9 	3.4 	2.4 	2.2 	44.2 
MADERA 
Chowchilla 	1.0 	1.4 	3.2 	4.7 	6.6 	7.8 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.4 
Madera 	0.9 	1.4 	3.2 	4.8 	6.6 	7.8 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.5 
Raymond 	1.2 	1.5 	3.0 	4.6 	6.1 	7.6 	8.4 	7.3 	5.2 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	50.5 
MARIN 
Black Point 	1.1 	1.7 	3.0 	4.2 	5.2 	6.2 	6.6 	5.8 	4.3 	2.8 	1.3 	0.9 	43.0 
Novato 	1.3 	1.5 	2.4 	3.5 	4.4 	6.0 	5.9 	5.4 	4.4 	2.8 	1.4 	0.7 	39.8 
Point San Pedro 	1.1 	1.7 	3.0 	4.2 	5.2 	6.2 	6.6 	5.8 	4.3 	2.8 	1.3 	0.9 	43.0 
San Rafael 	1.2 	1.3 	2.4 	3.3 	4.0 	4.8 	4.8 	4.9 	4.3 	2.7 	1.3 	0.7 	35.8 
MARIPOSA 
Coulterville 	1.1 	1.5 	2.8 	4.4 	5.9 	7.3 	8.1 	7.0 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	48.8 
Mariposa 	1.1 	1.5 	2.8 	4.4 	5.9 	7.4 	8.2 	7.1 	5.0 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	49.0 
Yosemite Village 	0.7 	1.0 	2.3 	3.7 	5.1 	6.5 	7.1 	6.1 	4.4 	2.9 	1.1 	0.6 	41.4 
MENDOCINO 
Fort Bragg 	0.9 	1.3 	2.2 	3.0 	3.7 	3.5 	3.7 	3.7 	3.0 	2.3 	1.2 	0.7 	29.0 
Hopland 	1.1 	1.3 	2.6 	3.4 	5.0 	5.9 	6.5 	5.7 	4.5 	2.8 	1.3 	0.7 	40.9 
Point Arena 	1.0 	1.3 	2.3 	3.0 	3.7 	3.9 	3.7 	3.7 	3.0 	2.3 	1.2 	0.7 	29.6 
Sanel Valley 	1.0 	1.6 	3.0 	4.6 	6.0 	7.0 	8.0 	7.0 	5.2 	3.4 	1.4 	0.9 	49.1 
Ukiah 	1.0 	1.3 	2.6 	3.3 	5.0 	5.8 	6.7 	5.9 	4.5 	2.8 	1.3 	0.7 	40.9 
MERCED 
Kesterson 	0.9 	1.7 	3.4 	5.5 	7.3 	8.2 	8.6 	7.4 	5.5 	3.8 	1.8 	0.9 	55.1 
Los Banos 	1.0 	1.5 	3.2 	4.7 	6.1 	7.4 	8.2 	7.0 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	50.0 
Merced 	1.0 	1.5 	3.2 	4.7 	6.6 	7.9 	8.5 	7.2 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.5 
MODOC 
Modoc/Alturas 	0.9 	1.4 	2.8 	3.7 	5.1 	6.2 	7.5 	6.6 	4.6 	2.8 	1.2 	0.7 	43.2 
MONO 
Bridgeport 	0.7 	0.9 	2.2 	3.8 	5.5 	6.6 	7.4 	6.7 	4.7 	2.7 	1.2 	0.5 	43.0 
MONTEREY 
Arroyo Seco 	1.5 	2.0 	3.7 	5.4 	6.3 	7.3 	7.2 	6.7 	5.0 	3.9 	2.0 	1.6 	52.6 
Castroville 	1.4 	1.7 	3.0 	4.2 	4.6 	4.8 	4.0 	3.8 	3.0 	2.6 	1.6 	1.4 	36.2 
Gonzales 	1.3 	1.7 	3.4 	4.7 	5.4 	6.3 	6.3 	5.9 	4.4 	3.4 	1.9 	1.3 	45.7 
Greenfield 	1.8 	2.2 	3.4 	4.8 	5.6 	6.3 	6.5 	6.2 	4.8 	3.7 	2.4 	1.8 	49.5 
King City 	1.7 	2.0 	3.4 	4.4 	4.4 	5.6 	6.1 	6.7 	6.5 	5.2 	2.2 	1.3 	49.6 
King City-Oasis Rd. 	1.4 	1.9 	3.6 	5.3 	6.5 	7.3 	7.4 	6.8 	5.1 	4.0 	2.0 	1.5 	52.7 
Long Valley 	1.5 	1.9 	3.2 	4.1 	5.8 	6.5 	7.3 	6.7 	5.3 	3.6 	2.0 	1.2 	49.1 
Monterey 	1.7 	1.8 	2.7 	3.5 	4.0 	4.1 	4.3 	4.2 	3.5 	2.8 	1.9 	1.5 	36.0 
Pajaro 	1.8 	2.2 	3.7 	4.8 	5.3 	5.7 	5.6 	5.3 	4.3 	3.4 	2.4 	1.8 	46.1 
Salinas 	1.6 	1.9 	2.7 	3.8 	4.8 	4.7 	5.0 	4.5 	4.0 	2.9 	1.9 	1.3 	39.1 
Salinas North 	1.2 	1.5 	2.9 	4.1 	4.6 	5.2 	4.5 	4.3 	3.2 	2.8 	1.5 	1.2 	36.9 
San Ardo 	1.0 	1.7 	3.1 	4.5 	5.9 	7.2 	8.1 	7.1 	5.1 	3.1 	1.5 	1.0 	49.0 
San Juan 	1.8 	2.1 	3.4 	4.6 	5.3 	5.7 	5.5 	4.9 	3.8 	3.2 	2.2 	1.9 	44.2 
Soledad 	1.7 	2.0 	3.4 	4.4 	5.5 	5.4 	6.5 	6.2 	5.2 	3.7 	2.2 	1.5 	47.7 
NAPA 
Angwin 	1.8 	1.9 	3.2 	4.7 	5.8 	7.3 	8.1 	7.1 	5.5 	4.5 	2.9 	2.1 	54.9 
Carneros 	0.8 	1.5 	3.1 	4.6 	5.5 	6.6 	6.9 	6.2 	4.7 	3.5 	1.4 	1.0 	45.8 
Oakville 	1.0 	1.5 	2.9 	4.7 	5.8 	6.9 	7.2 	6.4 	4.9 	3.5 	1.6 	1.2 	47.7 
St Helena 	1.2 	1.5 	2.8 	3.9 	5.1 	6.1 	7.0 	6.2 	4.8 	3.1 	1.4 	0.9 	44.1 
Yountville 	1.3 	1.7 	2.8 	3.9 	5.1 	6.0 	7.1 	6.1 	4.8 	3.1 	1.5 	0.9 	44.3 
NEVADA 
Grass Valley 	1.1 	1.5 	2.6 	4.0 	5.7 	7.1 	7.9 	7.1 	5.3 	3.2 	1.5 	0.9 	48.0 
Nevada City 	1.1 	1.5 	2.6 	3.9 	5.8 	6.9 	7.9 	7.0 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.9 	47.4 
ORANGE 
Irvine 	2.2 	2.5 	3.7 	4.7 	5.2 	5.9 	6.3 	6.2 	4.6 	3.7 	2.6 	2.3 	49.6 
Laguna Beach 	2.2 	2.7 	3.4 	3.8 	4.6 	4.6 	4.9 	4.9 	4.4 	3.4 	2.4 	2.0 	43.2 
Santa Ana 	2.2 	2.7 	3.7 	4.5 	4.6 	5.4 	6.2 	6.1 	4.7 	3.7 	2.5 	2.0 	48.2 
PLACER 
Auburn 	1.2 	1.7 	2.8 	4.4 	6.1 	7.4 	8.3 	7.3 	5.4 	3.4 	1.6 	1.0 	50.6 
Blue Canyon 	0.7 	1.1 	2.1 	3.4 	4.8 	6.0 	7.2 	6.1 	4.6 	2.9 	0.9 	0.6 	40.5 
Colfax 	1.1 	1.5 	2.6 	4.0 	5.8 	7.1 	7.9 	7.0 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.9 	47.9 
Roseville 	1.1 	1.7 	3.1 	4.7 	6.2 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.6 	3.7 	1.7 	1.0 	52.2 
Soda Springs 	0.7 	0.7 	1.8 	3.0 	4.3 	5.3 	6.2 	5.5 	4.1 	2.5 	0.7 	0.7 	35.4 
Tahoe City 	0.7 	0.7 	1.7 	3.0 	4.3 	5.4 	6.1 	5.6 	4.1 	2.4 	0.8 	0.6 	35.5 
Truckee 	0.7 	0.7 	1.7 	3.2 	4.4 	5.4 	6.4 	5.7 	4.1 	2.4 	0.8 	0.6 	36.2 
PLUMAS 
Portola 	0.7 	0.9 	1.9 	3.5 	4.9 	5.9 	7.3 	5.9 	4.3 	2.7 	0.9 	0.5 	39.4 
Quincy 	0.7 	0.9 	2.2 	3.5 	4.9 	5.9 	7.3 	5.9 	4.4 	2.8 	1.2 	0.5 	40.2 
RIVERSIDE 
Beaumont 	2.0 	2.3 	3.4 	4.4 	6.1 	7.1 	7.6 	7.9 	6.0 	3.9 	2.6 	1.7 	55.0 
Blythe 	2.4 	3.3 	5.3 	6.9 	8.7 	9.6 	9.6 	8.7 	6.9 	5.0 	3.0 	2.2 	71.4 
Cathedral City 	1.6 	2.2 	3.7 	5.1 	6.8 	7.8 	8.7 	7.8 	5.7 	4.0 	2.1 	1.6 	57.1 
Coachella 	2.9 	4.4 	6.2 	8.4 	10.5 	11.9 	12.3 	10.1 	8.9 	6.2 	3.8 	2.4 	88.1 
Desert Center 	2.9 	4.1 	6.4 	8.5 	11.0 	12.1 	12.2 	11.1 	9.0 	6.4 	3.9 	2.6 	90.0 
Elsinore 	2.1 	2.8 	3.9 	4.4 	5.9 	7.1 	7.6 	7.0 	5.8 	3.9 	2.6 	1.9 	55.0 
Indio 	3.1 	3.6 	6.5 	8.3 	10.5 	11.0 	10.8 	9.7 	8.3 	5.9 	3.7 	2.7 	83.9 
La Quinta 	2.4 	2.8 	5.2 	6.5 	8.3 	8.7 	8.5 	7.9 	6.5 	4.5 	2.7 	2.2 	66.2 
Mecca 	2.6 	3.3 	5.7 	7.2 	8.6 	9.0 	8.8 	8.2 	6.8 	5.0 	3.2 	2.4 	70.8 
Oasis 	2.9 	3.3 	5.3 	6.1 	8.5 	8.9 	8.7 	7.9 	6.9 	4.8 	2.9 	2.3 	68.4 
Palm Desert 	2.5 	3.4 	5.3 	6.9 	8.7 	9.6 	9.6 	8.7 	6.9 	5.0 	3.0 	2.2 	71.6 
Palm Springs 	2.0 	2.9 	4.9 	7.2 	8.3 	8.5 	11.6 	8.3 	7.2 	5.9 	2.7 	1.7 	71.1 
Rancho California 	1.8 	2.2 	3.4 	4.8 	5.6 	6.3 	6.5 	6.2 	4.8 	3.7 	2.4 	1.8 	49.5 
Rancho Mirage 	2.4 	3.3 	5.3 	6.9 	8.7 	9.6 	9.6 	8.7 	6.9 	5.0 	3.0 	2.2 	71.4 
Ripley 	2.7 	3.3 	5.6 	7.2 	8.7 	8.7 	8.4 	7.6 	6.2 	4.6 	2.8 	2.2 	67.8 
Salton Sea North 	2.5 	3.3 	5.5 	7.2 	8.8 	9.3 	9.2 	8.5 	6.8 	5.2 	3.1 	2.3 	71.7 
Temecula East II 	2.3 	2.4 	4.1 	4.9 	6.4 	7.0 	7.8 	7.4 	5.7 	4.1 	2.6 	2.2 	56.7 
Thermal 	2.4 	3.3 	5.5 	7.6 	9.1 	9.6 	9.3 	8.6 	7.1 	5.2 	3.1 	2.1 	72.8 
Riverside UC 	2.5 	2.9 	4.2 	5.3 	5.9 	6.6 	7.2 	6.9 	5.4 	4.1 	2.9 	2.6 	56.4 
Winchester 	2.3 	2.4 	4.1 	4.9 	6.4 	6.9 	7.7 	7.5 	6.0 	3.9 	2.6 	2.1 	56.8 
SACRAMENTO 
Fair Oaks 	1.0 	1.6 	3.4 	4.1 	6.5 	7.5 	8.1 	7.1 	5.2 	3.4 	1.5 	1.0 	50.5 
Sacramento 	1.0 	1.8 	3.2 	4.7 	6.4 	7.7 	8.4 	7.2 	5.4 	3.7 	1.7 	0.9 	51.9 
Twitchell Island 	1.2 	1.8 	3.9 	5.3 	7.4 	8.8 	9.1 	7.8 	5.9 	3.8 	1.7 	1.2 	57.9 
SAN BENITO 
Hollister 	1.5 	1.8 	3.1 	4.3 	5.5 	5.7 	6.4 	5.9 	5.0 	3.5 	1.7 	1.1 	45.1 
San Benito 	1.2 	1.6 	3.1 	4.6 	5.6 	6.4 	6.9 	6.5 	4.8 	3.7 	1.7 	1.2 	47.2 
San Juan Valley 	1.4 	1.8 	3.4 	4.5 	6.0 	6.7 	7.1 	6.4 	5.0 	3.5 	1.8 	1.4 	49.1 
SAN BERNARDINO 
Baker 	2.7 	3.9 	6.1 	8.3 	10.4 	11.8 	12.2 	11.0 	8.9 	6.1 	3.3 	2.1 	86.6 
Barstow NE 	2.2 	2.9 	5.3 	6.9 	9.0 	10.1 	9.9 	8.9 	6.8 	4.8 	2.7 	2.1 	71.7 
Big Bear Lake 	1.8 	2.6 	4.6 	6.0 	7.0 	7.6 	8.1 	7.4 	5.4 	4.1 	2.4 	1.8 	58.6 
Chino 	2.1 	2.9 	3.9 	4.5 	5.7 	6.5 	7.3 	7.1 	5.9 	4.2 	2.6 	2.0 	54.6 
Crestline 	1.5 	1.9 	3.3 	4.4 	5.5 	6.6 	7.8 	7.1 	5.4 	3.5 	2.2 	1.6 	50.8 
Lake Arrowhead 	1.8 	2.6 	4.6 	6.0 	7.0 	7.6 	8.1 	7.4 	5.4 	4.1 	2.4 	1.8 	58.6 
Lucerne Valley 	2.2 	2.9 	5.1 	6.5 	9.1 	11.0 	11.4 	9.9 	7.4 	5.0 	3.0 	1.8 	75.3 
Needles 	3.2 	4.2 	6.6 	8.9 	11.0 	12.4 	12.8 	11.0 	8.9 	6.6 	4.0 	2.7 	92.l 
Newberry Springs 	2.1 	2.9 	5.3 	8.4 	9.8 	10.9 	11.1 	9.9 	7.6 	5.2 	3.1 	2.0 	78.2 
San Bernardino 	2.0 	2.7 	3.8 	4.6 	5.7 	6.9 	7.9 	7.4 	5.9 	4.2 	2.6 	2.0 	55.6 
Twentynine Palms 	2.6 	3.6 	5.9 	7.9 	10.1 	11.2 	11.2 	10.3 	8.6 	5.9 	3.4 	2.2 	82.9 
Victorville 	2.0 	2.6 	4.6 	6.2 	7.3 	8.9 	9.8 	9.0 	6.5 	4.7 	2.7 	2.1 	66.2 
SAN DIEGO 
Chula Vista 	2.2 	2.7 	3.4 	3.8 	4.9 	4.7 	5.5 	4.9 	4.5 	3.4 	2.4 	2.0 	44.2 
Escondido SPV 	2.4 	2.6 	3.9 	4.7 	5.9 	6.5 	7.1 	6.7 	5.3 	3.9 	2.8 	2.3 	54.2 
Miramar 	2.3 	2.5 	3.7 	4.1 	5.1 	5.4 	6.1 	5.8 	4.5 	3.3 	2.4 	2.1 	47.1 
Oceanside 	2.2 	2.7 	3.4 	3.7 	4.9 	4.6 	4.6 	5.1 	4.1 	3.3 	2.4 	2.0 	42.9 
Otay Lake 	2.3 	2.7 	3.9 	4.6 	5.6 	5.9 	6.2 	6.1 	4.8 	3.7 	2.6 	2.2 	50.4 
Pine Valley 	1.5 	2.4 	3.8 	5.1 	6.0 	7.0 	7.8 	7.3 	6.0 	4.0 	2.2 	1.7 	54.8 
Ramona 	2.1 	2.1 	3.4 	4.6 	5.2 	6.3 	6.7 	6.8 	5.3 	4.1 	2.8 	2.1 	51.6 
San Diego 	2.1 	2.4 	3.4 	4.6 	5.1 	5.3 	5.7 	5.6 	4.3 	3.6 	2.4 	2.0 	46.5 
Santee 	2.1 	2.7 	3.7 	4.5 	5.5 	6.1 	6.6 	6.2 	5.4 	3.8 	2.6 	2.0 	51.l 
Torrey Pines 	2.2 	2.3 	3.4 	3.9 	4.0 	4.1 	4.6 	4.7 	3.8 	2.8 	2.0 	2.0 	39.8 
Warner Springs 	1.6 	2.7 	3.7 	4.7 	5.7 	7.6 	8.3 	7.7 	6.3 	4.0 	2.5 	1.3 	56.0 
SAN FRANCISCO 
San Francisco 	1.5 	1.3 	2.4 	3.0 	3.7 	4.6 	4.9 	4.8 	4.1 	2.8 	1.3 	0.7 	35.1 
SAN JOAQUIN 
Farmington 	1.5 	1.5 	2.9 	4.7 	6.2 	7.6 	8.1 	6.8 	5.3 	3.3 	1.4 	0.7 	50.0 
Lodi West 	1.0 	1.6 	3.3 	4.3 	6.3 	6.9 	7.3 	6.4 	4.5 	3.0 	1.4 	0.8 	46.7 
Manteca 	0.9 	1.7 	3.4 	5.0 	6.5 	7.5 	8.0 	7.1 	5.2 	3.3 	1.6 	0.9 	51.2 
Stockton 	0.8 	1.5 	2.9 	4.7 	6.2 	7.4 	8.1 	6.8 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.6 	49.1 
Tracy 	1.0 	1.5 	2.9 	4.5 	6.1 	7.3 	7.9 	6.7 	5.3 	3.2 	1.3 	0.7 	48.5 
SAN LUIS OBISPO 
Arroyo Grande 	2.0 	2.2 	3.2 	3.8 	4.3 	4.7 	4.3 	4.6 	3.8 	3.2 	2.4 	1.7 	40.0 
Atascadero 	1.2 	1.5 	2.8 	3.9 	4.5 	6.0 	6.7 	6.2 	5.0 	3.2 	1.7 	1.0 	43.7 
Morro Bay 	2.0 	2.2 	3.1 	3.5 	4.3 	4.5 	4.6 	4.6 	3.8 	3.5 	2.1 	1.7 	39.9 
Nipomo 	2.2 	2.5 	3.8 	5.1 	5.7 	6.2 	6.4 	6.1 	4.9 	4.1 	2.9 	2.3 	52.1 
Paso Robles 	1.6 	2.0 	3.2 	4.3 	5.5 	6.3 	7.3 	6.7 	5.1 	3.7 	2.1 	1.4 	49.0 
San Luis Obispo 	2.0 	2.2 	3.2 	4.1 	4.9 	5.3 	4.6 	5.5 	4.4 	3.5 	2.4 	1.7 	43.8 
San Miguel 	1.6 	2.0 	3.2 	4.3 	5.0 	6.4 	7.4 	6.8 	5.1 	3.7 	2.1 	1.4 	49.0 
San Simeon 	2.0 	2.0 	2.9 	3.5 	4.2 	4.4 	4.6 	4.3 	3.5 	3.1 	2.0 	1.7 	38.1 
SAN MATEO 
Half Moon Bay 	1.5 	1.7 	2.4 	3.0 	3.9 	4.3 	4.3 	4.2 	3.5 	2.8 	1.3 	1.0 	33.7 
Redwood City 	1.5 	1.8 	2.9 	3.8 	5.2 	5.3 	6.2 	5.6 	4.8 	3.1 	1.7 	1.0 	42.8 
Woodside 	1.8 	2.2 	3.4 	4.8 	5.6 	6.3 	6.5 	6.2 	4.8 	3.7 	2.4 	1.8 	49.5 
SANTA BARBARA 
Betteravia 	2.1 	2.6 	4.0 	5.2 	6.0 	5.9 	5.8 	5.4 	4.1 	3.3 	2.7 	2.1 	49.1 
Carpenteria 	2.0 	2.4 	3.2 	3.9 	4.8 	5.2 	5.5 	5.7 	4.5 	3.4 	2.4 	2.0 	44.9 
Cuyama 	2.1 	2.4 	3.8 	5.4 	6.9 	7.9 	8.5 	7.7 	5.9 	4.5 	2.6 	2.0 	59.7 
Goleta 	2.1 	2.5 	3.9 	5.1 	5.7 	5.7 	5.4 	5.4 	4.2 	3.2 	2.8 	2.2 	48.1 
Goleta Foothills 	2.3 	2.6 	3.7 	5.4 	5.3 	5.6 	5.5 	5.7 	4.5 	3.9 	2.8 	2.3 	49.6 
Guadalupe 	2.0 	2.2 	3.2 	3.7 	4.9 	4.6 	4.5 	4.6 	4.1 	3.3 	2.4 	1.7 	41.1 
Lompoc 	2.0 	2.2 	3.2 	3.7 	4.8 	4.6 	4.9 	4.8 	3.9 	3.2 	2.4 	1.7 	41.1 
Los Alamos 	1.8 	2.0 	3.2 	4.1 	4.9 	5.3 	5.7 	5.5 	4.4 	3.7 	2.4 	1.6 	44.6 
Santa Barbara 	2.0 	2.5 	3.2 	3.8 	4.6 	5.1 	5.5 	4.5 	3.4 	2.4 	1.8 	1.8 	40.6 
Santa Maria 	1.8 	2.3 	3.7 	5.1 	5.7 	5.8 	5.6 	5.3 	4.2 	3.5 	2.4 	1.9 	47.4 
Santa Ynez 	1.7 	2.2 	3.5 	5.0 	5.8 	6.2 	6.4 	6.0 	4.5 	3.6 	2.2 	1.7 	48.7 
Sisquoc 	2.1 	2.5 	3.8 	4.1 	6.1 	6.3 	6.4 	5.8 	4.7 	3.4 	2.3 	1.8 	49.2 
Solvang 	2.0 	2.0 	3.3 	4.3 	5.0 	5.6 	6.1 	5.6 	4.4 	3.7 	2.2 	1.6 	45.6 
SANTA CLARA 
Gilroy 	1.3 	1.8 	3.1 	4.1 	5.3 	5.6 	6.1 	5.5 	4.7 	3.4 	1.7 	1.1 	43.6 
Los Gatos 	1.5 	1.8 	2.8 	3.9 	5.0 	5.6 	6.2 	5.5 	4.7 	3.2 	1.7 	1.1 	42.9 
Morgan Hill 	1.5 	1.8 	3.4 	4.2 	6.3 	7.0 	7.1 	6.0 	5.1 	3.7 	1.9 	1.4 	49.5 
Palo Alto 	1.5 	1.8 	2.8 	3.8 	5.2 	5.3 	6.2 	5.6 	5.0 	3.2 	1.7 	1.0 	43.0 
San Jose 	l.5 	1.8 	3.1 	4.1 	5.5 	5.8 	6.5 	5.9 	5.2 	3.3 	l.8 	l.0 	45.3 
SANTA CRUZ 
De Laveaga 	1.4 	1.9 	3.3 	4.7 	4.9 	5.3 	5.0 	4.8 	3.6 	3.0 	1.6 	1.3 	40.8 
Green Valley Rd 	1.2 	1.8 	3.2 	4.5 	4.6 	5.4 	5.2 	5.0 	3.7 	3.1 	l.6 	1.3 	40.6 
Santa Cruz 	1.5 	1.8 	2.6 	3.5 	4.3 	4.4 	4.8 	4.4 	3.8 	2.8 	1.7 	1.2 	36.6 
Watsonville 	1.5 	1.8 	2.7 	3.7 	4.6 	4.5 	4.9 	4.2 	4.0 	2.9 	1.8 	1.2 	37.7 
Webb 	1.8 	2.2 	3.7 	4.8 	5.3 	5.7 	5.6 	5.3 	4.3 	3.4 	2.4 	1.8 	46.2 
SHASTA 
Burney 	0.7 	1.0 	2.1 	3.5 	4.9 	5.9 	7.4 	6.4 	4.4 	2.9 	0.9 	0.6 	40.9 
Fall River Mills 	0.6 	1.0 	2.1 	3.7 	5.0 	6.1 	7.8 	6.7 	4.6 	2.8 	0.9 	0.5 	41.8 
Glenburn 	0.6 	1.0 	2.1 	3.7 	5.0 	6.3 	7.8 	6.7 	4.7 	2.8 	0.9 	0.6 	42.1 
McArthur 	0.7 	1.4 	2.9 	4.2 	5.6 	6.9 	8.2 	7.2 	5.0 	3.0 	1.1 	0.6 	46.8 
Redding 	1.2 	1.4 	2.6 	4.1 	5.6 	7.1 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.9 	48.8 
SIERRA 
Downieville 	0.7 	1.0 	2.3 	3.5 	5.0 	6.0 	7.4 	6.2 	4.7 	2.8 	0.9 	0.6 	41.3 
Sierraville 	0.7 	1.1 	2.2 	3.2 	4.5 	5.9 	7.3 	6.4 	4.3 	2.6 	0.9 	0.5 	39.6 
SISKIYOU 
Happy Camp 	0.5 	0.9 	2.0 	3.0 	4.3 	5.2 	6.1 	5.3 	4.1 	2.4 	0.9 	0.5 	35.1 
MacDoel 	1.0 	1.7 	3.1 	4.5 	5.9 	7.2 	8.1 	7.1 	5.1 	3.1 	1.5 	1.0 	49.0 
Mt Shasta 	0.5 	0.9 	2.0 	3.0 	4.5 	5.3 	6.7 	5.7 	4.0 	2.2 	0.7 	0.5 	36.0 
Tule Lake FS 	0.7 	1.3 	2.7 	4.0 	5.4 	6.3 	7.1 	6.4 	4.7 	2.8 	1.0 	0.6 	42.9 
Weed 	0.5 	0.9 	2.0 	2.5 	4.5 	5.3 	6.7 	5.5 	3.7 	2.0 	0.9 	0.5 	34.9 
Yreka 	0.6 	0.9 	2.1 	3.0 	4.9 	5.8 	7.3 	6.5 	4.3 	2.5 	0.9 	0.5 	39.2 
SOLANO 
Benicia 	1.3 	1.4 	2.7 	3.8 	4.9 	5.0 	6.4 	5.5 	4.4 	2.9 	1.2 	0.7 	40.3 
Dixon 	0.7 	1.4 	3.2 	5.2 	6.3 	7.6 	8.2 	7.2 	5.5 	4.3 	1.6 	1.1 	52.1 
Fairfield 	1.1 	1.7 	2.8 	4.0 	5.5 	6.1 	7.8 	6.0 	4.8 	3.1 	1.4 	0.9 	45.2 
Hastings Tract 	l.6 	2.2 	3.7 	5.1 	6.8 	7.8 	8.7 	7.8 	5.7 	4.0 	2.1 	1.6 	57.1 
Putah Creek 	1.0 	1.6 	3.2 	4.9 	6.1 	7.3 	7.9 	7.0 	5.3 	3.8 	1.8 	1.2 	51.0 
Rio Vista 	0.9 	1.7 	2.8 	4.4 	5.9 	6.7 	7.9 	6.5 	5.1 	3.2 	1.3 	0.7 	47.0 
Suisun Valley 	0.6 	1.3 	3.0 	4.7 	5.8 	7.0 	7.7 	6.8 	5.3 	3.8 	1.4 	0.9 	48.3 
Winters 	0.9 	1.7 	3.3 	5.0 	6.4 	7.5 	7.9 	7.0 	5.2 	3.5 	1.6 	1.0 	51.0 
SONOMA 
Bennett Valley 	1.1 	1.7 	3.2 	4.1 	5.5 	6.5 	6.6 	5.7 	4.5 	3.1 	1.5 	0.9 	44.4 
Cloverdale 	1.1 	1.4 	2.6 	3.4 	5.0 	5.9 	6.2 	5.6 	4.5 	2.8 	1.4 	0.7 	40.7 
Fort Ross 	1.2 	l.4 	2.2 	3.0 	3.7 	4.5 	4.2 	4.3 	3.4 	2.4 	1.2 	0.5 	31.9 
Healdsburg 	1.2 	1.5 	2.4 	3.5 	5.0 	5.9 	6.1 	5.6 	4.5 	2.8 	1.4 	0.7 	40.8 
Lincoln 	1.2 	1.7 	2.8 	4.7 	6.1 	7.4 	8.4 	7.3 	5.4 	3.7 	1.9 	1.2 	51.9 
Petaluma 	1.2 	1.5 	2.8 	3.7 	4.6 	5.6 	4.6 	5.7 	4.5 	2.9 	1.4 	0.9 	39.6 
Santa Rosa 	1.2 	1.7 	2.8 	3.7 	5.0 	6.0 	6.1 	5.9 	4.5 	2.9 	1.5 	0.7 	42.0 
Valley of the Moon 	1.0 	1.6 	3.0 	4.5 	5.6 	6.6 	7.1 	6.3 	4.7 	3.3 	1.5 	1.0 	46.1 
Windsor 	0.9 	l.6 	3.0 	4.5 	5.5 	6.5 	6.5 	5.9 	4.4 	3.2 	1.4 	1.0 	44.2 
STANISLAUS 
Denair 	1.0 	1.9 	3.6 	4.7 	7.0 	7.9 	8.0 	6.1 	5.3 	3.4 	1.5 	1.0 	51.4 
La Grange 	1.2 	1.5 	3.1 	4.7 	6.2 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.2 
Modesto 	0.9 	1.4 	3.2 	4.7 	6.4 	7.7 	8.1 	6.8 	5.0 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	49.7 
Newman 	1.0 	1.5 	3.2 	4.6 	6.2 	7.4 	8.1 	6.7 	5.0 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	49.3 
Oakdale 	1.2 	1.5 	3.2 	4.7 	6.2 	7.7 	8.1 	7.1 	5.1 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	50.3 
Patterson 	1.3 	2.1 	4.2 	5.4 	7.9 	8.6 	8.2 	6.6 	5.8 	4.0 	1.9 	1.3 	57.3 
Turlock 	0.9 	1.5 	3.2 	4.7 	6.5 	7.7 	8.2 	7.0 	5.1 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	50.2 
SUTTER 
Nicolaus 	0.9 	1.6 	3.2 	4.9 	6.3 	7.5 	8.0 	6.9 	5.2 	3.4 	1.5 	0.9 	50.2 
Yuba City 	1.3 	2.1 	2.8 	4.4 	5.7 	7.2 	7.1 	6.1 	4.7 	3.2 	1.2 	0.9 	46.7 
TEHAMA 
Corning 	1.2 	1.8 	2.9 	4.5 	6.1 	7.3 	8.1 	7.2 	5.3 	3.7 	1.7 	1.1 	50.7 
Gerber 	1.0 	1.8 	3.5 	5.0 	6.6 	7.9 	8.7 	7.4 	5.8 	4.1 	1.8 	1.1 	54.7 
Gerber Dryland 	0.9 	1.6 	3.2 	4.7 	6.7 	8.4 	9.0 	7.9 	6.0 	4.2 	2.0 	1.0 	55.5 
Red Bluff 	1.2 	1.8 	2.9 	4.4 	5.9 	7.4 	8.5 	7.3 	5.4 	3.5 	1.7 	1.0 	51.1 
TRINITY 
Hay Fork 	0.5 	1.1 	2.3 	3.5 	4.9 	5.9 	7.0 	6.0 	4.5 	2.8 	0.9 	0.7 	40.1 
Weaverville 	0.6 	1.1 	2.2 	3.3 	4.9 	5.9 	7.3 	6.0 	4.4 	2.7 	0.9 	0.7 	40.0 
TULARE 
Alpaugh 	0.9 	1.7 	3.4 	4.8 	6.6 	7.7 	8.2 	7.3 	5.4 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.6 
Badger 	1.0 	1.3 	2.7 	4.1 	6.0 	7.3 	7.7 	7.0 	4.8 	3.3 	1.4 	0.7 	47.3 
Delano 	1.1 	1.9 	4.0 	4.9 	7.2 	7.9 	8.1 	7.3 	5.4 	3.2 	1.5 	1.2, 	53.6 
Dinuba 	1.1 	1.5 	3.2 	4.7 	6.2 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	51.2 
Lindcove 	0.9 	1.6 	3.0 	4.8 	6.5 	7.6 	8.1 	7.2 	5.2 	3.4 	1.6 	0.9 	50.6 
Porterville 	1.2 	1.8 	3.4 	4.7 	6.6 	7.7 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.4 	1.4 	0.7 	52.1 
Visalia 	0.9 	1.7 	3.3 	5.1 	6.8 	7.7 	7.9 	6.9 	4.9 	3.2 	1.5 	0.8 	50.7 
TUOLUMNE 
Groveland 	1.1 	1.5 	2.8 	4.1 	5.7 	7.2 	7.9 	6.6 	5.1 	3.3 	1.4 	0.7 	47.5 
Sonora 	1.1 	1.5 	2.8 	4.1 	5.8 	7.2 	7.9 	6.7 	5.1 	3.2 	1.4 	0.7 	47.6 
VENTURA 
Camarillo 	2.2 	2.5 	3.7 	4.3 	5.0 	5.2 	5.9 	5.4 	4.2 	3.0 	2.5 	2.1 	46.1 
Oxnard 	2.2 	2.5 	3.2 	3.7 	4.4 	4.6 	5.4 	4.8 	4.0 	3.3 	2.4 	2.0 	42.3 
Piru 	2.8 	2.8 	4.1 	5.6 	6.0 	6.8 	7.6 	7.8 	5.8 	5.2 	3.7 	3.2 	61.5 
Port Hueneme 	2.0 	2.3 	3.3 	4.6 	4.9 	4.9 	4.9 	5.0 	3.7 	3.2 	2.5 	2.2 	43.5 
Thousand Oaks 	2.2 	2.6 	3.4 	4.5 	5.4 	5.9 	6.7 	6.4 	5.4 	3.9 	2.6 	2.0 	51.0 
Ventura 	2.2 	2.6 	3.2 	3.8 	4.6 	4.7 	5.5 	4.9 	4.1 	3.4 	2.5 	2.0 	43.5 
YOLO 
Bryte 	0.9 	1.7 	3.3 	5.0 	6.4 	7.5 	7.9 	7.0 	5.2 	3.5 	1.6 	1.0 	51.0 
Davis 	1.0 	1.9 	3.3 	5.0 	6.4 	7.6 	8.2 	7.1 	5.4 	4.0 	1.8 	1.0 	52.5 
Esparto 	1.0 	1.7 	3.4 	5.5 	6.9 	8.1 	8.5 	7.5 	5.8 	4.2 	2.0 	1.2 	55.8 
Winters 	l.7 	1.7 	2.9 	4.4 	5.8 	7.1 	7.9 	6.7 	5.3 	3.3 	1.6 	1.0 	49.4 
Woodland 	1.0 	1.8 	3.2 	4.7 	6.1 	7.7 	8.2 	7.2 	5.4 	3.7 	1.7 	1.0 	51.6 
Zamora 	1.1 	1.9 	3.5 	5.2 	6.4 	7.4 	7.8 	7.0 	5.5 	4.0 	1.9 	1.2 	52.8 
YUBA 
Browns Valley 	1.0 	1.7 	3.1 	4.7 	6.1 	7.5 	8.5 	7.6 	5.7 	4.1 	2.0 	1.1 	52.9 
Brownsville 	1.1 	1.4 	2.6 	4.0 	5.7 	6.8 	7.9 	6.8 	5.3 	3.4 	1.5 	0.9 	47.4 
 
* The values in this table were derived from: 
1)  California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS); 
2)  Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, UC Dept. of Land, Air & Water Resources and California Dept of Water Resources 1999; 
3)  Reference Evapotranspiration for California, University of California, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987) Bulletin 1922; 
4)  Determining Daily Reference Evapotranspiration, Cooperative Extension UC Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987), Publication Leaflet 21426. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 24, 6-21-2016) 
Appendix B. Sample Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet 
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET 
This worksheet is filled out by the project applicant and it is a required element of the Landscape Documentation Package. 
Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo)_______________ 
Hydrozone # 
/Planting Description a 	Plant Factor (PF) 	Irrigation Method b 	Irrigation Efficiency (IE) c 	ETAF 
(PF/IE) 	Landscape Area (sq. ft.) 	ETAF × Area 	Estimated 
Total Water 
Use (ETWU) d 
Regular Landscape Areas 
							
							
							
							
				Totals 	(A) 	(B) 	
Special Landscape Areas 
				1 			
				1 			
				1 			
				Totals 	(C) 	(D) 	
			ETWU Total 	
			Maximum Allowed Water Allowance (WAWA) e 	
 
a Hydrozone #/Planting Description 
E.g. 
1. Front lawn 
2. Low water use plantings 
3. Medium water use planting 
b Irrigation Method—Overhead spray or drip 
c Irrigation Efficiency—0.75 for spray head/0.81 for drip 
d ETWU (Annual Gallons Required) = ETo × 0.62 × ETAF × Area. 
Where 0.62 is a conversion factor that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. 
e MAWA (Annual Gallons Allowed) = (ETo)(0.62) [(ETAF × LA) + ((1-ETAF) × SLA)] 
Where 0.62 is a conversion factor that converts acre-inches per acre per year, to gallons per square foot per year, LA is the total landscape area in square feet, SLA is the total special landscape area in square feet, and ETAF is 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas. 
ETAF Calculations 
Regular Landscape Areas 
Total ETAF × Area 	(B) 
Total Area 	(A) 
Average ETAF 	B ÷ A 
 
Average ETAF for regular landscape areas must be 0.55 or below for residential areas, and 0.45 or below for non-residential areas. 
All Landscape Areas 
Total ETAF × area 	(B+D) 
Total Area 	(A+C) 
Sitewide ETAF 	(B+D)+(A+C) 
 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 25, 6-21-2016) 
Appendix C. Sample Certificate of Completion 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION 
This certificate is filled out by the project applicant upon completion of the landscape project. 
PART 1. PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET 
Date 	
Project Name 	
Name of Project Applicant 	Telephone No. 
	Fax No. 
Title 	Email Address 
Company 	Street Address 
City 	State 	Zip Code 
 
Project Address and Location: 
Street Address 	Parcel, tract or lot number, if available. 
City 	Latitude/Longitude (optional) 
State 	Zip Code 	
 
Property owner or his/her designee: 
Name 	Telephone No. 
	Fax No. 
Title 	Email Address 
Company 	Street Address 
City 	State 	Zip Code 
 
Property owner 
"I/we certify that I/we have received copies of all the documents within the Landscape Documentation Package and the Certificate of Completion and that it is our responsibility to see that the project is maintained in accordance with the Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule." 
_____
Property Owner Signature 	_____
Date 
 
Please answer the questions below: 
1.  Date the Landscape Documentation Package was submitted to the local agency ________ 
2.  Date the Landscape Documentation Package was approved by the local agency ________ 
3.  Date that a copy of the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet (including the Water Budget Calculation) was submitted to the local water purveyor ________ 
PART 2. CERTIFICATION OF INSTALLATION ACCORDING TO THE LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE 
"I/we certify that based upon periodic site observations, the work has been substantially completed in accordance with the ordinance and that the landscape planting and irrigation installation conform with the criteria and specifications of the approved Landscape Documentation Package." 
Signature* 	Date 
Name (print) 	Telephone No. 
	Fax No. 
Title 	Email Address 
License No. or Certification No. 
Company 	Street Address 
City 	State 	Zip Code 
 
PART 3. IRRIGATION SCHEDULING 
Attach parameters for setting the irrigation schedule on controller per Section 17.11.140. 
PART 4. SCHEDULE OF LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE 
Attach schedule of Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance per Section 17.11.150. 
PART 5. LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDIT REPORT 
Attach Landscape Irrigation Audit Report per Section 17.11.160. 
PART 6. SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT 
Attach soil analysis report, if not previously submitted with the Landscape Documentation Package per Section 17.11.100. 
Attach documentation verifying implementation of recommendations from soil analysis report per Section 17.11.100. 
(Ord. No. 2751, § 6(Att. A), 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2884, § 26, 6-21-2016) 
Appendix D. Sample Certificate of Completion. 
(a)  This appendix contains prescriptive requirements which may be used as a compliance option to the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
(b)  Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented a landscape plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option: 
(1)  Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following elements: 
(A)  Date; 
(B)  Project applicant; 
(C)  Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot numbers(s)); 
(D)  Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf and plant material; 
(E)  Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed); 
(F)  Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well; 
(G)  Contact information for the project applicant and proper owner; 
(H)  Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option to the MWE-LO." 
(2)  Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet to a depth of six (6) inches into landscape area (unless contra-indicated by a soil test); 
(3)  Plant material shall comply with all of the following: 
(A)  For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for seventy-five (75) percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water; for non-residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for one-hundred (100) percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water; 
(B)  A minimum of three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. 
(4)  Turf shall comply with all of the following: 
(A)  Turf shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape area in residential areas, and there shall be no turf in non-residential areas; 
(B)  Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one foot vertical elevation change for every four (4) feet of horizontal length; 
(C)  Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten (10) feet wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by sub-surface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff. 
(5)  Irrigation systems shall comply with the following: 
(A)  Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data and utilize a rain sensor. 
(B)  Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted. 
(C)  Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturers recommended pressure range. 
(D)  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply. 
(E)  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard." All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014. 
(F)  Areas less than ten (10) feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with surface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray. 
(6)  For non-residential projects with landscape areas of one thousand (1,000) sq. ft. or more, a private submitter(s) to measure landscape water use shall be installed. 
(c)  At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation, irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2884, § 27, 6-21-2016)  
Chapter 17.12 - SIGN STANDARDS AND SIGNAGE REGULATION[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2831, § 4, adopted Sept. 24, 2013, changed the title of Ch. 17.12 from "Signs Standards" to "Sign Standards and Signage Regulations." 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish sign regulations that are intended to: 
A.  Aid the public's orientation and to advertise and identify business and activities; 
B.  Promote the appearance of the city as an attractive place to live, work, and trade by controlling and regulating the design, quality of materials, location, scale, illumination, and maintenance of signs; and 
C.  Provide minimum standards designed to safeguard the health, safety, and public welfare while encouraging flexibility, variety and compatibility. 
D.  Regulate signs in a constitutional manner that is content neutral as to messages which are within the protections of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution and corollary provisions of the California Constitution. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.010) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 5, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.020 - General provisions and requirements. 
A.  The provisions contained within this chapter shall apply to the placement of signs on private property, the public thoroughfare and city property. The foregoing notwithstanding, provisions of this chapter regulating signage, other than temporary signs and inanimate signs, shall not apply to private property located within the so-called "Downtown El Monte Retail Core" as the same is defined under Chapter 17.72 (Downtown El Monte Retail Core Face Design Standards). 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, entity or corporation to affix, install, construct, reconstruct, display, alter or relocate any sign without first complying with the requirements of this chapter. Any person, entity or corporation affixing, installing, constructing, reconstructing, displaying, altering or relocating any sign not in compliance with this chapter shall be subject to the remedies contained in Chapter 17.06 and/or the remedies contained within this chapter. 
C.  All signs shall be professionally painted, lettered and installed and maintained in good condition at all times including the replacement of damaged or broken letters, faded colors, or missing lights from illuminated signs. 
D.  Signs shall be architecturally integrated into the overall building design and harmonious with the materials, color, texture, scale, size, shape, height, placement, and design of the building, property, and neighborhood of which it is a part. 
E.  Exterior or exposed raceway or conduit is prohibited. 
F.  Unshielded light bulbs in excess of twenty-five (25) watts per lamp which may be seen from the public street or any property line shall not be used in conjunction with any sign, except neon signs. 
G.  No sign may be designated, lighted, placed or displayed that would in any way simulate any type of traffic, emergency vehicle or emergency control or direction device or create a situation which is determined to be a traffic hazard by the City Engineer. 
H.  Every building must have a street number in arabic numerals at a size of six (6) inches and be readily visible from the street. Numbers any larger may be considered a sign. 
I.  Unless otherwise specified, a sign containing text or graphic material which can be viewed from not more than two (2) surfaces of a single structure shall be considered a single sign; provided that the maximum distance between the two viewing surfaces shall not exceed four (4) feet at any point. 
J.  With respect to private property located in the Downtown El Monte Retail Core as referenced under Chapter 17.72 (Downtown El Monte Retail Core Façade Design Standards) of the El Monte Municipal Code, only one commercial temporary sign shall be permitted on each exterior wall or window of a premises which abuts a street, alley, exit court, or public parking area indicating that a sale of goods or services is being conducted on said premises, provided that said sign does not exceed ten (10) square feet in area; its letters, numbers, or symbols do not exceed twelve (12) inches in height; and no such sign is maintained for more than thirty (30) days in any consecutive one-hundred-eighty-day period. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.015) 
(Ord. No. 2831, §§ 6, 9, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Abandoned sign" means any sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of ninety (90) days which no longer identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the property where the display is located. 
"Abatement" means the process by which the city requires removal of signs that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and/or the process by which the city requires conformance to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Awning or canopy sign" means a sign which is painted, sewn, stained, etc., onto the exterior surface of an awning or canopy and which does not extend beyond the edge(s) of said awning or canopy. 
"Authorized city employee" means any city employee within an employment classification that has been duly authorized by the City Administrator to remove signs not in compliance with Section 17.12.130 of this chapter. 
"Balloon sign" means a lighter than air or gas-filled balloon or similarly inflated device tethered to a fixed location which may or may not include text or graphics. 
"Banner sign" means a cloth, paper or fabric sign suspended from a building, structure, light standard, or utility pole. 
"Changeable copy sign" means a sign in which at least fifty (50) percent of the sign area is designed to be used with removable graphics to allow the changing of copy, including but not limited to electronic message centers. 
"Channel letters" means individual three (3) dimensional letters or figures, with an open back or front, which may or may not be illuminated. 
"City property" means any real property parcel owned or leased by the city of El Monte and all buildings, structures and improvements constructed thereupon, including, but not limited to, El Monte City Hall, the El Monte Aquatic Center, Grace Black Auditorium, the El Monte Public Works and Transportation Yard, any "park or recreational facility" within the meaning of Section 12.48.020 (Definitions) of the El Monte Municipal Code or any city-owned parking lot or parking structure. 
"Construction sign" means a temporary sign erected on the site where the construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the name of individuals or firms having a role or interest in such project. 
"Development project sign" means a temporary sign identifying a proposed development project or one under construction, and which is located on the site of the project. 
"Directional sign" means an on-site sign limited to directional messages of a nonadvertising nature: such as, address, "one way," "exit," and "entrance." 
"Directory sign" means a freestanding or wall sign which vertically lists the names of all business tenants in a multitenant building or shopping center. 
"Eave sign" or "overhang sign" means a sign applied to the face of a building facade eave or overhang, parallel to the subject facade and not extending above the building roof line. 
"Election," when capitalized under this chapter, means any general municipal election or special municipal election called by the El Monte City Council or any other election administered by the Registrar/Recorder-County Clerk of the County of Los Angeles or a public agency for a public office whose jurisdiction includes all or part of the city of El Monte and/or a ballot or bond measure for which voters of all or part of the city of El Monte are entitled to vote. 
"Election sign" means a sign that advertises a candidate for public office, a proposition or other issue to be voted on by the electorate. 
"Facade area" means the area of the facade used to calculate the maximum allowable sign area. The calculation includes the width of the facade or lease line, whichever is less, multiplied by the height of the facade or lease line, whichever is less. The width and height measurement shall not include the height of a sloped or pitched roof or any architectural projection. 
Facade, Primary. "Primary facade" means the facade containing the primary building or business entrance or the facade facing the primary street. The property owner shall determine the primary facade if the primary building or business entrance does not face the primary street. If a building faces two (2) or more streets, the primary facade shall be the facade facing the street where the building is addressed. 
Facade, Secondary. "Secondary facade" means the facade facing a parking lot, alley or nonprimary street. 
"Fence sign" means a sign which is mounted on a fence or wall other than a building wall. 
"Fin sign" means a sign applied to or constructed as part of a vertical architectural element integral to the design and construction of a building facade. 
"Flag" means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patters, or design that displays the symbol(s) of a nation, state, local government, company, organization, belief system, idea, or other meaning. 
"Flashing sign" means an illuminated sign which exhibits changing light or color effects by any means so as to provide a nonconstant level of illumination. Flashing signs include but are not limited to animated, blinking, and scintillating signs. However, changeable copy signs are excluded. 
"Freestanding sign" means a sign permanently affixed to the ground by poles, pylons, braces or similar supporting structures and which is not a part of or attached to any building. Freestanding signs include monument signs, pole signs, and other similar signs. 
"Garage sale sign" and "yard sale sign" means any temporary sign advertising a garage sale within the meaning of Chapter 5.44 (Garage Sales) of Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
"Government sign" means a sign erected, installed, owned and maintained by a governmental agency, including but not limited to, a municipality, a county, the State of California, a joint exercise of powers authority or a school district and which is installed in the discharge of a governmental function and/or regulation. Examples of government signs that may be erected, installed, owned and maintained by a municipality and/or a county in the discharge of a governmental function and/or regulation, include, but are not limited to, (i) traffic control and/or directional signage such as stop signs, no parking or restricted parking signs, pedestrian crossing signs, speed limit signs, yield signs, road closed signs, detour signs, school zone signs or signs warning motorists of the presence of children and the like; (ii) name signs for highways, boulevards, avenues, drives, streets, roads, ways, lanes, places, circles and courts and also inclusive of "major arterials," "secondary arterials," "collectors" and "local streets" as the same are defined and described under the 2011 General Plan for the city of El Monte; and (iii) signs advertising governmental agency sponsored events or activities or which identify governmental buildings or facilities, including parking facilities. Examples of government signs that may be erected, installed and maintained by a joint exercise of powers authority, include, but are not limited to bus stop signs. Other examples of government signs include, but are not limited to, any informational signage, cautionary signage or emergency signage affixed to any public utilities, equipment and improvements by regulatory mandate of any governmental agency having approval authority over the construction and installation of the public utilities, equipment and improvements or any government agency having regulatory oversight over the ongoing use, operation and maintenance of such public utilities, equipment and improvements. 
"Highway" means any "highway," "freeway," "state highway" or "county highway" within the meaning of Sections 23, 23.5, 24 and 25, respectively, of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
"Illuminated sign" means a sign for which an artificial source of light is used in order to make the sign's message readable, including internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing, radiating or solar powered signs. 
"Inanimate sign" means any sign that is not displayed by being continuously held by or otherwise attached to a natural person. 
"Legal nonconforming sign" means a sign which was legally installed in conformance with ordinances in effect at the time the sign was installed, but which is in conflict with a subsequently adopted ordinance. 
"Logo" means a trademark or company name symbol identifying the business or service provided and which may be all or part of a sign. 
"Marquee" means a permanent, projecting structure attached to and supported by a building wall, which may project over a public right-of-way. 
"Master sign plan" means a coordinated program of signage for new or existing commercial, office or industrial centers, complexes, or parks which contain more than one business establishment or tenant. 
"Moving sign" means any sign or device which has any visible moving or revolving part or visible mechanical or nonmechanical movement. 
"Mural" means a picture on an exterior surface of a structure that does not pertain to the business, product, or services on the premises. 
"Nameplate" means a nonelectric on-premises identification sign which contains only the name and/or address of an occupant or group of occupants of a property. 
"Off-site sign" means a sign identifying and/or advertising a business, service, use, product, trade show, dance event, social function, entertainment event, entertainment venue, sporting event, sporting venue, real property rental or real property sale that is not offered or held on the property or site where the sign is displayed. 
"On-site sign" means a sign identifying and/or advertising a business, service, use, product, trade show, dance event, social function, entertainment event, entertainment venue, sporting event, sporting venue, real property rental or real property sale that is offered or held on the property or site where the sign is displayed. 
"Painted sign" means a sign which is painted directly onto a building facade. 
"Parkway" means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any roadway and, where there is not a sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. 
"Pennant" means devices generally made of flexible materials, such as cloth, paper, plastic, or vinyl which may or may not contain copy and which are primarily intended to draw attention. 
"Person" means any natural person, firm, association, organization, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, business trust, business enterprise, living trust, joint venture, campaign committee, volunteer, non-profit corporation, non-profit organization, fraternal organization or publicly regulated utility. 
"Political sign" means a sign advocating any political idea or message that is not voted on by the electorate. 
"Portable sign" means a sign not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground. 
"Primary street" is the greater of two (2) streets as defined in the El Monte general plan, master plan of roadways. Where two (2) streets of the same classification intersect, the primary street shall be the street with the greatest property frontage. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign which is attached to and projects from, a structure or building facade, with the display surface of the sign possessing a plane not parallel to the building facade or structure to which it is attached. 
"Public thoroughfare" means all that area dedicated to public use for public travel purposes, inclusive of highways, boulevards, avenues, drives, streets, roads, ways, lanes, places, circles, courts, cul-de-sacs and also inclusive of "major arterials", "secondary arterials", "collectors" and "local streets" as the same are defined and described under the 2011 General Plan for the city of El Monte. The defined term "public thoroughfare" encompasses and includes all roadways; parkways; street medians; sidewalks, vehicle and/or pedestrian overpasses and underpass structures and improvements, bridges, including railroad bridges and other similar improvements located within, over or under the all or any portion of the public thoroughfare. 
"Public utilities, equipment and improvements" means any utilities, equipment or improvements owned, operated and/or maintained by (i) the city of El Monte; or (ii) any person whose operation, use and/or maintenance of such utilities, equipment or improvements is regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission and/or the Federal Communications Commission; and/or (iii) any public mass transit authority or joint exercise of powers authority. Subject to the criteria set forth in the preceding sentence and for purposes of illustration, the defined term "public utilities, equipment and improvements" includes, but is not limited to, the following examples: 
(i)  Street lighting poles; 
(ii)  Telephone poles and any guy wires and above-ground utility cabinets or structures containing meters, devices and other equipment used in connection with the operation of the telephone lines that are carried by telephone poles; 
(iii)  Poles, lattice structures and other similar support structures used to carry electrical transmission lines and any guy wires and above-ground utility cabinets or structures containing meters, devices and other equipment used in connection with the operation of the electrical lines that are carried by such poles, lattice structures and other similar support structures; 
(iv)  Radio transmission towers and lattice structures and any guy wires and above-ground utility cabinets or structures containing equipment used in connection with the operation of such radio transmission towers and lattice structures; 
(v)  "Wireless facilities," "wireless telecommunications facilities," "wireless telecommunications collocation facilities," "support structures," "guyed structures," "lattice towers," "monopoles," "antenna," and "accessory equipment" as all of these terms are defined under Section 17.82.020 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.82 (Wireless Facilities) of the El Monte Municipal Code; 
(vi)  Poles and other support structures for traffic signals, traffic control devices and other like equipment as well as above-ground cabinets containing meters, devices and other equipment used in connection with the operation of such traffic signals traffic control devices and other like equipment; 
(vii)  Traffic control and/or directional signage, including, but not limited to, stop signs, no parking or restricted parking signs, pedestrian crossing signs, speed limit signs, yield signs, road closed signs, detour signs, school zone signs and the like, and any poles used to display such traffic control or directional signage; 
(viii)  Name signs and support poles for highways, boulevards, avenues, drives, streets, roads, ways, lanes, places, circles and courts and also inclusive of "major arterials," "secondary arterials," "collectors," and "local streets" as the same are defined and described under the 2011 General Plan for the city of El Monte; 
(ix)  Bus stop signs and poles used to support such signage, bus stop shelters and bus stop benches and chairs; 
(x)  Above-ground irrigation equipment, groundwater treatment and reinjection facilities and equipment, pumps, backflow prevention devices and other similar equipment. 
For purposes of further clarification, privately owned light standards and lamp posts located on privately owned real property (e.g., to illuminate parking lot areas on private property) which are not owned, operated and/or maintained by the city of El Monte or any of the other varieties of entities identified above, do not constitute "public utilities, equipment and improvements." 
"Real-estate sign" means a sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located. 
"Roadway" means that portion of the public thoroughfare generally used for public use for public vehicular traffic. 
"Roof sign" means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and any portion of which projects above the highest point of the roof line or main parapet of a flat roofed building. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of the public thoroughfare provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians, but which may be inclusive of driveway aprons used to provide vehicular ingress and egress to and from a public or private real property parcel and the roadway. 
"Sign" means any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to any object, person, institution, organization, business, project, service, event, or location by any means including but not limited to words, letters, graphics, figures, design symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
"Sign area" means the entire area of a sign if enclosed by a frame, trim or outline or the area within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign copy. 
"Sign copy" means any words, letters, graphics, numbers, text, figures, logos or other symbolic representation incorporated into a sign. 
"Sign face" means the area of display used for a sign. 
"Sign structure" means any edifice or framework which supports or is capable of supporting a sign. 
"Street median" means the raised or unraised area located within the roadway, of varying width and length which is not used for vehicular traffic but which may contain trees, shrubs, plants and other landscaping, public street lighting poles, traffic signals, public utilities and equipment, pedestrian areas, public street name signs, public directional signage and public traffic control signage. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign structure or device used for the public display of visual messages or images, which is easily installed with common hand tools, or without tools, and which is not intended for or suitable for long term or permanent display due to the lightweight or flimsy construction materials. The lightweight and/or flimsy construction materials typically used for temporary signs include, but are not necessarily limited to, vinyl, paper, cloth or fabric, polyboard, coroplast, corrugated plastic, poster board, plastic core, cardboard, wood and plywood. For purposes of illustration, "temporary signs" include, but are not limited to, the following types of signs: placards, lawn signs, yard signs, bandit signs, snipe signs, roadside signs, banner signs, paper flyers and handbills and posters. 
"Total sign area" means the combined area of each permanent sign located on the premises. 
"Wall sign" means a sign which is mounted flush and affixed securely to a building wall, projecting no more than eighteen (18) inches from said wall and not extending sideways beyond the building face or above the highest line of the building wall to which it is attached. 
"Window sign" means any sign which is painted, posted, or displayed on an exterior translucent or transparent surface including windows and doors, either permanently or temporarily, or which is placed within five (5) feet of the face of any window or door and is intended to be viewed from the outside or is oriented to the exterior of the building. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.020) 
(Ord. No. 2831, §§ 10—13, 9-24-2013) 
Editor's note— For outdoor advertising structures, off-site signs or billboards, see El Monte Municipal Code Chapter 17.70.  
17.12.040 - Submittal procedures. 
A.  Freestanding Buildings. A sign permit shall be obtained from the Planning Division prior to the installation, alteration or relocation of any sign. The procedures for applying for a sign permit are as follows: 
1.  Complete a sign permit application and pay the applicable fee; 
2.  Submit three (3) copies of a site plan and building elevations indicating the street frontage, width and height dimensions of the building and photographs of the building and any freestanding signs; 
3.  Submit three (3) copies of sign plans drawn to scale indicating the following: 
a.  Overall sign dimensions, 
b.  Letter colors (maximum four (4) colors), 
c.  Background colors, 
d.  Trim cap color, 
e.  Letter styles, 
f.  Method of illumination, 
g.  Method of attachment, and typical cross-section, 
h.  Reader panel on freestanding signs, if applicable, and 
i.  Directional signs, if applicable. 
B.  Multiple Tenant Centers. All properties with more than one tenant or business shall receive approval for a master sign program prior to any permits for new signs being issued for individual tenants (there is no fee to submit a master sign program). The property owner or authorized agent shall submit a master sign program containing: 
1.  Property owner/property management submittal requirements and approval procedures; 
2.  General sign criteria including: 
a.  Permitted sign colors (maximum four (4) colors), 
b.  Permitted background color (must be a uniform color), 
c.  Permitted trim cap color, 
d.  Permitted letter styles, 
e.  Sign locations and spacing, 
f.  Method of illumination, 
g.  Method of attachment, and 
h.  Typical cross-section. 
3.  Criteria for freestanding signs, directional signs, reader board signs (background color must be white or off-white), etc. 
4.  Property owners are strongly encouraged to name the commercial complex to assist future tenants and customers in identifying the commercial complex. It is further recommended that the name be prominently located on the freestanding sign occupying twenty-five (25) percent of the freestanding sign area. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.025)  
17.12.050 - Permitted signs—All R, SH, RMP and PRD zones. 
A.  One identification sign per dwelling, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, containing the names and/or the address of the occupant of the premises. No sign permit shall be required. 
B.  For properties developed with three or more units, one multifamily complex identification sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such sign shall be placed flat against the building, mounted on a block wall or shall be a freestanding monument sign not to exceed six (6) feet in height. Any illumination shall be limited to subdued spotlighting. 
C.  One non-illuminated temporary real estate sign, as described in Civil Code Section 713, per parcel with a maximum area of eight (8) square feet in area. Such signs shall only be allowed when the subject property is on the market and up to ten (10) calendar days following the close of escrow on the sale of the subject property. 
D.  A religious institution may locate one freestanding sign for each street frontage of at least fifty (50) lineal feet, provided the maximum sign area does not exceed forty (40) square feet or the sign's height does not exceed six (6) feet, unless other sign provisions are approved pursuant to law. Changeable copy shall be permitted on freestanding signs. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.030) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 14, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.060 - Permitted signs—All office, commercial, industrial and mixed use zones. 
A.  Painted wall signs are permitted, however, no more than two (2) such signs per business are permitted. Painted wall signs shall be painted directly upon the surface of the building. Furthermore, painted wall signs cannot be mixed with other sign types (e.g. channel letters, canister signs, etc.) on a single facade. 
B.  Permanent window signs are permitted, but shall cover no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the individual window area. Additionally, temporary window signs are permitted but the total window sign area shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the individual window area. 
C.  The total allowable sign area per facade for all permanent signs (including freestanding signs and reader panels, but excluding window signs) shall be determined as follows: 
1.  Permitted sign area for occupancies with less than fifty (50) feet of primary facade: 
a.  Fifteen (15) percent of the facade area for the primary facade. 
b.  Ten (10) percent of the facade area for the secondary facade. 
2.  Permitted sign area for occupancies fifty (50) feet or more of primary facade: 
a.  Ten (10) percent of the facade area for the primary facade. 
b.  Seven (7) percent of the facade area for the secondary facade. 
3.  Properties with only one building and one tenant are entitled to an additional five (5) percent of total sign area if there is no pole sign. 
D.  The only sign permitted above the first floor of a multistory building is a building identification sign or major tenant sign as designated by the property owner. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.035)  
17.12.070 - Freestanding signs. 
A.  Freestanding signs shall be proportional to the building height and the sign canister shall be proportional to the pole height. Furthermore, freestanding signs shall not exceed an overall height of twenty-five (25) feet unless the business is regional in nature and the sign is approved under a conditional use permit. 
B.  One freestanding sign for every one hundred fifty (150) feet of lot frontage or part thereof; provided, however, that no freestanding sign may be located less than one hundred (100) feet from another freestanding sign on the same parcel of property, and provided further that no freestanding sign shall be located less than twenty (20) feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the lot frontage, whichever is less, to the side property line. Every freestanding sign and supporting poles and structures shall be covered with a material to match or complement the main structure. 
C.  The maximum allowable freestanding sign area is one square foot per lineal foot of primary street frontage. However, in no case shall the total aggregate sign area exceed that permitted under Section 17.12.060. 
D.  Freestanding signs must be located within a landscaped area or island which is of a size that is at least one-half the area of the total sign area. 
E.  The clearance underneath freestanding signs projecting over a public right-of-way shall be as follows: 
Clearance 	Maximum Projection 
Less than 8 feet 	Not permitted 
8 feet 	1 foot 
8 feet—16 feet 	1 foot plus 6 inches for every foot over 8 feet 
Over 16 feet 	5 feet 
 
However in no case shall signs project within two (2) feet to the curb face. An encroachment permit must be obtained for all signs projecting over a public right-of-way. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.040)  
17.12.080 - Design guidelines. 
A.  Signs and sign copy shall not crowd the edges of the building, cornice line, architectural features or the sign canister which contains the sign copy. 
B.  A maximum of four (4) colors are permitted for the sign copy on any single sign and a maximum of four (4) colors are permitted for the sign copy on all signs within a multiple tenant center. 
C.  All signs within a multiple tenant center must have a uniform background color. 
D.  Signs must be evenly distributed throughout the tenant space and within the multiple tenant center. 
E.  Signs constructed of plywood, MDO, or MDF shall be finished as follows: 
1.  The material shall be approved for outdoor use; 
2.  The sign face and sides of the sign must be smooth; 
3.  The sign shall have a border painted on or attached to it; 
4.  The sign shall be mounted at least one inch away from the surface it is attached to; 
5.  All surfaces of the sign shall be finished with exterior quality finishes; and 
6.  The anchor bolts shall not be visible. 
F.  The maximum sign area permitted may be increased by up to ten (10) percent and the background color and the maximum number of colors on a sign may also be increased subject to an administrative hearing by the Planning Services Manager. Approval shall be granted based upon unique building characteristics or design, unique sign design or unique site planning. Requests for increases greater than ten (10) percent, shall be subject to approval of a design review by the City Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of this title. The fee for such design review requests shall be one-half the fee for other commercial requests. 
G.  Except as stated above, the standards contained herein are the maximum allowed. The Planning Services Manager has the duty and authority to review and approve all sign permits and to reduce the allowable sign area or to require relocation of the sign to improve the aesthetic or advertising value of the sign. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.045)  
17.12.090 - Commercial temporary signs—On-site signs. 
A.  Exterior commercial temporary signs which also qualify as both on-site signs and inanimate signs shall be permitted only upon the issuance of a commercial temporary sign permit and shall be subject to the following requirements and restrictions: 
1.  Such signs shall be constructed of the following materials only: canvas, vinyl, nylon or similar mesh which is tear-resistant. 
2.  Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days, within a one-hundred-eighty-day period. 
3.  A maximum of two (2) such signs shall be permitted for each single tenant commercial building located in a nonresidential zone and not more than one such sign shall be permitted for each tenant within a multiple tenant commercial building or commercial complex located in a nonresidential zone. 
4.  The total maximum sign area for such signs shall be thirty (30) square feet or five (5) percent of the primary facade area, whichever is greater. 
5.  Two (2) such signs not exceeding a total of one hundred (100) square feet in area identifying persons engaged in construction on a construction site, may be located in any nonresidential zone, as long as permitted construction is in progress, but not to exceed a twelve-month period. 
B.  Commercial temporary signs which are to be used window signs and which also qualify as both inanimate signs and on-site signs shall be permitted only upon the issuance of a commercial temporary sign permit and shall be subject to the following requirements and restrictions: 
1.  Such signs may be continuously displayed, however, sign copy must be changed or revised a minimum of every sixty (60) days; 
2.  Such signs may be constructed of paper (except newsprint paper computer printout paper), provided the signs are professionally printed and lettered on heavyweight art paper or similar materials; 
3.  A maximum of two (2) such signs shall be permitted for each single tenant commercial building located in a nonresidential zone and no more than one such sign shall be permitted for each tenant within a multiple tenant commercial building or commercial complex located in a nonresidential zone; 
4.  The total maximum sign area for such signs shall be thirty (30) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the window area, whichever is greater; 
C.  Garage sale or yard sale signs shall be displayed in accordance with all restrictions set forth under Chapter 5.44 (Garage Sales) of the El Monte Municipal Code, provided further that no garage sale or yard sale sign shall be displayed, posted or placed in the public thoroughfare or encroach upon the public thoroughfare or be affixed to any public utility, equipment or improvements located within the public thoroughfare. [2] 
D.  All commercial temporary signs authorized under this section shall be kept neat, clean and in good repair. Signs which are faded, torn, damaged or otherwise unsightly or in a state of disrepair shall be immediately replaced or removed. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.050) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 15, 9-24-2013) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— For the full range of requirements and regulations applicable to garage sales or yard sales, please refer to Chapter 5.44 (Garage Sales) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
 
17.12.100 - Exempt signs. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following type of signs: 
A.  Signs within buildings not constituting "window signs"; 
B.  Temporary signs advertising community or civic events that are sponsored or co-sponsored by the city of El Monte which are located or placed on city property or city-owned public utilities and equipment located within the public thoroughfare designed for the posting or placement of such signage; 
C.  Noncommercial security or privacy signs located on private property and not exceeding six (6) square feet in area which convey messages such as "No Trespassing," "Private Property," "Beware of Dog," "Neighborhood Watch Program in Force," "No Soliciting" or which merely indicate that a building or facility is secured by a security alarm system provided by a private security alarm service provider; 
D.  Directional signs (excluding government signs) located on private property not exceeding eight (8) square feet, except as otherwise mandated or authorized by the Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal or referral, as a condition of approval for any discretionary land use entitlement such as a conditional use permit, variance, modification, parcel map or subdivision map. 
E.  Menu boards for restaurants which display the actual customer menu, but not exceeding twelve (12) square feet; 
F.  A maximum of two (2) signs which identify a property or property improvement for sale, lease, or rent which are posted upon the subject property, when the area does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per side; 
G.  Nameplates of four (4) square feet or less per occupant, and twenty (20) square feet in the aggregate, when affixed to entrance/exit doors of the business/building; 
H.  Government signs. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.055) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 17, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.110 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or excepted or exempted from the regulations set forth under this chapter shall be prohibited. Such prohibited signs include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Excluding government signs, any type of sign located anywhere within the public thoroughfare including signs displayed, placed, posted, attached or affixed to any public utilities, equipment or improvements, as defined herein, that may also located within the public thoroughfare. A violation of the foregoing prohibition shall also occur in any instance where a prohibited sign (or portion thereof) protrudes and encroaches upon the public thoroughfare at any point from ground level up, even though the remaining part of the same sign is displayed, posted, placed, attached or affixed to property, buildings, structures, equipment or improvements that lie outside of the public thoroughfare. 
2.  Commercial signs, including but not limited to commercial temporary signs that qualify as inanimate signs, displayed from, posted to, placed upon and/or affixed to city property by any third party, except as expressly authorized by City Council ordinance or resolution or contract between the city of El Monte and said third party. 
3.  Excluding city-authorized government signs, noncommercial signs, including noncommercial temporary signs, displayed from, posted to, placed upon and/or affixed to city property by any third-party without the prior consent of the City Council by ordinance or resolution or agreement between the city and the third party, subject further to any and all state laws prohibited the use of public resources for political or campaign purposes. 
4.  Excluding government signs, signs displayed from, posted to, placed upon, attached to or affixed to any public utilities, equipment or improvements located on private property or on public property other than the public thoroughfare. 
5.  Commercial temporary signs which also qualify as both off-site signs and inanimate signs in all zones of the city of El Monte. 
6.  Blinking or flashing signs, except time and temperature signs. 
7.  Internally or externally illuminated temporary signs. 
8.  Moving, rotating or revolving signs. 
9.  Roof signs, including signs projecting above the eave or roof line; existing roof signs may remain if there is no other location for a freestanding sign and the City Planning Commission approves a design review application. 
10.  Windblown devices and balloons, except for vehicle sales lots. 
11.  Signs attached or affixed to any "protected tree" or "city-owned tree" within the meaning of Chapter 14.03 (Tree Protection and Preservation) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
12.  Commercial signs painted or attached to plywood or similar material, except as specified in Section 17.12.080 E. 
13.  Any commercial sign constructed of paper or similar material which makes use of chalk, felt pen, fluorescent paint, grease pencil, or similar medium. 
14.  Any sign applied directly on the interior or exterior of a translucent or transparent surface including windows and doors by the use of chalk, felt pen, fluorescent paint, grease pencil or similar medium. 
15.  Signs attached to motor vehicles, except as follows: 
a.  The sign is permanently or magnetically affixed to the vehicle; and 
b.  The sign is not attached in a manner that renders the vehicle immobile, or in a manner that violates the California Vehicle Code. 
16.  Portable signs including, but not limited to, A-frame signs and sandwich boards; 
17.  Billboards or outdoor advertising structures, except as permitted by Chapter 17.88 of this Code. 
B.  All signs posted in violation of this Section 17.12.110 shall constitute a public nuisance within the meaning of Chapter 8.44 (Property Maintenance) and may be abated in accordance with the nuisance abatement procedures set forth therein and/or under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2522 § 4, 2000; zoning ordinance § 17.12.060) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 18, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 2914, § 4, 7-18-2017)  
17.12.120 - Abatement of signs. 
A.  Abandoned Signs. Any sign or sign structure which is defined as abandoned when this chapter becomes effective shall be removed within eight (8) months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  Illegal Signs. Any sign or sign structure which was affixed, installed, moved or reconstructed illegally shall be removed within eight (8) months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
C.  Legal Nonconforming Signs. Any sign or sign structure which is currently defined as legal nonconforming or is made legal nonconforming by adopting of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter based upon the following schedule: 
1.  Moving and flashing signs shall no longer move or flash after January 1, 1996. 
2.  Freestanding signs higher than twenty-five (25) feet which have not been granted a conditional use permit shall be removed or shall obtain a conditional use permit by March 12, 2000. 
3.  Roof signs and wall signs which project above the roof line shall be removed by March 12, 2000, except as specified above. 
4.  Wall signs in excess of seven-tenths square feet of display area for every lineal foot of building perimeter or two (2) square feet of display area for every lineal foot of lot frontage, whichever is less, shall conform by March 12, 2000. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.065) 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 5, 7-18-2017)  
17.12.130 - Temporary signs—Commercial off-site and noncommercial. 
A.  Off-Site Commercial Temporary Signs. Except as otherwise excepted or exempted under this chapter, commercial temporary signs which also qualify as both off-site signs and inanimate signs are prohibited in all zones of the city of El Monte, including all private residential and nonresidential real property parcels. Such shall signs shall constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  Noncommercial Temporary Signs—Residential Zones. In any residential zone, non-illuminated temporary signs which qualify as inanimate signs shall be permitted provided that no more than six (6) square feet in area at a maximum of four (4) feet in height may be displayed at any time. The foregoing notwithstanding, during the period of time beginning forty-five (45) days prior to an Election and ending forty-eight (48) hours following the date of the Election, the amount of allowable display area for noncommercial temporary signage shall be unrestricted. Flags shall not count toward the signage allowed under this subsection. 
C.  Noncommercial Temporary Signs—Nonresidential Zones. In any nonresidential zone (e.g., any commercial, industrial or manufacturing zone), non-illuminated temporary signs which qualify as inanimate signs shall be permitted provided that no more than twenty (20) square feet in area at a maximum of six (6) feet in height may be displayed at any time. The foregoing notwithstanding, during the period of time beginning forty-five (45) days prior to an Election and ending forty-eight (48) hours following the date of the Election, the amount of allowable display area for noncommercial temporary signage shall be unrestricted. Flags shall not count toward the signage allowed under this subsection. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.070) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 19, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.140 - Cost for the removal of signs. 
Except as otherwise provided under Section 17.12.170 E of this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, in addition to any fines imposed under this chapter or elsewhere under the El Monte Municipal Code, be liable for costs of city labor, equipment and materials used to remove offending signs. The city shall substantiate its costs in the form of an invoice detail the labor, equipment and materials used to remove signs placed by a person or otherwise belonging to the person. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.12.075) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 20, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.150 - Hearing. 
A.  Any person issued an administrative citation for a violation of any provision of this chapter may request a hearing, provided a written request for such a hearing is submitted with the Office of the City Clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the administrative citation is issued. The hearing request must set forth in detail any objections to the citation and may include any relevant supporting evidence. 
B.  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Director of Community Development shall set a hearing date within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of such request. Notice of the hearing date shall be provided to such person not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing the Director of Community Development shall hear such evidence as the person requesting the hearing shall present that such person was not responsible for the placement of the unlawful temporary sign(s) or that the amount invoiced for costs of removal of the sign(s) was excessive. 
C.  Within ten (10) calendar days following the conclusion of the hearing the Director of Community Development shall issue a determination regarding the person responsible for placement of the signs and/or the costs associated with the removal of the signs. The determination of the Director of Community Development shall be final and not subject to a further appeal. 
(Ord. 2522 § 5, 2000; zoning ordinance § 17.12.080) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 21, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.160 - Fees. 
Fees for any sign or advertising device herein described shall be subject to the appropriate provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code unless otherwise specified in this title. Further, the City Council by resolution or ordinance may adopt and from time to time adjust and amend a schedule of fines and other penalties for any violation of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance § 17.12.085) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 22, 9-24-2013)  
17.12.170 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any separate and distinct violation of this Chapter 17.12 shall be subject to the enforcement procedures and remedies outlined in the El Monte Municipal Code and applicable state and federal laws. Specific penalties include, but are not limited to, administrative fines as outlined in El Monte Municipal Code Chapter 1.18 (Administrative Citations) and criminal enforcement pursuant to El Monte Municipal Code Section 1.24.010(A) (Misdemeanors). It shall be a misdemeanor to install, erect, fail to remove, or maintain any sign in violation of this Chapter 17.12, which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months in jail. Enforcement, whether through civil or criminal proceedings, nuisance abatement, injunction or any other means shall be cumulative. 
B.  In the absence of substantial evidence to the contrary, the person who is featured on a temporary sign or who otherwise benefits from its display shall be presumed to be the person who both owns the sign and was responsible for the placement of the sign. For example, nightclub promoters shall be presumed to be responsible for signs promoting his or her nightclub event, a political candidate shall be presumed to be responsible for signs promoting his or her candidacy, and a computer, tattoo, or other commercial expo promoter shall be responsible for signs promoting his or her expo. 
C.  Criminal Enforcement. It shall be illegal to install, mount, display, use, occupy or maintain signs in violation of this Chapter 17.12. Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter 17.12 constitutes a misdemeanor, a separate violation for each day each sign is in violation. Such misdemeanor violations may be punished in accordance with the provisions of EMMC Chapter 1.24 (General Penalty) or any other remedies prescribed by law. 
D.  Civil and Administrative Penalties. 
1.  Each separate and distinct violation of this Chapter 17.12 may be penalized pursuant to El Monte Municipal Code Chapters 1.18 (Administrative Citations) and 1.19 (Enforcement) and any other civil procedure authorized under the El Monte Municipal Code or state law. 
2.  Each separate and distinct violation of this Chapter 17.12 shall (i) constitute violations as defined under Section 1.18.020; (ii) subject to administrative citation pursuant to Section 1.18.030; and (iii) not be eligible for notice of violation warnings. 
3.  Notwithstanding subsection (D)(2)(iii), above, the City Attorney shall have the authority to waive any first offense within any one calendar year within forty-eight (48) hours of the issuance of administrative citation. 
E.  Abatement. 
1.  Nuisance Abatement. Signs not in compliance with this Chapter 17.12 are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated in accordance with El Monte Municipal Code Chapter 8.44 (Property Maintenance) or by methods authorized by state law. 
2.  Summary Abatement/Removal. 
(i)  In addition to any other enforcement procedures and remedies available to the city under this chapter or any other provision of the El Monte Municipal Code or state law, unauthorized signs which are displayed, placed or posted in the public thoroughfare or encroach upon the public thoroughfare or which are affixed to any public utilities, equipment and improvements located within the public thoroughfare may be immediately and summarily abated and removed by the city without prior notice to any person or entity. 
(ii)  In addition to any other enforcement procedures and remedies available to the city under this chapter or any other provision of the El Monte Municipal Code or state law, signs (including unauthorized signs) which by virtue of their physical condition (as opposed to their graphic design or message content), pose a serious and immediate threat to public safety, may be summarily removed and retained by the city without prior notice to any person or entity. In such case, the city, after removal of the sign, shall promptly give written notice to the sign or property owner, if known, of the emergency confiscation and the cost of redemption. 
F.  Penalties and Abatement—Noncommercial Temporary Signs. 
1.  Notwithstanding subsections A through E of this section, enforcement of the regulations, restrictions and prohibitions of this chapter with respect to noncommercial temporary signs shall be governed by this subsection F. 
2.  Consistent with the prohibition set forth under Section 17.12.110 A.1 of this chapter, the city may immediately and summarily remove any noncommercial temporary sign which qualifies as an inanimate sign without first issuing a notice of violation or providing any other written or verbal notice to any person when such sign (i) is displayed, placed or posted in the public thoroughfare or upon city property; or (ii) encroaches upon the public thoroughfare or city property; or (ii) is affixed to any public utilities, equipment or improvements located within the public thoroughfare or owned by the city. 
3.  No fine or other penalty shall be imposed for any first offense which occurs during the period of time commencing forty-five (45) days prior to the date of an Election and ending forty-eight (48) hours after the date of an Election (hereinafter, "expanded posting period"). 
4.  During each expanded posting period, the first single batch of noncommercial temporary signs belonging to a particular person, candidate, campaign committee or organization (hereinafter, a "responsible party") that have been removed by the city shall collectively constitute the first violation for the responsible party. The City Manager or designee shall attempt to contact the responsible party that owns the subject signs based on information reasonably available and accessible to the City Manager or designee so that the signs may be retrieved. The foregoing notwithstanding, as a condition precedent to the release of the offending signs, the responsible party or an agent or representative of the responsible party who is duly authorized to bind the same contractually and act on the responsible party's behalf shall be required to execute an affidavit on a form prepared by the city declaring under penalty of perjury that (i) the released signs do in fact belong to the responsible party; (ii) the responsible party understands the nature of the violation; and (iii) the responsible party shall advise and instruct all persons working on behalf of the candidate, campaign committee, organization or entity on the proper placement of noncommercial temporary signs within the city. If a responsible party fails to retrieve any removed signs or declines to sign the affidavit within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of notification, the signs shall be deemed discarded and the City Clerk may dispose of the signs in any manner deemed by the City Clerk to be convenient or desirable. 
5.  If, during the same expanded posting period and following the execution of the affidavit referenced, above, additional noncommercial temporary signs are displayed, posted, placed or affixed in violation Section 17.12.110 A.1 of this chapter for a particular responsible party, the second single batch of signs belonging to the responsible party and removed by the city shall count as a second violation. The City Clerk shall contact the responsible party but will only release the removed signs on condition that the responsible party first reimburse the city for the cost of removing the signs, inclusive of staff time, the use of special equipment and other reasonable costs associated with removal. If the reimbursement costs are not paid within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of notification, the signs shall be deemed discarded and the City Clerk may dispose of the signs in any manner deemed by the City Clerk to be convenient or desirable. 
6.  If, during the same expanded posting period and following the occurrence of a first and second violation of Section 17.12.110 A.1 of this chapter, addition noncommercial temporary signs for a responsible party are again displayed, posted, placed or affixed in violation of Section 17.12.110 A.1, then the city may prosecute the violation in accordance with the enforcement procedures of Chapter 1.18 (Administrative Citations) or Chapter 1.24 (General Penalty). The foregoing notwithstanding, every fifty (50) signs belonging to a particular responsible party which are displayed, placed, posted or affixed in violation of Section 17.12.110 A.1 and removed by the city shall constitute a single violation. In prosecuting such violations the city may pursue any and all remedies available to it at law, including fines, penalties and the reimbursement of actual costs associated with the removal of offending signs. 
7.  If, any noncommercial temporary sign is displayed, placed, posted or affixed in violation of Section 17.12.110 A.1 during any period of time other than an expanded posting period, such violations shall be prosecuted in the same manner as any other violation involving the posting of signs in the public thoroughfare or on city property. 
8.  For purposes of this subsection and in the absence of any other identifying information in a noncommercial temporary sign, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that noncommercial temporary signs in support of a specific candidate for elected office are owned jointly by the candidate and the candidate's campaign committee. If a candidate or candidate committee that provides substantial evidence in support of the assertion that the candidate or candidate committee is not the owner of a sign, signs removed by the city shall not be released to the candidate or candidate committee. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 23, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 2865, § 4, 9-15-2015)  
17.12.180 - Orientation for the placement of temporary signs. 
A.  At least once per calendar year, the city shall conduct a voluntary temporary sign placement orientation, advising stakeholders, including but not limited to nightclub promoters, candidates for elected office and/or commercial expo promoters, of the laws and regulations applicable to temporary signs in the city. 
B.  Attendance at the city's temporary sign orientation shall not constitute a condition precedent to the posting of signs in the city or other exercise of constitutionally protected speech, but a lack of knowledge of the city's sign regulations shall not serve as a defense to any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 24, 9-24-2013)  
Chapter 17.14 - NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.14.010 - General provisions. 
The intent of this chapter is to permit nonconforming uses and structures to continue until they are removed, restricted or abandoned, but not to encourage their survival. Nonconforming uses and structures are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the same district. Nonconforming uses and structures shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, except as expressly provided herein, nor shall the existence of a nonconforming use or structure be grounds for adding other uses or structures prohibited in the same district. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.14.10)  
17.14.020 - Definitions. 
"Nonconforming building or structure" means a building or structure which was lawful when brought into existence, but because of subsequent amendment to this chapter, or annexation into the city, could not be built because of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, setbacks, parking, design requirements, location on a lot, type or construction, or other similar requirements concerning the structure. 
"Nonconforming land" means a use which was lawful when brought into existence, but by reason of subsequent amendment to this chapter, or annexation into the city, no longer conforms to the requirements for the district in which it is located. 
"Nonconforming lot" means a lot the area, dimension or location of which was lawful when brought into existence, but by reason of subsequent amendment to this title, or annexation into the city, no longer conforms to the minimum lot size requirements. 
"Nonconforming use" means the use of a property that was allowed under the zoning regulations at the time the use was established but which, because of a subsequent change in the zoning regulations, is no longer a permitted use or now requires a conditional use permit. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.14.20; Ord. No. 2883, § 20, 6-21-2016)  
17.14.030 - Nonconforming buildings or structures. 
A nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  It may not be enlarged, expanded or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity but may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
B.  Whenever a building or structure which is deemed to be nonconforming by virtue of this chapter is damaged to an extent of less than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost immediately prior to such damage, the structure may be restored to its state prior to such damage, provided the restoration is started within one hundred eighty (180) days and diligently pursued to completion. This replacement cost shall be determined by the chief building official, whose decision may be appealed to the City Council. Except as specified in Section 17.14.070, buildings or structures that are damaged greater than fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost shall conform to all current provisions of this title. 
C.  If a nonconforming use is maintained in a nonconforming structure, the provisions of this section and Section 17.14.050 shall apply; provided, that where a conflict between said sections exist, the more restrictive provision shall govern. 
D.  When a nonconforming building or structure is abandoned or vacated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months (three hundred sixty-five (365) days) or more, except for massage establishments, any subsequent use of the property shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the property is located. In order for the business to prove continued operation, the business must submit a valid city business license for the entire period in question, and may be supported by the following evidence subject to the review and approval by the City Planner: 
1.  Receipts, invoices, payments, bank statements and other accounting records showing accounts payable and receivable for entire period in question. These must show actual and continuous business activity. These may be redacted to protect confidentiality of business clients or business bank account or credit card numbers; and/or 
2.  Utility bills showing service to the specific business for the entire period in question. 
E.  Additions and structural alterations may be made to an existing building or structure that is nonconforming solely with respect to a required side yard setback provided; 
1.  That the addition comply with the current side yard setback requirements; or 
2.  That the alteration or addition not exceed fifty (50) percent of the existing floor area of the structure and that the side yard setback not be made further nonconforming. However, in no case may the side yard setback be less than three (3) feet for a main dwelling unit and one foot for an accessory structure, unless a modification has been reviewed and approved in accordance with this title. 
F.  Accommodation of Disabilities. An adjustment of any zoning regulation where the adjustment is necessary to allow improvements to an existing building or property in order to provide reasonable accommodations to individuals with disabilities. This adjustment is not available in the case of new buildings, demolitions and rebuilds, or additions where the proposed construction precludes a reasonable accommodation that would not require an adjustment 
1.  Parking Amendments. The conversion of an existing parking space to an accessible parking space or access aisle for an accessible parking space does not require an adjustment of the parking requirement, even if the conversion results in fewer parking spaces on the lot than required under Chapter 17.08 as long as the accessible parking requirement is not triggered by a change of use or an expansion of the existing use. 
2.  Setback, Open Yards and Distance between Main Buildings Encroachments. An adjustment of setback, lot area, floor area, street frontage, open yard, outdoor living space, or distance between buildings; requirements where the adjustment is consistent with the purposes and intent of this title, and is necessary to: (a) secure an appropriate improvement on a lot; (b) prevent unreasonable hardship; (c) promote uniformity of improvement; or (d) the adjustment is necessary to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act and/or California Code of Regulations, Title 24, requirements. 
G.  Reasonable Accommodation Process. 
1.  Director. The Economic Development Director, or designee, may permit an adjustment in accordance with subsections F.1 and 2, if the director, or designee, finds that: 
a.  The requested adjustment is not part of the approval of a tentative subdivision map, conditional use permit, development plan, site plan, plot plan, or any other matter which requires approval of the Planning Commission. If the adjustment is part of one of these entitlements, then the accommodation will be reviewed by the Planning Commission; 
b.  If granted, the adjustment would not significantly affect persons or property owners other than those entitled to notice; and 
c.  The adjustment is solely for the purpose of accommodating ADA and/or California Code Regulations, Title 24 requirements to comply with accessibility requirements. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.14.30; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 21—23, 6-21-2016)  
17.14.040 - Nonconforming lots. 
A nonconforming lot may be constructed upon provided that, the lot was legally created and the structure or structures and uses conform to all other provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.14.40)  
17.14.050 - Nonconforming uses. 
A nonconforming use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  It may not be enlarged, extended, moved or altered, except to change the use of a structure or land to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
B.  In the case of a nonconforming use of land not involving a structure, the use may not be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel on which it is located other than that occupied by the use at the time it became nonconforming. 
C.  If a nonconforming use of a structure or land is superseded by a permitted use, such use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not be resumed. 
D.  When a nonconforming use of a structure or land is discontinued or abandoned for a continuous period of twelve (12) months (three hundred sixty-five (365) days) or more except for massage establishments, any subsequent use shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the property is located. In order for the business to prove continued operation, the business must submit a valid city business license for the entire period in question, and may be supported by the following evidence subject to the review and approval by the City Planner. 
1.  Receipts, invoices, payments, bank statements and other accounting records showing accounts payable and receivable for entire period in question. These must show actual and continuous business activity. These may be redacted to protect confidentiality of business clients or business bank account or credit card numbers; and/or 
2.  Utility bills showing service to the specific business for the entire period in question. 
E.  Transitional Uses. In order to permit some flexibility with existing commercial and manufacturing uses located in residential zones, certain neighborhoods servicing uses may be permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit. These are listed as "transitional uses" in Section 17.24.040. 
1.  Transitional uses are limited to offices, businesses or professional offices or neighborhood serving uses. A neighborhood-serving use primarily serves nearby individual consumers and households and businesses, is generally pedestrian in design, and does not generate noise, fumes or truck traffic greater than that typically expected for uses with a local customer base. 
2.  These uses would be allowed with CUP and could continue in perpetuity. 
3.  These transitional uses are conditionally permitted in addition to all other uses already permitted in the zone. 
4.  If the commercial use converts to a residential use or other conforming use, it cannot thereafter convert to a nonconforming commercial use. 
5.  The conditional use permit may limit signage and hours of operation and hours of operation among other standards. Minor renovations to the building, including doors, windows, and facades, are permitted to accommodate neighborhood uses, but no additional square footage shall be permitted. 
6.  Parking allowances are permitted pursuant to Subsection 17.14.110.C 
7.  This section applies to existing structures only; new build projects must, adhere to current applicable zoning. 
8.  Applications for conditional use permits to allow transitional uses will only be accepted up to December 31, 2025. Thereafter, the property must comply with the current zoning and a conditional use permit will not be accepted. 
F.  Multi-Tenant Buildings. If an existing, nonconforming multi-tenant commercial and industrial building has vacancies of up to fifty (50) percent of the total gross square footage of the multi-tenant building, then permit the vacant units to be occupied by the most recently occupied use. This is permitted with a zone clearance. If an existing, nonconforming multi-tenant commercial building has vacancies over fifty (50) percent of the total gross square footage of the multi-tenant building, then the multi-tenant building must convert to the current regulations of the zone related to those uses or provide uses pursuant to Sections 17.24.040 and 17.14.050.E above. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.14.50; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 24, 25, 6-21-2016)  
17.14.060 - Repairs and maintenance. 
On any nonconforming structure, or on any nonconforming structure containing a nonconforming use, routine maintenance work may be performed, or repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may take place; provided, that the value of repair or replacement work during any five-year period does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the whole structure; and provided further, that the square footage of the structure, whether conforming or nonconforming, shall not be increased. In addition, no more than fifty (50) percent of the bearing walls may be repaired and/or replaced as part of repair and maintenance work for the structure. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.14.60; Ord. No. 2883, § 26, 6-21-2016)  
17.14.070 - Nonconformity resulting from change in residential density regulations. 
If a residential use is deemed nonconforming solely by virtue of its exceeding the allowable dwelling unit density of the parcel of land on which it is located, such residential use may, if destroyed or damaged greater than fifty (50) percent of its replacement costs through natural causes, be rebuilt to the original legal density subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Design review approval is granted by the City Planning Commission. 
B.  The rebuilt development shall comply with all current design and property development standards, to the extent feasible, except parking and open space. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.14.70)  
17.14.080 - Loss of legal nonconforming status. 
A.  The right to continue a nonconforming use shall terminate when it is determined to be a public nuisance by order of the independent Hearing Officer pursuant to procedures provided in Chapter 8.44 of this Code or order of a court of competent jurisdiction and the nuisance is not abated in the manner and within the time stated in the order of the Hearing Officer or the order of the court. In addition to the specific grounds for finding a nuisance as set forth in Chapter 8.44 of this Code, a nonconforming use is a public nuisance if: 
1.  The use interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property in the neighborhood; or 
2.  The use is a business establishment which permits persons to congregate for unreasonably long time periods in parking areas and/or pedestrian walkways resulting in unreasonable noise levels in residential areas during the hours of nine p.m. to seven a.m., or resulting in said persons obstructing or interfering with the free passageway in said parking areas or on said pedestrian walkways, or which becomes a place where an unreasonable number of violations of Chapter 9.12 of this Code (relating to public consumption of alcoholic beverages) or violations of alcoholic beverage control regulations occur; or 
3.  The use is injurious to the health of persons in the neighborhood. 
B.  The right to continue the use of a nonconforming structure shall terminate when the structure and/or the parcel on which it is located is determined to be a public nuisance by order of the Hearing Officer made pursuant to Chapter 8.44 of this Code, or by judgment or order of a court of competent jurisdiction and the nuisance is not abated in the manner and within the time stated in the order of the Hearing Officer or order of the court. If the abatement of the nuisance required demolition of the structure the order, judgment or order of the court shall find that in fairness and in justice there is no other way reasonably to correct the nuisances other than by demolition of the structure. 
C.  Where it cannot be found that demolition of a structure is appropriate, the Hearing Officer shall permit the structure to remain in existence, but may impose one or more conditions to bring the structure into conformity with the requirements of this title so far as is reasonable in addition to any other conditions necessary to abate the public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2552 § 1, 2002)  
17.14.090 - Amortization and discontinuance of legal nonconforming massage establishments and alternative financial service establishments. 
A.  All massage establishments which have a valid massage establishment certificate under Chapter 5.56 (Massage Establishments and Massage Practitioners/Therapists) of this Code prior to May 5, 2016 and are located within the C-3 (General Commercial) and C-4 (Heavy Commercial) zone shall obtain a conditional use permit no later than May 5, 2019. Any such massage establishment that does not timely obtain a conditional use permit by May 5, 2019 must cease all operations as of May 6, 2019 and remove all signs, advertising and displays relating to such business within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
B.  No massage establishment may operate in zones other than C-3 and C-4, in accordance with the provision of subsection A of this Section 17.04.090 as of May 5, 2021 and must remove all signs, advertising and displays relating to such business within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
C.  All alternative financial service establishments validly operating the city as of August 31, 2017 that possess all requisite permits and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, which are located within the C-3 (General Commercial) and C-4 (Heavy Commercial) zone shall obtain a conditional use permit no later than August 31, 2021, in accordance with Chapter 17.24 of this Code. Any such massage establishment that does not timely obtain a conditional use permit by August 31, 2021 must cease all operations as of September 1, 2021 and remove all signs, advertising and displays relating to such business within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
D.  No alternative financial service establishment may operate in zones other than C-3 and C-4, in accordance with the provision of subsection C of this Section 17.04.090 as of August 31, 2024 and must remove all signs, advertising and displays relating to such business within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
E.  A legal nonconforming massage establishment use or alternative financial service establishment use shall terminate in accordance with the discontinuance provisions of Section 17.14.050 (Nonconforming Uses) and be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.14 (Nonconforming Provisions) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 3, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2920, §§ 4, 5, 8-1-2017)  
17.14.100 - Extension of massage establishment and alternative financial service establishment amortization periods. 
A.  An application for the extension of an amortization period set forth in Section 17.14.090 shall be made as provided herein. 
B.  The owner of the property on which the massage establishment or alternative financial service establishment is located, or the owner of the massage establishment or alternative financial service establishment, must submit a complete application for approval of an extension not later than six (6) months prior to the expiration of the amortization period, unless the Economic Developer determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application. Such application shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the Economic Development Director and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the City Council. The person requesting the extension of the amortization period shall bear the burden of proof in establishing that the amortization period established by Section 17.14.090 is unreasonable, and that the requested extension is a reasonable amortization period under the criteria set forth in subsection G of this Section 17.14.100. The person applying for the extension shall furthermore be required, in order to meet its burden of proof, to submit the documentation set forth in this section. 
C.  Not later than thirty (30) calendar days after submittal of an application to extend the amortization period, the Economic Development Director shall notify the applicant, in writing, if the application is not complete. The notice shall describe the manner in which the application can be made complete and shall be deemed given upon personal delivery to the applicant or upon deposit in the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty (30) calendar days after the application is submitted, the application shall be deemed complete. A complete application shall include: 
1.  The applicant's name and street address of business; 
2.  The address to which notice is to be mailed, at the applicant's option, a telephone number and/or email address; 
3.  The applicant's signature; 
4.  The term of the requested extension; 
5.  Documentation relevant to the factors listed in subsection G of this Section 17.14.100; and 
6.  The required filing fee. 
D.  Within sixty (60) days after a complete application is filed, the Planning Commission shall hear and act on the application and the secretary to the Planning Commission shall give the applicant written notice of the decision and findings made by the Planning Commission. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed granted by operation of law and the business shall be operated as a legal nonconforming use subject to Chapter 17.14 (Nonconforming Provisions). Notice shall be deemed given upon personal delivery to the applicant or upon deposit in the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. The secretary shall give the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days written notice of the time and place at which the application shall be heard by the Planning Commission, in the same manner that notice of the decision is to be given pursuant to this subsection. 
E.  A decision of the Planning Commission to deny the application may be appealed, in whole or in part, by filing a complete notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after notice of the decision was given to the applicant pursuant to subsection D of this section. To be deemed complete, the notice of appeal shall be signed by the appellant, shall state the grounds for disagreement with the decision of the Planning Commission, and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
F.  Within forty-five (45) calendar days after the appeal was filed, the City Council shall hear and act on the appeal, and the City Clerk shall give the appellant written notice of the decision and findings made by the City Council. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed granted by operation of law and the business shall be operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be deemed given upon personal delivery to the appellant and applicant upon deposit in the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. The notice shall include a written statement verified by oath or affirmation attesting to the date that the decision was mailed to the party by first class mail. The City Clerk shall give the appellant and applicant at least ten (10) calendar days written notice of the time and place at which the appeal shall be heard, de novo, by the City Council, in the same manner that written notice of the decision is to be given pursuant to this subsection. 
G.  In determining whether to grant an extension of the amortization period, and in determining the appropriate length of such an extension, the Planning Commission and, the City Council on appeal, shall consider: 
1.  The amount of investment in the business; 
2.  The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements; 
3.  The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or functional non-confidential equivalent; 
4.  The remaining useful life of the business improvements; 
5.  The remaining lease term; 
6.  The ability of the massage establishment and/or land owner to change the use; and 
7.  The opportunity for relocation to a legally permissible site and the cost of relocation. 
H.  The Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, shall receive and consider evidence presented by the appellant and any other persons, and shall make findings that the extension to the amortization period it establishes is reasonable in view of the evidence and the criteria set forth in subsection G. In no event shall the amortization period extension be longer than three (3) years for massage establishments (or by May 5, 2024) or two (2) years for alternative financial service establishments (or by August 31, 2026). The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final and conclusive, unless a timely and complete appeal is filed with the City Clerk pursuant to subsection E of this Section. The decision of the City Council on appeal shall be final and conclusive, unless timely judicial review is sought pursuant to Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.6. In the event a timely action or proceeding is brought pursuant to Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.6 from the decision to deny the requested extension, in whole or in part, the decision shall be automatically stayed pending a final decision on the merits by the trial court. As used in this subsection, final decision on the merits does not include rehearing or appellate procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2878, § 4, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2920, §§ 6—8, 8-1-2017)  
17.14.110 - Parking and expansion or remodeling of structure, or change in use. 
A.  When the use of a structure changes to a use that is required to have the same number of parking spaces as the immediately previous use, no additional parking spaces shall be required for the new use, regardless of the number of spaces actually provided by the previous use; provided that the previous use was legally established and the number of spaces has not decreased. For example, for a new restaurant going into a site where a previous restaurant existed. The new restaurant requires twenty (20) spaces but the old restaurant only had ten (10) spaces. The new restaurant can open with only ten (10) spaces. 
B.  When the floor area of an existing use is increased, additional parking spaces shall be provided on-site as required by this chapter only for the additional gross floor area. This applies to expansions that are a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the original floor area. Any expansion greater than fifty (50) percent requires the use to conform to current parking standards. For example, if a restaurant expands its floor area by five hundred (500) sq. ft., then they would need to provide additional parking for the five hundred (500) sq. ft., no matter how many spaces existed for the original structure. 
C.  Parking allowance for transitional uses, pursuant to Section 17.24.040, and subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. Transitional uses are permitted a twenty-five (25) percent parking reduction over the required number of spaces for the transitional use. A twenty-six (26) to fifty (50) percent reduction can be approved by the Planning Commission if substantiated by a parking study. Options for allowing this reduction include, but are not limited to, tandem parking, shared off-site parking, limitation of transitional uses to low impact uses, limitation of hours of operation, partial demolition of existing building and any other method that can be substantiated by a parking study prepared by a licensed traffic engineer or transportation professional. 
D.  When a new trash enclosure is required the applicant must seek all feasible locations before considering removing required on-site parking to accommodate the new trash enclosure. 
E.  Nonconforming parking or loading. An existing use of land shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming use simply because of the lack of off-street parking or loading facilities required by Chapter 17.08. However, a structure with nonconforming parking that increases the number of parking or loading spaces shall not thereafter reduce that number of spaces unless the number of spaces after the reduction complies with the minimum requirements of Chapter 17.08. 
(Ord. No. 2883, § 27, 6-21-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2883, § 27, adopted June 21, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as § 17.14.090. To avoid duplication of section numbers and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 17.14.110.  
Chapter 17.16 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY* 
Sections: 
 
17.16.010 - Certificate of occupancy; temporary certificate of occupancy. 
A.  Certificate of Occupancy. No person shall occupy or otherwise use, or permit the occupancy or use of all or any portion of the following until a certificate of occupancy is applied for and then issued by the Building Official: 
1.  Any building, structure or other improvement constructed upon all or any portion of real property; 
2.  Any building, structure or other improvement that has been altered, added to, enlarged or moved upon all or any portion of real property; 
3.  Any real property, building, structure or other improvement that has been sold, exchanged, transferred or otherwise conveyed, excluding the sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance of any multi-family residential building containing five (5) or more residential dwelling units. (The property inspection report provisions of Section 17.16.060 shall also apply in the case of certain sales, exchanges, transfers and conveyances identified under that section); 
4.  All or any portion of any nonresidential building, structure or other improvement rented, leased, licensed or whose occupancy or reoccupancy is otherwise permitted by the owner or any agent of the owner; 
5.  All or any portion of any real property, building, structure or other improvement whose legally permitted use is changed. 
B.  Building Permit Application. An application for a certificate of occupancy must be submitted concurrently with an application for a building permit. 
C.  General Property Inspection. Once a complete and accurate application for a certificate of occupancy is submitted to, and accepted by, the Building Division, an inspection date for the real property in question shall be scheduled and the applicant shall thereafter make the real property available for such inspection by the Building Official on the date scheduled. 
D.  Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) business days from the date the Building Official determines all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  A complete and accurate application for a certificate of occupancy is on file with the city of El Monte; 
2.  The real property complies with all discretionary land use authorizations affecting the real property; and all other real property related provisions of this Code, most notably the provisions of Title 15 (Building and Construction) and Title 17 (Zoning); 
3.  The real property in question complies with all other provisions, requirements and restrictions of this chapter; and 
4.  All violations and deficiencies identified in the course of the inspection have been corrected and approved by the Building Division. 
E.  Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
1.  Following the submission of a complete and accurate application for a certificate of occupancy but prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Building Official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy if: 
a.  The Building Official determines the real property in question is in substantial compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other real property related provisions of this Code; 
b.  The applicant makes a clear and convincing showing of good faith efforts to timely complete the correction of all outstanding violations and deficiencies identified by the Building Official; and 
c.  The applicant posts a compliance bond with the city to guarantee the full and timely completion of all required corrections. The amount of the compliance bond shall be determined by the Building Official using such criteria and methodology as may be adopted, and from time to time revised and/or modified, by City Council resolution. 
2.  An applicant's failure to correct all deficiencies within the time period specified on the temporary certificate of occupancy shall constitute a violation of this chapter. No temporary certificate of occupancy shall set forth a time period for the completion of all corrections that is greater than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall automatically expire fourteen (14) calendar days from the date in which all outstanding corrections were to be completed or automatically upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Absent the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, no person may continue to occupy or otherwise use the real property that is the subject of a temporary certificate of occupancy upon the expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy. 
F.  The property inspection report requirements of Section 17.16.040 shall only apply in the case of certain sales, exchanges, transfers or conveyances of real property. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.020 - Exceptions to certificate of occupancy requirement. 
A.  Changes in Residential Tenancies. The issuance of a new certificate of occupancy shall not be required for a simple change in tenancies with respect to any lawful dwelling or dwelling unit leased or otherwise rented for residential purposes. 
B.  Transient Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be required for the transient occupancy or reoccupancy of a legally permitted guest room within a legally permitted hotel, motel, motor hotel or inn as part of its normal course of business. In order to be considered "transient" under this section, each individual occupancy or reoccupancy of an individual guest room/unit must be for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days and no individual guest unit may be occupied or reoccupied by the same person for more than sixty (60) consecutive days total within any one hundred eighty (180) consecutive day period. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.030 - Vacant and unimproved real property. 
A.  An application for a certificate of occupancy must first be submitted and a certificate of occupancy issued by the Building Official before real property that is both vacant and unimproved may be occupied or used for any purpose. 
B.  Absent the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, real property that is both vacant and unimproved may only be used for the limited purpose of tilling soil and growing farm, garden or orchard products, provided such real property is lawfully zoned for such uses. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.040 - Property inspection report upon sale or transfer of real property. 
A.  Property Inspection Report. The title owner of real property or the duly authorized agent of the real property owner shall also apply to the Building Division for the preparation of a property inspection report in the case of any sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance of the real property in question. The property inspection report shall be prepared by the Building Official. 
B.  Exceptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance of any of the following: 
1.  Multifamily residential buildings containing five (5) or more residential dwelling units; 
2.  Real property that is both vacant and unimproved; or 
3.  Real property that will soon be made vacant and unimproved and thereafter remain vacant and unimproved for an indefinite period of time, provided the owner or owner's agent posts a demolition compliance bond and provided all demolition and debris removal is completed within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the date sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance, whichever the case may be. 
C.  Mixed-Use Developments—Rented Units. If all residential dwelling units within the residential portion of a mixed-use development are owned by a single owner with each such unit being rented, leased, licensed or otherwise made available for residential purposes by the single owner (e.g., as would be the case with a multi-unit apartment complex), the requirements of this section shall not apply if the residential portion of the mixed-use development consists of five (5) or more residential dwelling units. 
D.  Mixed-Use Developments—Owned Units. If two (2) or more residential dwelling units within the residential portion of a mixed-use development are owned by different owners under an arrangement of separate ownership (e.g., as would be the case with a multi-unit condominium complex), the requirements of this section shall apply to the sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance of any residential unit within the residential portion of the mixed-use development. 
E.  Demolition Compliance Bond. In the event of any sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance of real property that will soon be made vacant and unimproved with the aim of leaving said real property in a vacant and unimproved state for an indefinite period of time, the owner or owner's agent shall be required to post a demolition compliance bond to guarantee the full and timely demolition of all buildings, structures and other improvements upon the real property. The amount of the demolition compliance bond shall be determined by the Building Officials utilizing such criteria and methodology as may be adopted, and from time to time revised and/or modified, by City Council resolution. Following the completion of such sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance as evidenced by close of escrow or the change in title, whichever is earlier in time, no person may continue to occupy or use the subject real property unless the Building Official issues a temporary certificate of occupancy which shall remain valid until the stated commencement of date of demolition activities. The Building Official may issue such a temporary certificate of occupancy using the issuance criteria set forth under subsection E of Section 17.16.010. Temporary certificates of occupancy issued pursuant to this subsection shall state the anticipated date upon which demolition will commence and shall expire upon the earlier of the following: (a) the date upon which demolition actually commences; or (b) the anticipated commencement date stated on the temporary certificate of occupancy. No temporary certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to this subsection shall set forth an anticipated demolition commencement date that is more than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the temporary certificate of occupancy is issued. 
F.  Content of Property Inspection Report. The property inspection report shall contain the following information: 
1.  The street address and legal description of the subject real property; 
2.  The zone classification; 
3.  The legally authorized use of the subject real property; 
4.  As determined by the Planning Services Manager and/or the Building Official, the identification of all land use restrictions including, but not limited to, those imposed by way of variances, modifications, conditional use permits, subdivision maps, parcel maps and the like; 
5.  All corrections needed to bring the subject real property into compliance with provisions of this Code relating to building and construction standards; zoning requirements and restrictions; and housing restrictions; and 
All other corrections needed to correct any other condition constituting a violation of this Code, including, but not limited to, provisions relating to public health and safety. 
G.  Completion Period. Each property inspection report shall be completed within ten (10) city business days from the date the real property in question is inspected and shall remain valid for a period of six (6) months from the date of its issuance by the Building Official. If a property inspection report is not completed within the foregoing ten (10) day period, the requirements of this section shall be deemed waived. The foregoing notwithstanding, the waiver of the requirements of this section shall not constitute a waiver of any other requirements set forth under this chapter nor shall such waiver preclude the city from pursuing any and all remedies available to it at law or in equity in order to enforce the requirements and standards set forth under this Code. 
H.  Nonliability of City for Failure to Identify all Deficiencies. In issuing a property inspection report, neither the Building Official nor the Building Division warrant or represent that all outstanding code violations or deficiencies are stated therein. Violations and deficiencies identified in each property inspection report represent the Building Official's and Building Division's best attempt to identify all outstanding violations and deficiencies, but do not necessarily represent an exhaustive listing of such violations or deficiencies. The failure of the Building Official and/or the Building Division to identify a violation or deficiency in the property inspection report shall not prevent the city from taking all legal action available to it to cause such violation to be corrected, including, but not limited to, the issuance of criminal citations. 
I.  Nonliability of City for Failure to Identify Utility Charges. The failure of a property inspection report to identify delinquent utility charges for the subject real property shall not prevent the city from taking all legal action available to it to obtain payment of such charges. 
J.  Delivery of Report to Prospective Buyer. Each applicant shall deliver the property inspection report to the person attempting to acquire the subject real property (e.g., to the prospective buyer) and within fourteen (14) calendar days thereafter shall deliver to the Building Division a delivery confirmation receipt evidencing the successful delivery of the property inspection report. The delivery confirmation receipt form shall be provided to each applicant. 
K.  Time Period for Making Corrections to Property. If the subject real property is in need of corrections as specified in the property inspection report, the applicant shall initiate such corrections within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the property inspection report is issued and shall complete such corrections before a certificate of occupancy may be issued but in no event later than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the date the property inspection report is issued. 
L.  Parties Responsible for Corrections. The owner of real property that is the subject of a property inspection report shall be responsible for the completion of all needed corrections identified in the property inspection report. The person attempting to acquire the real property may assume legal responsibility for the completion of all corrections by execution and submission of an "Acknowledgement & Assumption Affidavit" coincident with the completion of the real property sale or exchange. The execution of an "Acknowledgement & Assumption Affidavit" notwithstanding, no new certificate of occupancy may be issued until all needed corrections are completed. 
M.  Compliance Bond. The execution of an "Acknowledgement & Assumption Affidavit" shall in turn require the posting by the buyer of a compliance bond with the city to guarantee the full and timely completion of all required corrections. The compliance bond shall be submitted at the same time as the submission of the "Acknowledgement & Assumption Affidavit" and no "Acknowledgement & Assumption Affidavit" shall be considered complete absent the posting of an adequate compliance bond. The amount of the compliance bond shall be determined by the Building Official using such criteria and methodology as may be adopted, and from time to time revised and/or modified, by City Council resolution. Following the Building Official's receipt of the posted compliance bond and pending the completion of all required corrections, the Building Official, in his or her discretion, may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy subject to the requirements of subsection E of Section 17.16.010 of this chapter in an effort to reasonably minimize any undue delay in the closing of escrow on the sale, exchange, transfer or conveyance of the subject real property. 
N.  Failure to Make Corrections. If any corrections prescribed in the property inspection report are not corrected within the time frame specified herein or within a temporary certificate of occupancy, such failure shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may be referred to the City Prosecutor for appropriate action. 
(Ord. 2722 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.050 - Content of certificate of occupancy. 
A.  Content. Each certificate of occupancy pursuant to this chapter shall state: 
1.  The date of issuance; 
2.  The authorized occupancy for the subject real property; 
3.  The legally permitted use for the subject real property; 
4.  Restrictions as determined by the Planning Services Manager and/or the Building Official in the interest of safeguarding the public health, safety, morals, and welfare, and the identification of all land use restrictions including but not limited to those imposed by way of variances, modifications, conditional use permits, subdivision maps, parcel maps, modifications and the like; 
5.  The street address and legal description of the subject real property; 
6.  The name of the person to whom the certificate of occupancy is issued; 
7.  The certification that the subject real property complies with all provisions of this Code relating to zoning, building standards, and maintenance to the best knowledge of the Building Division at the time of issuance. 
B.  Nonconforming Properties. A certificate of occupancy issued for real property bearing the status of a nonconforming use shall also state that the subject real property is a nonconforming use. The requirements of this subsection shall apply to all real property bearing the status of a nonconforming use on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
C.  Maintenance of Records. Records of all certificates of occupancy and temporary certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the offices of the Building Official and the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.060 - Administrative fees. 
A.  Payment and Setting of Fees. Each applicant shall be required to pay administrative fees in connection with each application for a certificate of occupancy and a property inspection report. The amount of the administrative fees imposed shall be established and from time to time adjusted by City Council resolution. The purpose of the administrative fees shall be to recover the administrative costs and/or expenses associated with the enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs and expenses associated with the processing and review of applications; the conduct of real property inspections; the preparation and processing of property inspection reports; the verification of the completion of all corrections; the processing, review and investigation of requests for reconsideration and/or appeals of the Building Official's decision on a requests for reconsideration. 
B.  Restriction on Amount of Fees. Any administrative fee(s) established, increased or otherwise adjusted pursuant to this section shall not exceed the reasonable estimated cost or expense of providing and/or performing the service, task, activity or set of services, tasks and activities for which the administrative fee is imposed. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.070 - Adoption of administrative policies and procedures; forms. 
A.  Adoption of Administrative Policies and Procedures. By resolution, the City Council may adopt and from time to time amend or update administrative rules, policies, procedures and guidelines for the enforcement and implementation of this chapter, provided such rules, policies, procedures and guidelines do not conflict with the express provisions of this chapter and are consistent with the purposes and objectives set forth herein. 
B.  Adoption of Forms. By resolution, the City Council may adopt, approve and from time to time update and amend forms for the application of certificates of occupancy, property inspection reports and such other forms and documents as may be necessary or desirable to enforce and/or administer this chapter. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Violation of Certificate of Occupancy/Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. No person shall violate or fail to comply with each and every term, condition, requirement or restriction set forth in a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Violation of Chapter. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or a combination of both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.090 - Request for reconsideration; appeals. 
A.  Request for Reconsideration. With respect to the enforcement of this chapter, any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the Building Official or the Building Division relating to the existence of violations or deficiencies or the failure to adequately correct or timely complete the correction of any violation or deficiency may request that the Building Official reconsider the determination in dispute. Requests for reconsideration must be made in writing filed with the City Clerk's Office within seven (7) calendar days from the date the Building Official notifies the applicant of the violation or deficiency or the failure to adequately correct or timely complete the correction of the violation or deficiency at issue. Each written request for reconsideration must specifically identify the determination in dispute; specifically state the basis for disputing the determination; and include tangible evidence and/or authority supporting the applicant's position. 
B.  Rendering of Decision on Reconsideration Request. The Building Official shall render a decision on the request for reconsideration within fourteen (14) business days of the submission of the request for reconsideration to the City Clerk. A specific initial determination that is not identified as being in dispute in the request for reconsideration will not be reconsidered by the Building Official and its omission from the request shall be interpreted as an acknowledgement that the initial determination was correct. The Building Official may deny a request for reconsideration if an applicant fails or refuses to permit a follow-up inspection of the real property requested by the Building Official in order to ascertain the merits of the applicant's reconsideration request. 
C.  Appeal of Reconsideration Determination. The decision of the Building Official with respect to a request for reconsideration may be appealed and such appeal shall be subject to an administrative hearing heard by an administrative hearing officer designated by the city. All such appeals must be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk within seven (7) business days of the date of the Building Official's decision on the request for reconsideration. The written appeal must identify the determination(s) at issue and the reason for disputing each determination and include all tangible evidence and authority supporting the applicant's position. The appeal hearing shall be heard within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of the appeal is filed but in no event sooner than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date the written appeal is submitted. Only determination disputes stated in the initial request for reconsideration and stated in the written appeal may be considered in the appeal hearing and the omission of such determinations from the initial reconsideration request or the written appeal shall be construed as an acknowledgement that the determination was correct. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final. 
D.  Deadlines. All deadlines set forth in this section shall be deemed to run at five-thirty p.m. on the applicable deadline date. If any deadline set forth in this section falls on a date in which the city is not open for business, the deadline shall be extended to five-thirty p.m. of the next day in which the city is open for business. 
E.  Tolling Pending Final Disposition. The correction period for all disputed violations or deficiencies identified by the Building Official or the Building Division pursuant to this chapter shall be tolled pending final disposition of a request for reconsideration or an appeal of the Building Officials decision regarding a request for reconsideration. Undisputed and/or unappealed violations or deficiencies must be corrected within the correction period set forth or otherwise authorized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.100 - Definitions. 
A.  General Meaning. Except as otherwise provided under this section or elsewhere in this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the same definition as set forth under Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) of this Code or such other chapter of Title 17 (Zoning), if no such definition is provided for under Chapter 17.04. If a term used in this chapter is not defined under this chapter or any chapter of Title 17 (Zoning) of this Code, the meaning of such term may be reasonably established by way of rules or policies established pursuant to Section 17.16.090 (Adoption of Administrative Policies and Procedures; Forms) of this chapter. 
B.  Special Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this section: 
"Applicant" means any person who applies for a certificate of occupancy and, if necessary, a property inspection report. 
"Building Division" means the El Monte Building Division. 
"Building Official" means the Chief Building Official for the city of El Monte or his or her duly designated, City-employed designee. 
"City" means the city of El Monte, a municipal corporation and general law city. 
"City Council" means the El Monte City Council the legislative body for the city of El Monte. 
"Must" and "shall" when used in a sentence means that an action or prohibition set forth is imperative and mandatory. 
"Nonresidential," when used as a modifying adjective to describe the type of use, occupancy or purpose associated with certain type of real property, building, structure, improvement or portion thereof, means real property, buildings, structures, improvements or portions of thereof that do not fall within the definition for "residential" as defined under this section. Use, occupancies and/or purposes considered "nonresidential" in nature include, but are not limited to, the following: industrial; commercial; retail or wholesale sale; manufacturing; office; mini-mall; personal care facilities; entertainment; restaurant, dining or other food preparation; on-sale liquor establishment and off-sale liquor establishment; storage; agricultural; hotel, motel, motor hotel, inn, boarding house, or lodging house provided the use of each legally permitted guest unit satisfies the restrictions set forth under Section 5.48.080 of this Code; nonresidential portions of a mixed use developments; multiple tenant developments; and any type of use, occupancy or purpose for which a business license or combination of business license and business permit is required. 
"Person" means any natural person or grouping natural persons such as tenants in common, husband and wife, joint tenants with right of survivorship and the like; any general partnership, limited partnership or limited liability partnership; any corporation or limited liability company whether for profit or not-for-profit; any organization whether for profit or not-for-profit; any business trust, living trust or joint venture; or any legal entity holding title to real property or serving as the agent for another person holding title to real property. 
"Planning Services Manager" means the Planning Services Manager for the El Monte Planning Division or his or her duly designated, city-employed designee. 
"Real property" means all or any portion of a parcel of real estate located within the city inclusive of any buildings, structures or other constructed thereupon. 
"Residential," when used as a modifying adjective to describe the type of use, occupancy or purpose associated with a certain type of building, structure, improvement or portion thereof, shall necessarily refer to any building, structure, improvement or individual dwelling unit within such a building, structure or improvement which (1) is specifically and exclusively designed for and occupied by, or available for occupancy by, a single household as a place of residence; (2) contains one legally permitted kitchen per household residing in the building, structure, improvement or individual dwelling unit; and (3) contains at least one bathroom equipped with a toilet and a shower or bath tub. "Residential" when used as a modifying adjective to describe a certain type of real property, shall refer to real property or any portion thereof that is lawfully zoned for any of the types buildings, structures or improvements described in the preceding sentence. The foregoing notwithstanding, the use, occupancy or reoccupancy of a legally permitted guest room within a legally permitted hotel, motel, motor hotel, inn, boarding house, or lodging house in the normal course of business shall be considered "nonresidential" in nature, provided its use satisfies the restrictions set forth under Section 5.48.080 of this Code. Any residential dwelling or residential dwelling unit located within a mixed-use development shall also be considered "residential" in nature. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.110 - Effective date of chapter. 
This chapter shall take effect on February 20, 2007. This chapter shall apply to all real property requiring a valid certificate of occupancy on or after the effective date of this chapter, excluding all such real property for which a complete and accurate application for a certificate of occupancy was submitted prior to the effective date but the issuance of a certificate of occupancy is still pending. 
(Ord. 2683 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.16.120 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2785, § 2, adopted Feb. 7, 2012, repealed § 17.16.120 which pertained to a five-year sunset clause and derived from Ord. No. 2683, § 1(part), 2007.  
Chapter 17.18 - ZONING CLEARANCE 
Sections: 
 
17.18.010 - Purpose. 
Zoning clearance review is a ministerial act that ensures development is consistent with the general plan and the zoning ordinance. The zoning clearance is intended to implement architectural standards, site planning, circulation, landscaping, and other zoning and planning policies. A zoning clearance shall be issued pursuant to this chapter prior to the issuance of any other planning or building permit for any building or structure hereafter erected, altered or modified. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.10)  
17.18.020 - Authority. 
The Director of Community Development or his/her designee shall be empowered to approve, conditionally approve or deny zoning clearance applications subject to the guidelines contained in Section 17.18.060. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.20)  
17.18.030 - Procedures. 
The rules and procedures for applications, records and investigations applicable to zoning clearance shall be as follows: 
A.  Application. The Director of Community Development shall determine the minimum filing procedures, content and form of materials which must be submitted before action is taken on a zoning clearance request. The filing procedures and applications shall be published and made available to the public. 
B.  Records. Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall be part of the official records of the Planning Division. 
C.  Investigation. It shall be the burden of the applicant to provide sufficient documents and exhibits that allow the Director of Community Development, or the City Planning Commission upon appeal, to render a decision upon the application under consideration. The Director of Community Development, or the City Planning Commission upon appeal, to render a decision on the request. The filing of an application also grants city staff the right to enter the property to make any inspections necessary to render a decision on the application. All inspections shall be conducted with the owners' knowledge and advance notice. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.30)  
17.18.040 - Projects. 
All buildings and structures hereafter erected, altered or modified shall have an approved zoning clearance prior to obtaining any other planning or building permit or prior to commencing work. Improvements subject to zoning clearance are as follows: 
A.  New buildings and structures, or additions to existing buildings or structures; 
B.  Patio covers, breezeways, porch covers and similar structures; 
C.  Patio enclosures; 
D.  Property line fences and walls that are more than two (2) feet above the adjacent grade; 
E.  Decks that are more than two (2) feet above the adjacent grade at any point, gazebos, trellises, windscreens and similar improvements; 
F.  Exterior spas, hot tubs, or swimming pools; 
G.  Pay telephones, automatic teller machines and vending machines; 
H.  Exterior mounted security bars; 
I.  Storage structures and tool sheds in excess of one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area; 
J.  Building murals. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.40)  
17.18.050 - Exempt projects. 
The following projects shall be exempt from zoning clearance: 
A.  Any building or structural alteration, addition or modification subject to review and approval under other sections of this chapter; 
B.  Repainting of buildings or structures provided the color is not fluorescent, luminescent or bright and provided the building colors were not specified under a previously approved land use entitlement; 
C.  Landscaping improvement or restoration; 
D.  Concrete flatwork that does not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the front or street side yard of any residentially zoned or used property. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.50)  
17.18.060 - Guidelines. 
In order to grant zoning clearance approval, the Director of Community Development shall use the following guidelines to determine if the request is appropriate: 
A.  The orientation and location of buildings and open space; 
B.  The vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
C.  The scale, character and quality of design; 
D.  The functionality of floor plans; 
E.  The proposed improvement is harmonious with adjacent improvements. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.60)  
17.18.070 - Time period. 
A zoning clearance approval shall expire twelve (12) months from the date on which the approval was granted. The Director of Community Development may grant an extension of the zoning clearance for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.70)  
17.18.080 - Appeal. 
The applicant may appeal the decision of the Director of Community Development to the City Planning Commission within ten (10) calendar days following the decision. Appeals by the Commission shall be reviewed as a regular agenda item and the fee paid shall be fifty (50) percent of the original filing fee. The decision of the City Planning Commission shall be final. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.18.80)  
17.18.090 - Fees. 
Before accepting an application for filing, the Planning Division shall collect a fee for the purpose of defraying division expenditures. The amount of the fee collected shall be in accordance with the fee schedule of the city. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance § 17.18.90)  
Chapter 17.20 - MODIFICATION—VARIANCE 
Sections: 
 
17.20.010 - Variances. 
When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this title occur by reason of a strict interpretation of any of the provisions of this title, the Panning Commission upon its own motion may, or upon the verified application of any interested person shall, in specific cases initiate proceedings for the granting of a variance from the provisions of this title under such conditions as may be deemed necessary to assure that the spirit and purposes of this title will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. All acts of the Planning Commission and Council under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as administrative acts performed for the purpose of assuring that the intent and purpose of this title shall apply in special cases, as provided in this chapter, and shall not be construed as amendments to the provisions of this title or the zoning map. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.01)  
17.20.020 - Necessary conditions. 
Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which subject property is situated. Before a variance may be granted, the facts specified in the following subsections shall be shown: 
A.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved, or to the intended use of the property, that do not apply generally to the property or class of use in the same zone or vicinity; 
B.  The granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health or welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or vicinity in which the property is located; 
C.  Because of special circumstances applicable to subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance is found to deprive subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under the identical zone classifications; 
D.  The granting of such variance will not adversely affect the comprehensive general plan. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.20.03—17.20.11)  
17.20.030 - Information required. 
Applications for variances and modifications shall be accompanied by the data specified in the following subsections: 
A.  A plot plan and description of the property involved showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings. Additional plans and descriptions of the proposed use of the property with ground plans and elevations for all proposed buildings may be required at the discretion of the Planning Commission. 
B.  A reference to the provisions of the title from which said property is sought to be excepted. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.20.13—17.20.17)  
17.20.040 - Filing of applications. 
Applications for variances and modifications shall be made in writing to the Planning Commission on such form as is approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may provide forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to be provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such requirements. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.19)  
17.20.050 - Records. 
Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the Planning Commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.21)  
17.20.060 - Filing fees. 
Before accepting any application for filing, the city shall charge and collect, for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed herein, the respective fees specified in the following subsections: 
A.  Variance. For each application for a variance a fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
B.  Modification. For each application for a modification of any provision of this title with respect to property developed with one single-family structure on a single lot a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). For each application for a modification of any provision of this title with respect to all other development a fee of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00). 
C.  Appeals. 
1.  For each appeal to the Planning Commission from any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Modification Committee in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this title, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for property developed with one single-family structure on a single lot and a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for all other types of development. 
2.  For each appeal to the City Council from any order, requirement, decision or determination of the City Planning Commission in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this title, including an appeal therefrom concerning modifications and any appeal therefrom concerning a recommendation against an amendment to the zoning ordinance to change property from one zone to another, and including an appeal therefrom concerning an order, requirement, decision or determination initially made by the Modification Committee, a fee of eighty dollars ($80.00); provided, however, that there shall be no fee for the filing of such appeal if it is signed by the owners or adult residents of ten (10) or more parcels of property, a portion of which is within the radius of three hundred (300) feet from the subject property. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.20.23—17.20.29)  
17.20.070 - Investigation. 
The Planning Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and with previous amendments, variances or modifications. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.31)  
17.20.080 - Notices. 
Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten (10) days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given by any two (2) of the methods specified in the following subsections: 
A.  By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
B.  By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the Planning Commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application, using for this purpose, the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city. 
C.  By posting notices not more than five hundred (500) feet apart along each and every street upon which the property involved abuts, for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the exterior limits of such property. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.20.33—17.20.39)  
17.20.090 - Notice—Method. 
Notice by mailing and publishing, as hereinbefore specified, shall be given unless the Planning Commission directs notice to be given in some other manner. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.41)  
17.20.100 - Public hearings. 
Public hearings as provided for in this title shall be held before the Planning Commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as hereinbefore required. 
A.  Rules. The Planning Commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. 
B.  Record. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. 
C.  Continuance. Any such hearing may be continued provided that, prior to the adjournment of recess thereof, the Presiding Officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.20.43—17.20.49)  
17.20.110 - Findings. 
Within thirty-five (35) days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall render its decision thereon by formal resolution reciting the findings upon which such decision is based. The failure of the Planning Commission to render such decision within the time specified shall cause the entire matter automatically to be referred to the Council, without recommendation, for such action as it deems warranted under the circumstances. In such event, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall immediately deliver to the City Council all of the records in the matter. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.51)  
17.20.120 - Variances and modifications—Decision. 
Within five (5) days after final action by the Planning Commission on an application for a variance or modification, notices of the decision on the matter shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application, and to all other persons who have filed a written request therefor with the Secretary of the Planning Commission. 
A.  Appeal. The granting either with or without conditions or the denial of such application by the Planning Commission shall be final unless within ten (10) days of the decision by the Planning Commission, two (2) members of the City Council may request in writing to the City Clerk or by motion at a meeting of the City Council that the matter be set for hearing before the Council for review. At its next regular meeting after the filing of the appeal with the City Clerk, or upon the request of two (2) members of the City Council, the Council shall set a date for a hearing thereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed for hearing by the Planning Commission. The decision appealed from or reviewed by the City Council may be affirmed, modified, or reversed by a vote of not less than three (3) members of the Council. 
B.  Permits. No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a variance or modification until same shall have become final by reason of the failure of any person to appeal or by reason of the action of the Council. 
C.  Abandonment and Extension. If the use authorized by any variance, modification, design review or conditional use permit is, or has been, unused, abandoned or discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, or the conditions have not been complied with, said variance, modification, design review or conditional use permit shall become null and void and of no further force or effect, unless an extension therefor has been granted by the Planning Commission upon the written petition of an interested person filed with the Planning Commission prior to the expiration of such twelve-month period. A fee in the amount of sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be payable at the time of filing the written petition for any such extension. 
D.  Modifications and variances shall be valid for twelve (12) months, ten (10) days after approval by the Planning Commission. Project approved with a subdivision would be valid for the life of the entitlement or map, whichever is greater. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.20.53—17.20.59; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 28, 29, 6-21-2016)  
17.20.130 - Reconsideration fee. 
A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be payable by an applicant who may seek to obtain reconsideration by the Planning Commission of any prior action or approval of the Planning Commission. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.61)  
17.20.140 - Council—Final hearings. 
The Council, after receipt of the report and recommendations from the Planning Commission, shall hold a final hearing hereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving of notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed for hearings by the Planning Commission. Such recommendation of the Planning Commission may be approved, modified or reversed by a vote of not less than three (3) members of the Council. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.63)  
17.20.150 - Permit or license issuance—Effective ordinance required. 
No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a change of zone until the ordinance effecting such change shall be in effect. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.65)  
17.20.160 - Modification committee—General provisions. 
A.  Creation. There is created a Modification Committee composed of three (3) persons. 
B.  Membership. The Modification Committee shall consist of the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, or such member of the Planning Commission as the Chairman may from time to time designate; the Building Official or during his or her absence, disability or disqualification, his or her deputy so designated by him or her, and the Planning Services Manager, or during his or her absence, disability or disqualification, his or her deputy so designated by him or her. 
C.  Secretary and Chairperson. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall serve as Secretary of the Modification Committee, and the records of said committee shall at all times be available to the Planning Commission. The Chairperson of the Modification Committee shall be the Planning Commission member thereon. Minutes of all Modification Committee meetings shall be mailed to all members of the Planning Commission. 
D.  Meetings. Said Modification Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairperson to consider applications as provided herein and all such meetings shall be open to the public. 
E.  Authority. The Modification Committee shall have authority to grant, subject to appeal to the Planning Commission and the Council, under the provisions of this title, any relief specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Permit the modification or waiver of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements or of the requirements for access thereto where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent for the purposes and intent of this title; 
2.  Permit such modification of the height, sign, yard, lot area and satellite dish antenna regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate improvements on a lot, to prevent unreasonable hardship, or to promote uniformity or improvement. The term "satellite dish antenna" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 17.04.020 of Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) of this title. The Modification Committee shall not have the authority to grant relief in the RHOD related to lot area; 
3.  Permit such modification of fence, wall and hedge regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement on a lot; 
4.  Permit such minor reductions and modification of floor area occupied by a single-user pursuant to multiple-tenant development standards and such standards as required under Chapter 17.74 where such minor reductions and modification will not be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of multiple-tenant development standards and guidelines; 
5.  Permit single-story additions in the RHOD where more than one dwelling exists on a lot. 
F.  Action by Committee. No modification permitted by this chapter may be granted except by the unanimous affirmative vote of all of the members of the Modification Committee. If any modification application is disapproved by two (2) or more members of the Committee, the application shall be deemed to have been denied and such denial shall be final, subject only to appeal as provided in subsection H of this section. The Modification Committee may in its discretion refer to the Planning Commission any application for modification for decision by the Planning Commission without further fee to the applicant. If only one member of the Modification Committee disapproves a modification application, such application shall automatically be referred to the Planning Commission for decision. 
G.  Procedure. The procedure for acting upon applications for modifications by the Modification Committee shall be the same as the procedures for acting upon applications for variances, by the Planning Commission, except that the required notice shall be to all property owners within a three hundred (300) foot radius. 
H.  Appeals. Appeals from the decisions of the Modification Committee shall be made to the Planning Commission. After action on an appeal by the Planning Commission an appeal may be made to the Council in the same manner as an appeal for a variance. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.20.67—17.20.89) 
(Ord. No. 2739, § 4, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2883, § 30, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 10, 11, 5-15-2018)  
17.20.170 - Relief to be afforded. 
If, after a public hearing before the Planning Commission in a proceeding for a change of zone, the evidence received shows facts which by the provisions of this chapter would entitle a person to a variance or conditional use permit, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council the granting of a variance or conditional use permit to permit the subject property to be used for any use or uses permitted in the zone for which the proceedings were instituted. Thereafter the City Council may, after a public hearing hereon, grant a variance or conditional use permit to permit the subject property to be used for any use or uses permitted in the zone for which the proceedings were instituted. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.91)  
17.20.180 - Filing of names and addresses. 
Whenever an application is made for a variance, modification, conditional use permit, or the classification or reclassification of the property, and notice is required by the law or by this Code to be mailed to owners of property, the applicant shall prepare and file with any such application two (2) sets of gummed labels containing the names and addresses, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, of all persons required by law or by this Code to be given notice of the hearing to be held on any such application. The applicant shall be responsible for the accuracy and completeness of such names and addresses, and the person preparing the same shall declare under penalty of perjury that all the names and addresses are as shown on the last equalized assessment roll (unless otherwise specified) and that they constitute all of the names and addresses of the owners of property to whom notice is required by law or by this Code to be mailed in connection with the application with which such names and addresses are filed. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.20.93)  
Chapter 17.22 - DESIGN REVIEW 
Sections: 
 
17.22.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are established to: 
A.  Encourage appropriate development that is compatible and harmonious with the design and use of surrounding properties and with the city in general; 
B.  Foster the use of sound design principles which result in creative, imaginative solutions and establish structures of quality design throughout the city and which avoid monotony and mediocrity of development; 
C.  Promote and maintain the public health, safety, general welfare throughout the city; 
D.  Implement general plan policies which encourage the preservation and enhancement of the unique character and assets of the city. 
E.  Encourage development and design principles that are compatible and consistent with the City's adopted Comprehensive Design Guidelines. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.02) 
(Ord. No. 2805, § 2, 7-31-2012; Ord. No. 2807, § 3, 10-2-2012)  
17.22.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The city Planning Commission shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny the architectural design and site configuration for the following: 
1.  Any new commercial, office, or industrial building; 
2.  The expansion of an existing structure, if greater than a twenty-five (25) percent increase of the current gross floor area, except single-family residential structures; 
3.  Conversion of a building from a residential use to any other nonresidential use; 
4.  Any facade renovation or exterior improvement that is visible from the street where the improvement value as determined by the Chief Building Official exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
5.  Any new mixed-use with residential or multi-family residential development in the Downtown Transit-Oriented District Specific Plan and MMU zone. 
B.  The Director shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny the architectural design for new developments or additions in the RHOD that result in more than one story. Also refer to Chapter 17.37 (Rurban Homesteads Overlay District) for additional standards and requirements. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.04; Ord. No. 2883, § 31, 6-21-2016) 
(Ord. No. 2928, § 12, 5-15-2018)  
17.22.030 - Procedures. 
A.  Applications. Applications for design review shall be made on the appropriate form to the City Planning Commission. The Planning Services Manager shall determine the minimum filing procedures, content and form of materials which must be submitted before the City Planning Commission can review and take action on a design review request. The filing procedures and applications shall be published and made available to the public. No petition shall be received unless it complies with all city filing requirements. The City Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, may at its discretion request additional information before rendering a decision. 
The applicant shall bear the burden of providing sufficient documents and exhibits that allow the City Planning Commission, or City Council upon appeal, to render a decision upon the application under consideration. It is the responsibility of the applicant to certify the information contained therein. 
The application shall also be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  Site plan (1 inch = 10 inches); 
2.  Property lines/easements; 
3.  Existing structures on the site; 
4.  Proposed building with dimensions; 
5.  Location, number of parking spaces, dimensions; 
6.  Pedestrian, vehicular and service ingress and egress, driveway widths; 
7.  Setbacks; 
8.  Street dedications and improvements; 
9.  Location, height and design of all fences or walls; 
10.  Open space use and landscaped areas; 
11.  All elevations of each building and composite elevation from street, if multiple buildings are proposed (¼?=1'); 
12.  Floor plans (¼?=1'); 
13.  Color renderings, if necessary; 
14.  Exterior lighting, including building mounted, pole mounted; 
15.  All signs including free standing signs and directional signs; 
16.  Utility lines, meters, boxes; 
17.  Refuse areas and recycling storage and pickup locations; 
18.  Flues, chimneys; 
19.  Awnings, if any; 
20.  Mechanical equipment; 
21.  Loading docks; 
22.  Downspouts; 
23.  Landscaping. Plans showing proposed landscaped areas and general descriptions of landscaping to be installed together with a layout of the irrigation system and the manner by which the landscaping will be maintained. 
B.  Records. Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall be part of the permanent official records of the City Planning Commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. 
C.  Investigations. The City Planning Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of city staff, an investigation of the facts that will serve to provide the necessary information to assure that the action on each application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.06)  
17.22.040 - Design review in conjunction with a conditional use permit. 
When a conditional use permit is filed for a residential development, the City Planning Commission, or City Council, on appeal, shall review the architectural design, site configuration, and other design elements consistent with the City's comprehensive design guidelines concurrent with the conditional use permit and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.08) 
(Ord. No. 2805, § 3, 7-31-2012; Ord. No. 2807, § 4, 10-2-2012)  
17.22.050 - General design standards. 
The design review procedures and standards contained in this chapter are intended to encourage the broadest possible range of individual and creative design while meeting the above stated purposes. When reviewing and taking action on a design review request, the City Planning Commission shall take into consideration the following areas: 
A.  Site Planning and Configuration. 
1.  Project amenities shall be designed and located so as not to cause a nuisance to adjoining properties; 
2.  The trash collecting areas shall be integrated as part of the project design and appropriately located to assure that there shall be no detriment to surrounding structures and uses; 
3.  On-site lighting shall provide for the safety and security of the tenants, owners and visitors to the site while being directed away from adjacent properties and streets. 
4.  Such other site planning and configuration design elements as consistent with the City's adopted "comprehensive design guidelines." 
B.  Architectural Design. 
1.  An appropriate project scale in relationship to the surrounding neighborhood; 
2.  Building entrances shall be located and designed to be identifiable from the public street; 
3.  Windows and openings shall incorporate accent treatment and materials; 
4.  Consideration shall be given to the sequence of roof levels, angles and exposure as viewed from a public right-of-way in order to emphasize attractive roof lines; 
5.  Wall design shall include appropriate articulation and fenestration to relieve any appearance of monotonous design. 
6.  Such other architectural design elements as consistent with the City's adopted "comprehensive design guidelines." 
C.  Circulation and Parking. 
1.  The project shall be designed so that all vehicle movement on the site as well as to and from the site shall provide for safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicle access; 
2.  Pedestrian walkways and pathways shall link the project to the adjacent street and shall connect the individual buildings or structures within the project; 
3.  All driveway surface areas shall incorporate accent treatments within the design. 
4.  Such other circulation and parking design elements as consistent with the City's adopted "comprehensive design guidelines." 
D.  Landscaping. 
1.  Planting areas shall be designed and located to enhance the architectural design of the project; 
2.  Planting areas shall be designed and located to mitigate the monotonous appearance of driveways and parking lots; 
3.  Landscaping shall be designed and located to reduce dependance on mechanical heating and cooling systems. 
4.  Such other landscape design elements as consistent with the City's adopted "comprehensive design guidelines." 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.10) 
(Ord. No. 2805, § 4—7, 7-31-2012; Ord. No. 2807, §§ 5—8, 10-2-2012)  
17.22.060 - Findings. 
Before a design review approval is granted the City Planning Commission, or City Council upon appeal, shall find and determine: 
A.  The granting of the design review request will not be detrimental to the public health or welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or vicinity; 
B.  The design of the proposed project would provide a desirable environment for its occupants and visiting public as well as its neighbors through good aesthetic use of materials, textures, and colors that will remain appealing and will retain a reasonably adequate level of maintenance; 
C.  The design and layout of the proposed project will not unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future development, and will not result in vehicular and/or pedestrian hazards; 
D.  The architectural design of the proposed project is compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and will maintain the harmonious, orderly and attractive development contemplated by the provisions of this chapter and the general plan; and 
E.  The landscape considerations including the location, type, size and coverage of plant materials, provisions for irrigation, maintenance and protection of landscaped areas, have been provided to insure visual relief, to complement buildings and structures and to provide an attractive environment. 
F.  The architectural design, layout and site configuration is consistent with the City's adopted "comprehensive design guidelines." 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.12) 
(Ord. No. 2805, § 8, 7-31-2012; Ord. No. 2807, § 9, 10-2-2012)  
17.22.070 - Time period. 
A.  The construction authorized by the Design Review shall be valid for twelve (12) months, ten (10) days after the date of adoption of the City Planning Commission resolution. Projects approved with a subdivision would be valid for the life of the entitlement of map, whichever is greater. 
B.  If the applicant has proceeded in good faith toward the implementation of the entitlement granted as determined by the City Planner, then the applicant may be granted an extension of the design review by the City Planning Commission prior to the expiration of the twelve-month period. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.14; Ord. No. 2883, § 32, 6-21-2016)  
17.22.080 - Appeal. 
If any interested party, or the applicant who filed the design review application request is dissatisfied with any requirement, ruling, finding, or disapproval by the City Planning Commission, they may file an appeal with the City Clerk to have the case reviewed by the City Council. Such filing must take place within (10) days following adoption of the City Planning Commission resolution. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.16)  
17.22.090 - Permit. 
No entitlement shall be issued for any purpose involved in an application for a design review until same shall have become final by reason of the failure of any person to appeal or by reason of the action of the City Council. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.18)  
17.22.100 - Fees. 
Before accepting an application for filing, the Planning Division shall collect a fee for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed herein. The amount of the fee shall be in accordance with the most recently adopted City Council resolution. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.22.20)  
Chapter 17.24 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
17.24.010 - Purpose. 
In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, uses may be permitted by the City Planning Commission subject to certain conditions designed to mitigate the potentially negative impacts of that use in that zone and location. This chapter establishes both uses and zones where the granting of a conditional use permit may be appropriate. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.24.02) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
17.24.020 - Procedures. 
The rules and procedures for applications, records, investigations, notices and public hearings applicable to conditional use permits shall be as follows: 
A.  Application. Applications for conditional use permit shall be made on the appropriate form to the City Planning Commission. The City Planner shall determine the minimum filing procedures, content and form of materials which must be submitted before the City Planning Commission can review and take action on the conditional use permit request. The filing procedures and applications shall be published and made available to the public. No petition shall be received unless it complies with all city filing requirements. The City Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, may at its discretion request additional information before rendering a decision. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing sufficient documents and exhibits that allow the City Planning Commission, or City Council upon appeal, to render a decision upon the application under consideration. Further, it is the responsibility of the applicant to certify the information contained therein. 
B.  Records. Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall be part of the permanent official records of the City Planning Commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. 
C.  Investigation. The City Planning Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of city staff, an investigation of the facts that will serve to provide the necessary information to assure that the action on each application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
D.  Public Notice. Public notices shall be provided and processed in a manner consistent with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65090 and/or 65091 as required, and shall be given by the methods specified as follows: 
1.  By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
2.  By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant and to owners of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application, using for this purpose, the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city; 
a.  For applications filed for the approval of: 
(1)  Boarding or rooming houses with seven (7) or more residents; 
(2)  Child family day care facility with fifteen (15) or more residents; 
(3)  Community care facility with seven (7) or more residents; 
(4)  Residential care facilities for the elderly with seven (7) or more residents; 
(5)  Correctional facilities in the MMU and any C-3 or less restrictive zone in accordance with Chapter 17.75; 
(6)  Emergency shelter (more than thirty (30) occupants in the M-1 zone) as conditionally permitted by Sections 17.24.030 and 17.24.040; or 
(7)  Massage establishments nine hundred (900) feet, this distance shall be increased to include owners of all properties within nine hundred (900) feet. 
E.  Public Hearings. Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the City Planning Commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as before required in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2530 § 4, 2001; zoning ordinance § 17.24.04) 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 15, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, §§ 33, 34, 6-21-2016)  
17.24.030 - Conditionally permitted uses in any zone. 
The uses specified in the following subsections may be permitted in any zone upon the granting of a conditional use permit: 
1.  Airports or aircraft landing fields; 
2.  City, county, state, federal and other government or government-related enterprises, including buildings, facilities and use of departments or institutions thereof, if the occupancy is greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet on a single property; 
3.  Day care and preschools for more than eight (8) people; 
4.  Educational institutions, including private schools, public elementary, junior, middle or high schools; 
5.  Institutions of a philanthropic or charitable nature; 
6.  Natural resources development together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances necessary thereto; 
7.  Parks, playgrounds and community buildings; 
8.  Boarding or rooming house with seven (7) or more residents; 
9.  Child family day care facility with fifteen (15) or more residents; 
10.  Community care facility with seven (7) or more residents; 
11.  Residential care facilities for the elderly with seven (7) or more residents. 
(Ord. 2598 § 1, 2003; zoning ordinance § 17.24.06) 
(Ord. No. 2812, §§ 7—10, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
17.24.040 - Conditionally permitted uses in specified zones. 
The uses specified in the following subsections may be permitted in the zones indicated in this section upon the granting of a conditional use permit: 
1.  Adult day care program facilities with seven (7) or more residents in C-1 or less restrictive zones; 
2.  Adult entertainment establishments in accordance with El Monte Municipal Code Chapter 17.76; 
3.  Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities with seven (7) or more residents in MMU, C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
4.  Alternative financial service establishment in C-3 or C-4 zones, so long as no new alternative financial service establishment is within one thousand (1,000) feet of another existing alternative financial service establishment. All alternative financial service establishments validly operating the city as of August 31, 2017 that possess all requisite permits and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, which are located within the C-3 or C-4 zones shall obtain a conditional use permit no later than August 31, 2021, in accordance with Chapter 17.24 of this Code. Any such establishment that does not timely obtain a conditional use permit by August 31, 2021 must cease all operations as of September 1, 2021 and remove all signs, advertising and displays relating to such business within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
5.  Animal Husbandry Products. Formal, supervised youth-oriented animal husbandry projects, sponsored, conducted or approved by the Future Farmers of America, Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of America, Four-H Club, or any similar nonprofit organization, in any residential zone; 
6.  Arcades, billiard, pool or snooker halls in the MMU, C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
7.  Athletic clubs or health spas in the MMU, C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
8.  Auditoriums in the MMU, C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
9.  Automobile body and fender repair and painting in C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
10.  Automobile rental or automobile leasing in C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
11.  Automobile repair in C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
12.  Automobile service stations in C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
13.  Automobile storage garages, including servicing, in C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
14.  Automobile or truck wash, either mechanized or nonmechanized, in C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
15.  Automobile sales facility or new car dealers with used car sales, service, and outdoor motor vehicle display and storage only as ancillary uses of the new car dealership in the C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
16.  Automobile sales of used cars, provided that such area is located and developed, as required in Chapter 17.62 of this title. These uses are conditionally permitted in the C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
17.  Bowling centers in the MMU, C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
18.  Buffer uses in the MMU zone; 
19.  Cabaret dance in the MMU, C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
20.  Cafes in C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
21.  Cesspool pumping, draining or cleaning in the M-2 zone; 
22.  Churches, mosques, temples, synagogues, seminaries, temporary revivals or other places used for religious worship in any C, MMU or less restrictive zone; 
23.  Convention hall, trade show, exhibit building in MMU, C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
24.  Correctional facilities in the MMU and any C-3 or less restrictive zone in accordance with Chapter 17.75 (Correctional Facilities); 
25.  Emergency shelter (more than thirty (30) occupants) in the M-1 zone; 
26.  Equestrian establishments, stables or riding academies or schools in the C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
27.  Drive-through facilities in the MMU and any C or M zone; 
28.  Entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to, dancing, karaoke, KTV, live music, miniature auto driving, miniature golf courses, movie theaters, performance art houses, etc., whether as a separate business or conducted as a part of a permitted use and whether open to the public or restricted to membership of a club in the MMU, any C-2 or less restrictive zone; 
29.  Equestrian establishments, stables or riding academies or schools in the MMU, C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
30.  Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people or automobiles, including amusement parks, circuses, carnivals, expositions, fairgrounds, open-air theaters, race tracks, recreational and sports centers in the MMU or any C or less restrictive zone; 
31.  Garment manufacturing, limited to sewing machine operation, cutting and garment assembly in the C-3 zone; 
32.  Halfway houses, including facilities used to house released federal, state or local inmates or facilities used in conjunction with drug/alcohol treatment centers in the MMU or any C or M zone; 
33.  Impound yard in any M zone; 
34.  Kennels in any M zone; 
35.  Lodge halls, private clubs, and other establishments designed for meetings or catered events in the MMU, C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
36.  Massage establishments in C-3 zone or C-4 zone, so long as no new massage establishment is within one thousand (1,000) feet of another existing massage establishment. (See Chapter 5.56 of this title for additional standards and requirements); 
37.  Medicinal commercial cannabis activities (cultivation, distribution, manufacturing, and laboratory testing), as permitted with City Council approval pursuant to Chapter 5.18 of this Code, in the portions of the M-1 (Light manufacturing), M-2 (General Manufacturing), C-3 (General Commercial), and O-P (Professional Office) zones, which are illustrated in Exhibit "A" to City Council Ordinance No. 2924. No such activity shall occur on a premises located within an eight hundred (800) foot radius of a public or private school (kindergarten through grade 12), day care center, or youth center, that is in existence at the time the permit is issued. The distance specified in this section shall be measured in the same manner as provided in subdivision (c) of Section 11362.768 of the Health and Safety Code unless otherwise provided by law. No conditional use permit for such activity shall be valid without an accompanying and complementary development agreement entered into between the city and applicant, or designee, adopted in accordance with Chapter 17.84 and setting forth the terms and conditions under which the medicinal cannabis facility will operate, including, but not limited to, public outreach and education, community service, payment of fees and other charges as mutually agreed, and such other terms and conditions that will protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare. Notice for conditional use permits for commercial cannabis activities, as set forth in Section 17.24.020.D.2, shall be expanded to five hundred (500) feet. Except as provided herein in Section 17.24.040 and Chapter 5.18, all commercial cannabis activities are prohibited throughout the city; 
38.  Mini-malls (subdivision of the floor area of a single business occupancy into multiple business occupancies) in C-1 or less restrictive zones; 
39.  Mobile home or trailer parks in R-3 or less restrictive zones; 
40.  Motels/hotels in the MMU, C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
41.  Multiple-family residential development (three (3) or more units on a site/attached or detached/single-family or multiple-family) in the R-1B or less restrictive residential zones; 
42.  Multiple-tenant development in the C-1 or less restrictive zone, (for guidelines, see City Planning Commission Resolution No. 2021, adopted February 6, 1989) (Chapter 17.74 of this Code); 
43.  New development or construction or occupancy of an industrial building in any M zones within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residentially zoned or used property; 
44.  Off-sale beer, wine or liquor establishments, in MMU and C-1 or less restrictive zone (for guidelines, see City Planning Commission Resolution No. 1762, adopted March 4, 1985); 
45.  On-sale beer, wine or liquor establishments in MMU and C-2 or less restrictive zones if the perimeter of the lot or parcel of land upon which any portion of such business is conducted is located at least two hundred (200) feet from all properties zoned for, or in fact-used for residential purposes; 
46.  Parking lots in the C-1 or less restrictive zone, if there is a charge for parking and the parking which is charged for is required parking for the uses on-site; 
47.  Public utility or public service buildings, structures and uses, except facilities which are located within the Northwest El Monte redevelopment project area and part of an environmental remediation program reviewed and approved by a regulatory agency in a C-3 or less restrictive zone, if designed and installed pursuant to City Council resolution; 
48.  Recycling facilities or centers, excluding small collection facilities, as defined in El Monte Municipal Code Chapter 17.04, in C-4 or less restrictive zones; 
49.  Residential uses or expansion of an existing dwelling unit by more than twenty-five (25) percent, or a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is greater, of its current floor area in any C or M zone. Less than twenty-five (25) percent is permitted with a zone clearance; 
50.  Restaurants, as defined in Chapter 17.04 of this title, serving alcohol in MMU and C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
51.  Secondhand vendors and pawnshops in C-2 or less restrictive zones, provided that no other secondhand vendor or pawnshop shall be located within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of the property; 
52.  Senior housing developments in R-3 or less restrictive zones; 
53.  Signs over twenty-five (25) feet in height not otherwise prohibited by any provisions of this chapter in any C or M zone; 
54.  Single movie theaters or auditoriums (except drive-in theaters) with fixed seating accommodating more than two hundred fifty (250) persons, or multi-movie theater complex with fixed seating, each screening room with a minimum seating capacity of two hundred (200) persons in the MMU, any C-2 or less restrictive zone; 
55.  Skating rinks in the MMU, and any C-3 or less restrictive zone; 
56.  Self-storage facilities in C-2 or less restrictive zones; 
57.  Social rehabilitation facilities with seven (7) or more residents in C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
58.  Tattoo parlors or body piercing establishments in the MMU, C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
59.  Taxi service or passenger transportation services in C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
60.  Trade, business or professional schools in C-1 or less restrictive zones, if the facility is designed for an occupancy greater than ten (10) students; 
61.  Transitional uses pursuant to Section 17.14.050.E. Offices, businesses, or professional offices or the following neighborhood serving uses: 
a.  Bakery products shops; 
b.  Financial institutions; 
c.  Barber shops; 
d.  Beauty shops; 
e.  Confectionery stores; 
f.  Dressmaking or millinery shops; 
g.  Drug stores, with or without a prescription pharmacy; 
h.  Dry cleaning pick up store (self service laundromats and dry cleaning plants are not permitted); 
i.  Dry goods or notions stores; 
j.  Florist shops; 
k.  Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores; 
l.  Jewelry stores; 
m.  Meat markets or delicatessen stores; 
n.  Photographic shops; 
o.  Shoe stores or shoe repair shops; 
p.  Stationery or book stores; 
q.  Clothing or wearing apparel shops; 
r.  Tailor shop; 
s.  Accessory buildings necessary to any such use, located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a storage garage for the exclusive use of the patrons of the above stores or businesses; 
t.  Live work uses pursuant to Chapter 17.45.090; and 
u.  Any other uses that are determined to be neighborhood serving by the City Planner. 
62.  Truck and trailer rental in C-3 or less restrictive zones; 
63.  Undertaking establishments and mortuaries in the MMU or any C or less restrictive zone; 
64.  Wedding chapels in any C-2 or less restrictive zone; 
(Ord. 2659 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 2634 § 13 (part), 2004; Ord. 2607 § 5, 2004; Ord. 2585 § 12, 2003; Ord. 2525 § 4 (part), 2000; Ord. 2522 § 6, 2000; amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance § 17.24.08) 
(Ord. No. 2739, § 3, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 2812, §§ 11, 12, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. C), (Exh. F), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2878, § 8, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2883, § 35, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2914, § 6, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 2920, § 9, 8-1-2017; Ord. No. 2924, § 4, 11-8-2017; Ord. No. 2928, § 13, 5-15-2018) 
Editor's note— The reference, under prior subsection (53), to "Telecommunication equipment and facilities, including, but not limited to, television antenna, cellular telephone facilities, personal communication systems Support Structures, satellite antenna systems, etc. in any C or M zone" has been deleted in light of the promulgation of a new Chapter 17.82 (Wireless Facilities) which sets forth all applicable rules and regulations for the placement, affixing, attachment, mounting, construction, erection, installation, development, use, operation and maintenance, co-location and/or modification of such facilities, devices, structures and equipment.  
17.24.050 - Findings. 
Before a conditional use permit may be granted, it shall be shown and the City Planning Commission or City Council upon appeal shall find and determine: 
A.  The granting of such conditional use permit will not be detrimental to the public health or welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or vicinity; 
B.  The use applied for at the location indicated is properly one for which a conditional use permit is authorized; 
C.  The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate such use; and that all yards, spaces, walls, fences, parking, loading, landscaping, and other features required to adjust such use with the land and uses in the neighborhood are provided; 
D.  The site abuts streets and highways adequate in width and pavement type to carry the kind of traffic generated by the proposed use; 
E.  The granting of such conditional use permit will not adversely affect the purpose, goals and policies of the city general plan. 
F.  For transitional uses, pursuant to Section 17.24.040, the following findings must be made: 
1.  That the parking for the transitional use will not have a significant negative impact on the surrounding parcels or neighborhood; and 
2.  That the property will be improved, to the extent feasible, to meet current development standards relating to landscaping, fencing, building facades, trash enclosures and ADA accessibility. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.24.10) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 36, 6-21-2016)  
17.24.060 - Time period. 
A.  The granting of a conditional use permit by the City Planning Commission shall be valid for one year (twelve (12) months ten (10) days) after the date of adoption of the City Planning Commission resolution. Projects approved with a subdivision would be valid for the life of the entitlement of map, whichever is greater. 
B.  If the applicant has proceeded in good faith toward the implementation of the permit granted as determined by the City Planner, then the applicant may be granted an extension of the conditional use permit by the City Planning Commission prior to the expiration of the six-month period. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.24.12) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 37, 6-21-2016)  
17.24.070 - Appeal. 
If any interested party, or the applicant who filed the conditional use permit is dissatisfied with any condition, ruling, finding, approval or disapproval by the City Planning Commission, they may file an appeal with the City Clerk to have the case reviewed by the City Council. Such filing must take place within ten (10) days following adoption of the City Planning Commission resolution. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.24.14) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
17.24.080 - Permit. 
No entitlement shall be issued for any purpose involved in an application for a conditional use permit until same shall have become final by reason of the failure of any person to appeal or by reason of the action of the City Council. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.24.16) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
17.24.090 - Abandonment and extension. 
If the use authorized by any conditional use permit is, or has been, unused, abandoned or discontinued for a period of six (6) months, such conditional use permit shall become null and void and of no effect, unless an extension therefore has been granted by the City Planning Commission prior to the expiration of the six-month period. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.24.18) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
17.24.100 - Revocation. 
A.  All of the conditions of approval adopted by the City Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall remain in full force and effect as long as the use for which the conditional use permit was granted remains in operation. Any entitlement granted pursuant to this chapter is transferable and assignable, however, all successors in interest shall abide by all of the original conditions. 
B.  Any party that fails to conduct the use pursuant to the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit shall be subject to the following revocation proceedings. The City Planning Commission, on its own motion, may, or upon the direction of the City Council, shall hold a public hearing upon the question of revocation of a conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Notice of such hearing shall be given pursuant to Government Code Sections 65090 and/or 65091, as required. 
C.  A conditional use permit shall be revoked if the City Planning Commission finds that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The conditional use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; 
2.  The conditional use permit is being, or has been, exercised contrary to the conditions of approval imposed upon such permit; 
3.  The conditional use permit is being, or has been, exercised in violation of any federal, state, or local law or is in violation of approved conditions of approval; 
4.  The use for which the conditional use permit was granted is being exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.24.20) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
17.24.110 - Fees. 
Before accepting an application for filing, the Planning Division shall collect a fee for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this chapter. The amount of the fees collected shall be in accordance with the fee schedule of the city. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance § 17.24.22) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
17.24.120 - Reasonable accommodation. 
The city shall provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in its rules, policies, practices, and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities, as mandated by the federal Fair Housing Act and Fair Housing Act Amendments (42 U.S.C. Section 3601) and state Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et seq.). Reasonable accommodation shall be made in accordance with EMMC Chapter 17.77 (Reasonable Accommodation). 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 13, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. F), 1-14-2014)  
Chapter 17.26 - ZONE CHANGE—ZONING CODE AMENDMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.26.010 - Amendments and changes of zone boundaries. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action, the Planning Commission upon its own motion may, or upon the verified application of any interested person shall initiate proceedings to amend, supplement or change the zones, standards or districts established or regulated by this title. For each application submitted by an interested person for initiations of proceedings to amend, supplement or change a zone, a standard or a district as established or regulated by this title, a fee of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.01)  
17.26.020 - Filing of applications. 
Applications for changes of zone shall be made in writing to the Planning Commission in such form as is approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may provide forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to be provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such requirements. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.03)  
17.26.030 - Records. 
Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the Planning Commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.05)  
17.26.040 - Filing fees. 
Before accepting any application for filing, the city shall charge and collect, for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed herein, the respective fees specified as follows: 
Change of Zone. For each application for a change of zone, a fee of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall be payable at the time of filing the application; provided, however, that there shall be no fee for the filing of a change of zone application requesting reclassification from zone R-2 or some less restrictive zone to zone R-1a, R-1b or R-1c. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.26.07, 17.26.09)  
17.26.050 - Investigation. 
The Planning Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and with previous amendments, variances or modifications. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.11)  
17.26.060 - Notices. 
Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten (10) days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given by any two of the methods specified as follows: 
A.  By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
B.  By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the Planning Commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application, using for this purpose, the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city; 
C.  By posting notices not more than five hundred (500) feet apart along each and every street upon which the property involved abuts, for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the exterior limits of such property. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.26.13—17.26.19)  
17.26.070 - Notice—Method. 
Notice by mailing and publishing, as hereinbefore specified, shall be given unless the Planning Commission directs notice to be given in some other manner. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.21)  
17.26.080 - Public hearings. 
Public hearings as provided for in this title shall be held before the Planning Commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as hereinbefore required. 
A.  Rules. The Planning Commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. 
B.  Record. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. 
C.  Continuance. Any such hearing may be continued provided that, prior to the adjournment of recess thereof, the Presiding Officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.26.23—17.26.29)  
17.26.090 - Findings. 
Within thirty-five (35) days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall render its decision thereon by formal resolution reciting the findings upon which such decision is based. The failure of the Planning Commission to render such decision within the time specified shall cause the entire matter automatically to be referred to the Council, without recommendation, for such action as it deems warranted under circumstances. In such event, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall immediately deliver to the City Council all of the records in the matter. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.31)  
17.26.100 - Appeal. 
The granting either with or without conditions or the denial of such application by the Planning Commission shall be final unless within ten (10) days of the decision by the Planning Commission, two members of the City Council may request in writing to the City Clerk or by motion at a meeting of the City Council that the matter be set for hearing before the Council for review. At its next regular meeting after the filing of the appeal with the City Clerk, or upon the request of two (2) members of the City Council, the Council shall set a date for a hearing thereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed for hearing by the Planning Commission. The decision appealed from or reviewed by the City Council may be affirmed, modified, or reversed by a vote of not less than three (3) members of the Council. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.33)  
17.26.110 - Reconsideration fee. 
A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be payable by an applicant who may seek to obtain reconsideration by the Planning Commission of any prior action or approval of the Planning Commission. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.35)  
17.26.120 - General plan amendments. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good community planning practice justify such action, the Planning Commission upon its own motion may, or upon the verified application of any interested person shall, initiate proceedings to amend, supplement or change the general plan of the city (or an element thereof). For each application submitted by an interested person for initiation of proceedings to amend, supplement or change the general plan of the city (or an element thereof) a fee of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.37)  
17.26.130 - Text—Amendments and zone changes. 
Within ten (10) days after the final action by the Planning Commission on an application for amendments or changes of zone boundaries, its recommendations together with the complete records of the case shall be delivered to the Council. 
A.  Council Hearings. The Council, after receipt of the report and recommendations from the Planning Commission, shall hold a final hearing hereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving of notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed for hearings by the Planning Commission. Such recommendation of the Planning Commission may be approved, modified or reversed by a vote of not less than three (3) members of the Council. 
B.  Permits. No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a change of zone until the ordinance effecting such change shall be in effect. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.26.39—17.26.43)  
17.26.140 - Relief to be afforded. 
If, after a public hearing before the Planning Commission in a proceeding for a change of zone, the evidence received shows facts which by the provisions of this chapter would entitle a person to a variance or conditional use permit, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council the granting of a variance or conditional use permit to permit the subject property to be used for any use or uses permitted in the zone for which the proceedings were instituted. Thereafter the City Council may, after a public hearing hereon, grant a variance or conditional use permit to permit the subject property to be used for any use or uses permitted in the zone for which the proceedings were instituted. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.45)  
17.26.150 - Filing of names and addresses. 
Whenever an application is made for a variance, modification, conditional use permit, or the classification or reclassification of the property, and notice is required by the law or by this Code to be mailed to owners of property, the applicant shall prepare and file with any such application two (2) sets of gummed labels containing the names and addresses, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, of all persons required by law or by this Code to be given notice of the hearing to be held on any such application. The applicant shall be responsible for the accuracy and completeness of such names and addresses, and the person preparing the same shall declare under penalty of perjury that all the names and addresses are as shown on the last equalized assessment roll (unless otherwise specified) and that they constitute all of the names and addresses of the owners of property to whom notice is required by law or by this Code to be mailed in connection with the application with which such names and addresses are filed. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.26.47)  
Chapter 17.28 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures to ensure that the provisions of this title and any land use entitlement granted by the city are diligently pursued to completion, and to provide effective administration of this title, in order to promote the city's planning efforts and to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and peace. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.28.10)  
17.28.020 - Administration. 
The provisions of this title shall be interpreted and administered by the Community Development Department. Any decision of the Department may be appealed to the City Planning Commission, and/or City Council in accordance with the provisions contained herein. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.28.20)  
17.28.030 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Community Development Department, including the Building Division, the Code Enforcement Division, the Engineering Division, the Planning Division and Public Works to enforce this title, and their respective deputies, employees and subordinates, are authorized to enforce the provisions of this title. All departments, officials and public employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title; and any such permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.28.30)  
17.28.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, entity or corporation violating any provision of Title 17 or any condition imposed upon a land use entitlement, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.24 of this Code. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance § 17.28.40)  
17.28.050 - Abatement. 
A.  Any building or structure erected altered, expanded or maintained, or any use of property, contrary to the provisions of this title or any condition imposed upon a land use entitlement shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. 
B.  The City Attorney's office, at their discretion, may immediately commence actions and proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and may take such other steps, and may apply to any court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any individual, entity, company or corporation from erecting, enlarging or maintaining such building or structure, or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title or any condition imposed upon a land use entitlement granted by the city. Subsequent to the abatement of the public nuisance a lien will be filed against the property in order to recover all costs associated with the abatement of said nuisance. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.28.50)  
17.28.060 - Cumulative remedies. 
This title may also be enforced by injunction issued out of Superior Court upon the suit of the city of the owner or occupant of any real property affected by such violation or prospective violation. This method of enforcement shall be cumulative and in no way effect the penal provisions hereof. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.28.60)  
Chapter 17.30 - ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS AND MAPS 
Sections: 
 
17.30.010 - Establishment of zones—Zone classifications. 
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the density of population, the following classes of land use zones are hereby established and are to be known as follows: 
Zoning Class 	Description 
R-1A 	One-family dwelling zone 
R-1B 	One-family dwelling zone 
R-1C 	One-family dwelling zone 
R-2 	Low-density multiple-family dwelling zone 
R-3 	Medium-density multiple-family dwelling zone 
R-4 	High-density multiple-family dwelling zone 
PRD 	Planned residential development zone or as an overlay zone indicated as "(PRD)" behind the underlying zone 
RMP 	Residential mobilehome park zone or as an overlay zone indicated as "(RMP)" behind the underlying zone 
O-P 	Office professional zone 
C-O 	Professional office zone 
C-1 	Limited commercial zone 
C-2 	Retail commercial zone 
C-3 	General commercial zone 
C-4 	Heavy commercial zone 
M-1 	Light manufacturing zone 
M-2 	General manufacturing zone 
SP-1 	El Monte Gateway Specific Plan 
SP-2 	Mountain View Specific Plan 
SP-3 	Flair Spectrum Specific Plan 
SP-4 	Downtown Transit-Oriented District Specific Plan 
MMU 	Mixed/multi-use 
RHOD 	Rurban Homestead Overlay District as an overlay zone indicated a "(RHOD)" behind the underlying zone 
P 	Automobile parking zone or as an overlay zone indicated as (P) behind the underlying zone 
PF 	Public facility 
OS 	Open space 
Airport 	Airport 
 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.30.10) 
(Ord. No. 2780, § 1, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2909, § 2, 4-18-2017; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 14, 15, 5-15-2018)  
17.30.020 - Zoning map. 
A.  For convenience of use, the city zoning map Z-1, as heretofore adopted and made a part of this Code, and as thereafter from time to time amended, is divided into forty (40) parts, each such part being designated by a map number and assigned a subsection number, the relationship of each such part to the other being designated on a chart, the circled numerals on which correspond with the respective map and subsection number thus assigned. 
B.  The boundaries of each zone classification heretofore established are designated on the said map parts by means of the zoning classification symbols preceding the respective zone classifications set forth in Section 17.30.010, and the zone classification of each lot or parcel of land shown on said map parts is established and re-established as indicated by the respective zone classification symbol or symbols thereon shown. The zoning map as thus divided and numbered, and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as through the matters and information set forth on said maps were all fully described and set forth herein. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.30.30(1))  
17.30.030 - Boundaries of zones. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on said map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
B.  In unsubdivided property or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map; 
C.  Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley; 
D.  Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, canal transportation or public utility company is vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned property; 
E.  All property in the city not otherwise classified, and all property hereafter annexed and not zoned upon annexation, is classified as R-1a zone; 
F.  In case any uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of the boundaries. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.30.30(2))  
Chapter 17.32 - R-1A ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.32.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the R-1a one-family dwelling zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Not more than one one-family dwelling on any lot as defined by Chapter 17.04 of this title; 
2.  The accessory buildings necessary to such one-family dwelling, located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a private garage the capacity of which shall not exceed three (3) automobiles; 
3.  The maintaining of a mail address for commercial, professional and business license purposes only, provided that no stock in trade, supplies, professional equipment, apparatus or business equipment are kept on the premises, and provided that no employees or assistants are engaged for said services on the premises; 
4.  Private greenhouse of not over five hundred (500) square feet in area, horticultural collections, flower gardens, vegetable gardens, fruit trees; 
5.  Where a dwelling existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title on the rear half of the lot and at least seventy-five (75) feet back of the front lot line, an additional dwelling may be constructed and maintained on the front half of said lot; 
6.  Subject to provisions of Section 5.96.060 of this Code, a trailer may be used or occupied as a temporary dwelling in the rear yard only for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days; 
7.  Garage sales, as defined and if conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.44 of this Code; 
8.  Transitional Parking. If any portion of a lot sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, or sides upon a lot which is entirely developed and used for transitional parking and which also sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, that portion thereof within one hundred (100) feet of the lot thus zoned C-1 or less restrictively and upon which it sides or from which it is thus separated, may be used for any use specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, upon condition that it be improved and maintained in accordance with all the provisions of said Chapter 17.62 and of Section 17.08.030; 
9.  Manufactured home; 
10.  Supportive housing; 
11.  Transitional housing. 
(Ord. 2634 § 13 (part), 2004; Ord. 2585 § 13, 2003; amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.32.010—17.32.025, 17.32.055—17.32.080) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. D), (Exh. E), 1-14-2014)  
17.32.020 - Signs. 
Any signs specified in the following subsections are permitted in zone R-1a in addition to those permitted by other sections of this chapter: 
A.  One name plate sign per dwelling unit not to exceed one square foot of display area identifying the occupant of the premises; also address numbers not to exceed six (6) inches in height to be permitted on each name plate; 
B.  One unlighted real estate sign per lot and one unlighted open house sign per lot or two on a corner lot not exceeding six (6) square feet in display area, each pertaining only to the sale, lease, or rent of the property on which the signs are displayed. Sign may be double faced or two signs in a "V" arrangement, the "V" not to exceed ninety (90) degrees. Riders are permitted on signs in excess of the six (6) square foot limit. Six (6) flags or pennants may be displayed on the property in addition to the signs permitted above; 
C.  One unlighted pole or wall sign per lot not to exceed four (4) square feet pertaining to the legal sale of products raised, grown or produced on the premises or permitted services rendered on the premises. Pole sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height; 
D.  Directional signs shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.12 of this title. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.32.030—17.32.050)  
17.32.030 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building, and structure in the R-1A one-family dwelling zone: 
A.  Building Height. No building or structure shall exceed in height two and one-half (2½) stories, or thirty-five (35) feet. 
B.  Front Yard and Side Yard. The front and side yard setbacks for first and second floors shall be measured as shown below. The second floor setback shall be measured from the building wall line of the first floor. Where a porch or patio has been integrated into the architecture of the first floor, the second floor setback can be measured from the line of the porch or patio structural supports, located closest to the front property line. 
1 st Floor Front Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Front/Yard Setback 	1 st Floor Side/Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Side Yard Setback 
20 ft. or 20 percent (max 25 ft.) 	5 ft. additional 	5 ft. 	5 ft. additional 
 
1.  Exception. Where lots comprising forty (40) percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten (10) feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than thirty-five (35) feet from the front property line shall be considered located thirty-five (35) feet from the front property line, and buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted. 
C.  Rear Yard. Behind the most rear main building, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet, except where a greater distance is otherwise required by law. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling unit and shall have a width of not less than sixty (60) feet at the mid point measured between the front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that when a lot has less area than herein required and was recorded at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit. 
E.  Street Frontage. Every lot in zone R-1A shall abut a public street for a distance of at least sixty (60) feet; provided, however, that lots abutting the radius at the end of the cul-de-sac street need not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
F.  Minimum Floor Area. No dwelling unit shall contain less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
G.  Distance Between Buildings. There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building on the same lot. 
H.  Fencing. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units a solid six-foot high masonry wall shall be installed and maintained adjacent to the rear and interior side property lines to the front setback line. When the grade of the property being developed is below the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be approximately six (6) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. When the grade of the property being developed is above the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be above the grade of the adjacent property by the approximate sum of six (6) feet plus one-half (½) of the difference in the elevation of the two (2) properties at the wall. In no event, however, except upon approval of a modification shall the top of the wall be more than eight (8) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. 
(Ord. 2662 § 5(C), 2006; zoning ordinance §§ 17.32.100—17.32.150; Ord. No. 2883, § 38, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, § 16, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 17.34 - R-1B ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.34.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the R-1B one-family dwelling zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Any use permissible in the R-1A one-family dwelling zone except accessory living quarters. An additional one-family dwelling shall be permitted as follows, a property with two hundred (200) feet or less of street frontage and width would qualify for one dwelling unit for every nine thousand seven hundred fifty (9,750) square feet of net land area; a property with two hundred one (201) to two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage and width would qualify for one dwelling unit for every eight thousand six hundred twenty-five (8,625) square feet of net land area; and a property with more than two hundred fifty (250) feet of street frontage and width would qualify for one dwelling unit for every seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of net land area; provided, that no more than one dwelling shall be contained in any one building and the building site shall be approved pursuant to this title; 
2.  Breeding hatching, raising and fattening of poultry, fowl, nutria, birds, rabbits, chinchillas, earthworms, fish, frogs and bees for domestic or commercial use; 
3.  Keeping of horses on lots having an area of one-half acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet) or more, provided that the number of horses on any one lot shall not exceed one horse for every one quarter acre; 
4.  Transitional Parking. If any portion of a lot sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, or sides upon a lot which is entirely developed and used for transitional parking and which also sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, that portion thereof within one hundred (100) feet of the lot thus zoned C-1 or less restrictively and upon which it sides or from which it is thus separated, may be used for any use specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, upon condition that it be improved and maintained in accordance with all the provisions of Chapter 17.62 and of Section 17.08.030; 
5.  Manufactured home; 
6.  Supportive housing; 
7.  Transitional housing. 
(Ord. 2669 § 5, 2006; amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.34.01—17.34.01.40) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. D), (Exh. E), 1-14-2014)  
17.34.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations applicable to lots, premises, buildings and structures in the R-1A one-family zone shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the R-1B one-family dwelling zone with the following exceptions: 
A.  The keeping of all fowl and animals shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same. No fowl, animal, pen, bin, coop, stable, barn or corral shall be kept or maintained within thirty-five (35) feet of any dwelling or other building used for human habitation, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the front lot line of the lot upon which it is located, or within one hundred (100) feet of any public park, school, hospital or similar institution. There shall be no killing or dressing of any animals or poultry for commercial purposes. 
B.  If more than one dwelling unit is constructed on one lot, each dwelling unit shall not only comply with the front yard, side yard and rear yard requirements of Chapter 17.32 of this title, but shall also be so located and maintained with respect to each other that yards will be provided and maintained on each side of each dwelling unit equivalent to the respective front, side and rear yards that would be required for one dwelling unit on one lot. 
C.  Front and Side Yards. The front and side yard setbacks for first and second floors shall be measured as shown below. The second floor setback shall be measured from the building wall line of the first floor. Where a porch or patio has been integrated into the architecture of the first floor, the second floor setback can be measured from the line of the porch or patio structural supports, located closest to the front property line. 
D.  Rear Yard. Behind the most rear main building, there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet, except where a greater distance is otherwise required by law. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.34.02—17.34.02.20) 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 8, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2883, § 39, 6-21-2016)  
Chapter 17.36 - R-1C ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.36.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the R-1C 10,000 dwelling zone, shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  One-family dwelling shall be permitted for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet upon the conditions and subject to the regulations hereinafter in this chapter specified; 
2.  Accessory buildings necessary or incidental to each one-family dwelling, located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a private garage for each lawful dwelling. The capacity of each such garage shall not exceed three (3) automobiles; 
3.  Any use permitted in Sections 17.32.010(1), (4) through (6), 17.32.020 and certain provisions of Chapter 17.34 of this title; 
4.  Horses. The keeping of not more than one horse for each member of the family residing upon the premises, or not more than one horse for each seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of lot area, whichever number is greater; also the boarding of horses, provided that if horses are boarded upon the premises, not more than one horse shall be kept for each seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or less of lot area; 
5.  Other Animals. The keeping of not more than three (3) female goats and their offspring less than one year of age, and the keeping of not more than three (3) sheep and their offspring less than one year of age, and the keeping of not more than one cow, but only for the personal use of the family residing upon the premises or in the conduct by any member of the family residing upon the premises of any program of animal husbandry as a member of any national or nonprofit educational or character building organization; 
6.  Transitional Parking. If any portion of a lot sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, or sides upon a lot which is entirely developed and used for transitional parking and which also sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, that portion thereof within one hundred (100) feet of the lot thus zoned C-1 or less restrictively and upon which it sides or from it is thus separated, may be used for any use specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, upon condition that it be improved and maintained in accordance with all the provisions of Chapter 17.62 and of Section 17.08.030; 
7.  Manufactured home; 
8.  Supportive housing; 
9.  Transitional housing. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.36.01—17.36.060) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. D), (Exh. E), 1-14-2014)  
17.36.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building, structure and use in the R-1C 10,000 dwelling zone: 
A.  Building Height. No building or structure shall exceed in height two and one-half (2½) stories, or thirty-five (35) feet. 
B.  Front and Side Yards. The front and side yard setbacks for first and second floors shall be measured as shown below. The second floor setback shall be measured from the building wall line of the first floor. Where a porch or patio has been integrated into the architecture of the first floor, the second floor setback can be measured from the line of the porch or patio structural supports, located closest to the front property line. 
1 st Floor Front Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Front Yard Setback 	1 st Floor Side Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Side Yard Setback 
20 ft. or 20 percent (max 25 ft.) 	5 ft. additional 	5 ft. 	5 ft. additional 
 
1.  Exception for Front Yards. Where lots comprising forty (40) percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten (10) feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depths, buildings located more than thirty-five (35) feet from the front property line shall be considered located thirty-five (35) feet from the front property line, and buildings facing a side street on a comer lot shall not be counted. 
C.  Rear Yard. Behind the most rear main building and behind any building designed or used for human habitation there shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet, except where a greater distance is otherwise required by law. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet per dwelling unit and shall have a width of not less than fifty (50) feet at the mid-point measured between the front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that when a lot has less area than herein required and was recorded at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit. 
E.  Street Frontage Required. Every lot in Zone R-1C 10,000 shall abut a public street for a distance of at least fifty (50) feet; provided, however, that lots abutting the radius at the end of a cul-de-sac street need not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
F.  Minimum Floor Area. No dwelling unit shall contain less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
G.  Distance Between Buildings. There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building on the same lot. There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between accessory buildings on the same lot. There shall be a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet between buildings on the same lot used for dwelling purposes. 
H.  Distance of Accessory Structures. No barn, stable, corral or chute designed or used for the enclosure or shelter of animals shall be located within seventy-five (75) feet of the front lot line. This section shall not apply to fenced pastures. 
I.  Distance of Animals. The keeping of all fowl and animals shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same. No fowl, animal, pen, bin, coop, stable, barn or corral shall be kept or maintained within thirty-five (35) feet of any dwelling or other building used for human habitation other than the dwelling of the owner thereof, or within seventy-five (75) feet of the front lot line of the lot upon which it is located, or within one hundred (100) feet of any public park, school, hospital or similar institution. There shall be no killing or dressing of any animals or poultry for commercial purposes. 
J.  Fencing. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units, a solid six-foot high masonry wall shall be installed and maintained adjacent to the rear and interior side property lines to the front setback line. When the grade of the property being developed is below the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be approximately six (6) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. When the grade of the property being developed is above the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be above the grade of the adjacent property by the approximate sum of six (6) feet plus one-half (½) of the difference in the elevation of the two (2) properties at the wall. In no event, however, except upon approval of a modification, shall the top of the wall be more than eight (8) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. 
(Ord. 2662 § 5(D), 2006; zoning ordinance §§ 17.36.02—17.36.120) 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 9, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2883, § 40, 6-21-2016)  
Chapter 17.37 - RURBAN HOMESTEADS OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.37.010 - Purpose. 
The Rurban Homesteads Overlay District is established to preserve rural character, promote a low-density, rural residential lifestyle, and ensure continued availability of lots that allow animal keeping agricultural cultivation and retain the area's homestead heritage. 
It is the intent of the Rurban Homesteads Overlay District to protect areas for low-density, rural development by retaining large lots in a configuration that enables animal raising and keeping and to ensure that new residential development and alterations and additions to existing residences are compatible with the scale, mass and character of the rural neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 10, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2928, § 17, 5-15-2018)  
17.37.020 - Applicability. 
The Rurban Homesteads Overlay District applies to all areas on the city identified with the RHOD on the city's zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 10, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2928, § 17, 5-15-2018)  
17.37.030 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premise, building, or structure in the Rurban Homestead Overlay District shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified below: 
A.  One-Family Dwelling. Not more than one one-family dwelling on any lot as defined by Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) of this title. 
B.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings necessary or incidental to each one-family dwelling, located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a private garage for each lawful dwelling. The capacity of each such garage shall not exceed three (3) automobiles. See Section 17.06.070 of this title for additional standards. 
C.  Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory Dwelling Units are regulated pursuant to Chapter 17.06 of this title. The architectural style and materials the accessory dwelling unit shall match the architectural style and materials of the primary building on the property. 
D.  Horses. The keeping of not more than one horse for each seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of lot area. 
E.  Other Animals. The keeping of not more than three (3) female goats and their offspring less than one year of age, and the keeping of not more than three (3) sheep and their offspring less than one year of age, and the keeping of not more than one cow, but only for the personal use of the family residing upon the premises or in the conduct by any member of the family residing upon the premises of any program of animal husbandry as a member of any national or nonprofit educational or character building organization. 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 10, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2928, § 17, 5-15-2018)  
17.37.040 - Regulations. 
The regulations applicable to lots, premises, buildings and structures in the underlying zone shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building, and structure in the Rurban Homesteads Overlay District. 
A.  Minimum Lot Area and Width. Each lot shall have a lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and a width of not less than sixty (60) feet at the mid-point measured between the front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that when a lot has less area than herein required and was recorded at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit. 
B.  Street Frontage Required. Every lot shall abut a public street for a distance of at least sixty (60) feet. Flag Lots and PRDs shall be prohibited. 
C.  Lot Design. Lots shall be rectangular in shape, with side parcel lines as close as practical to ninety-degree angles with front and rear parcel lines. Lot depth shall be a minimum of two (2) times the lot width. Planned Residential Development (PRD) and flag lots are prohibited. 
D.  First Floor Top Plate Height. First floor top plate height shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in the front one-third of the structure. 
E.  Building Height. The maximum allowable height is twenty-five (25) feet and one and one half (1.5) stories. New development, additions and alterations that will result in more than one store are subject to the following: 
1.  Configuration. Floor area above the first story shall be wholly built into the framing of the roof. 
2.  Floor Area Limit. Habitable floor area above the first story shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the first story roofed area. 
3.  Dormer. Dormers shall not exceed the height of the building ridge line, shall not overhang the outer face of the wall below, or exceed sixty (60) percent of the length of the roof. 
4.  Balconies or Patios. Balconies or patios above the first floor are prohibited. 
5.  Design Review. All applications for new development or additions that will result in more than one story shall require design review pursuant to Chapter 17.22 of this title and as follows: 
a.  Application Requirement. In addition to other materials required for the submittal of a design review application, supporting materials shall be submitted to describe and provide visual representation of existing conditions and the proposed project. Supporting materials may include, but are not limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, renderings, models, material samples, and the erection of story poles at the site. 
b.  Review Authority. Design review shall be conducted by the Director or his/her designee. 
c.  Notice. At least ten (10) days prior to the date of action, notice of the application shall be posted on-site and mailed to all residents and property owners of record within a three-hundred (300) foot radius of the subject property as shown on the latest available assessment roll. The notice shall include a general description of the application, the location of the property, the date of the decision, the procedure for submitting comments, and the procedure for appealing the decision. 
d.  Call-Up for Planning Commission Review. The Director may refer items directly to the Planning Commission when in his/her opinion the public interest would be better served by having the Planning Commission conduct design review. In addition, any resident or property owner within the mailing radius may submit a written request to the Director for a call-up. 
e.  Appeals. If any interested party, or the applicant who filed the design review is dissatisfied with any condition, ruling, finding, approval or disapproval by the Director, they may file an appeal with the Planning Division to have the case reviewed by the Planning Commission. Such filing must take place within ten (10) days of the Director's decision. 
f.  Exemption. Accessory Dwelling Units above existing garages, as permitted in Chapter 17.06 (General Regulations) of this title and as set forth in Section 65852.2 of the California Government Code are exempt from the one and one half (1.5) story height limit and design review requirement. 
F.  Animal Enclosures and Related Activities. Animal enclosures include barns, stables, corrals, pens, coops, bins, chutes or other enclosures designed or used for the keeping or shelter of animals. These standards shall not apply to fenced pastures or other contained animal grazing or roaming areas. 
1.  Location. Roofed animal enclosures shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the front lot line and thirty-five (35) feet from any dwelling or other building used for human habitation other than the dwelling of the owner. 
2.  Size. 
a.  Unroofed animal enclosure areas shall not count towards floor area calculations, accessory structure size or lot coverage. Up to eight hundred (800) square feet of roofed animal enclosures shall be exempt from floor area calculations and accessory structure size. In addition, roofed animal enclosures greater than eight hundred (800) square feet and existing prior to May 1, 2018, shall be exempt from floor area calculations and accessory structure size. 
b.  Animal housing, premises and quarters must be of sufficient size, kept clean and in a sanitary condition, properly ventilated and in good repair at all times. Sufficient size is defined as a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of interior measurement of corral space and, for horses, each individual box stall must contain a minimum dimension of eight (8) feet in width and twelve (12) feet in length. 
3.  Animal enclosures shall comply with all development standards of the land use district and adopted City codes. 
4.  Maintenance. 
a.  Water troughs shall be cleaned out weekly. Mosquito fish or other mosquito prevention measures shall be used in water troughs or in any standing water. 
b.  Vermin, flies, standing surface water, refuse, and manure must be controlled and not accumulate so as not to be a nuisance for adjacent properties. Property owner is subject to EMMC Chapter 8.12 (Property Maintenance). 
c.  Site must control dust, fumes, odors, vapors and/or unsanitary conditions. Property owner is subject to EMMC Chapter 8.12 (Property Maintenance). 
d.  Plugged in amplified noise on site relative to the operation of horses or large animals shall not be allowed. 
5.  Manure Storage and Disposal. 
a.  All manure disposal/storage shall be covered and protected from drainage flows, rain, and wind. Area used for non-containerized manure disposal/storage must cause no nuisance and be kept a minimum distance below and located so that it drains away from the neighboring property, facilities and water supplies. 
b.  Manure must be disposed off-site at a frequency that prevents overfilling of manure bin, or storage area, and which prevents strong odors, accumulation of flies, or vermin from creating a nuisance condition. Manure storage shall be located away from public view. 
6.  Trailer Parking. Horse or large animal trailers shall be located outside of the required front yard setback. Trailer parking is prohibited within the public right-of-way. All parking shall comply with Chapter 17.08 (Parking Requirements) of this title. 
G.  Trees. All new development and additions more than ten (10) percent of the floor area on the site shall provide a minimum of one tree within the required front setback for every thirty-five (35) feet of street frontage. If a tree already exists within the required front setback, the applicant shall not be required to plant a new tree. 
H.  Parking. Refer to Chapter 17.08 of this title. 
I.  Floor Area Ratio and Lot Coverage. Refer to Chapter 17.6 of this title. 
J.  Other Standards. For all other standards and requirements, refer to the base zone. 
(Ord. No. 2743, § 10, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2928, § 17, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 17.38 - R-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.38.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the R-2 low-density multiple-family dwelling zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Any use permitted in the R-1A zone; 
2.  Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings at a density that shall not exceed one unit for five thousand four hundred and forty-five (5,445) square feet of lot area; 
a.  The accessory buildings necessary to any such use, located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
3.  Transitional Parking. If any portion of a lot sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, or sides upon a lot which is entirely developed and used for transitional parking and which also sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, that portion thereof within one hundred (100) feet of the lot thus zoned C-1 or less restrictively and upon which it sides or from which it is thus separated, may be used for any use specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, upon condition that it be improved and maintained in accordance with all the provisions of Chapter 17.62 and of Section 17.08.030; 
4.  Manufactured home; 
5.  Supportive housing; 
6.  Transitional housing. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.38.01—17.38.01.040) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. D), (Exh. E), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 41, 6-21-2016)  
17.38.020 - Signs. 
Signs specified in the following subsections are permitted in zone R-2 in addition to those permitted by other sections of this chapter: 
A.  One name plate sign per dwelling unit not to exceed one square foot of display area identifying the occupant of each dwelling unit on the premises; also, address numbers not to exceed six (6) inches in height to be permitted on each name plate; 
B.  One identification wall or pole sign per building not exceeding twenty (20) square feet of display area, provided that such sign shall be stationary and nonflashing and contain no advertising matter except the name and/or street address of the building upon which placed. Such a sign shall be permitted only for multiple dwellings of four (4) or more attached units; 
C.  No more than two (2) pole or wall signs in any combination shall be permitted for every three hundred (300) feet of street or highway frontage or part thereof, pertaining only to the legal sale, rental or lease of the property on which the sign is displayed; 
D.  On vacant or undeveloped property a total display area of sixty-four (64) square feet shall be permitted with no single sign face to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; 
E.  On developed property, the display area shall be computed on the following basis: 
Number of Units 	Display Surface 
0—4 	16 square feet 
5—16 	20 square feet 
17—75 	32 square feet 
76—up 	50 square feet 
 
F.  Directional signs shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.12 of this title; 
G.  No pole sign shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet; 
H.  No wall sign shall project higher than the roof line of the building to which it is attached. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.38.01.050—17.38.01.130)  
17.38.030 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building, and structure in the R-2 low-density multiple-family dwelling zone: 
A.  Building Height. No building or structure shall exceed in height two and one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
B.  Front and Side Yards. The front and side yard setbacks for first and second floors shall be measured as shown below. The second floor setback shall be measured from the building wall line of the first floor. Where a porch or patio has been integrated into the architecture of the first floor, the second floor setback can be measured from the line of the porch or patio structural supports, located closest to the front property line. 
1 st Floor Front Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Front Yard, Setback 	1 st Floor Side Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Side Yard Setback 
20 ft. 	2 ft. additional 	10 ft. 	12 ft., measured from property line 
 
C.  Rear Yards. Behind the most rear main building there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet, except where a greater distance is otherwise required by law. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be not less than five thousand four hundred and forty-five (5,445) square feet per dwelling unit provided that multiple-family dwellings shall not be permitted on lots having a frontage of less than seventy (70) feet. When a lot has less area than therein required and was recorded at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be occupied by not more than one dwelling unit. 
F.  Distance Between Buildings. There shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between buildings used for dwelling purposes on the same lot. 
1.  There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building. 
2.  There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between accessory buildings, 
G.  Minimum Floor Area. Except as may otherwise be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.24 of this title, no dwelling unit shall contain less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area; provided further, that every dwelling unit containing an area; provided further, that every dwelling unit containing an area designed and intended to be used primarily as a bedroom shall contain no less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area; that a dwelling unit containing two (2) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms shall contain no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area; and that every dwelling unit containing three (3) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms, shall contain no less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area and that every dwelling unit containing four (4) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms shall contain no less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of floor area; each extra bedroom shall require one hundred fifty (150) additional square feet of floor area to the dwelling unit 
H.  Usable Open Space. The required usable open space shall be calculated at twenty-five (25) percent of gross living area or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is greater, for each dwelling unit. At least two hundred (200) square feet of the required open space shall be in private open space contiguous to each unit. The remaining usable open space shall be private or common. 
1.  Contiguous private open space shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10) linear feet horizontally in each direction with an unobstructed vertical height of seven (7) feet and shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence. Contiguous private open space shall be directly accessible only from the unit which it serves. 
2.  All areas qualifying as useable common open space shall have a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) linear feet horizontally in each direction with an unobstructed vertical height of seven (7) feet. 
3.  One hundred (100) percent of the useable open space areas (except maximum four-foot wide walkways, balconies and patios) shall be landscaped. The following areas shall not be used in calculating required useable open space; required front and street side yards, driveways, parking spaces, access to parking spaces, pedestrian pathways and roof area over garages except balconies. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space may be in balconies. All balconies must be directly accessible only from the unit which it serves. 
4.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an underground irrigation system. Additionally, a landscaping plan shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission and shall include all three (3) types of landscape elements; trees, shrubbery and ground cover. 
I.  Maximum Length. No exterior building wall shall exceed a length of one hundred sixty (160) feet without a minimum offset of five (5) feet. 
J.  Trash Areas. For all sites serving five (5) or more dwelling units, the outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. All required walls or screening shall at all times be adequately maintained. 
K.  Fencing. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units, a solid six-foot high masonry wall shall be installed and maintained adjacent to the rear and interior side property lines to the front setback line. When the grade of the property being developed is below the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be approximately six (6) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. When the grade of the property being developed is above the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be above the grade of the adjacent property by the approximate sum of six (6) feet plus one-half (½) of the difference in the elevation of the two (2) properties at the wall. In no event, however, except upon approval of a modification, shall the top of the wall be more than eight (8) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. 
L.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units shall be screened from view. 
M.  Undergrounding of Utilities. For all sites serving five (5) or more dwelling units, all utility distribution lines including but not limited to electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
N.  Lighting Systems. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units, the developer shall install an on-site lighting system in all parking areas, vehicular access ways and along major walkways. Such lighting shall be directed onto driveways and walkways within the project and away from dwelling units and adjacent properties. Such lighting system shall be automated using either an electronic time switch device or photoelectric sensor device and the lighting device shall be equipped with vandal resistant covers. 
(amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.38.02—17.38.170; Ord. 2662 § 5(E), 2006; Ord. No. 2883, § 42, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 18, 19, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 17.40 - R-3 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.40.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the R-3 medium-density multiple-family dwelling zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Any use permitted in the R-2 zone; 
2.  Group dwellings, multiple-family dwellings and apartment houses; 
3.  The accessory buildings necessary to any such use located on the same lot or parcel of land; 
4.  Transitional Parking. If any portion of a lot sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, or sides upon a lot which is entirely developed and used for transitional parking and which also sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, that portion thereof within one hundred (100) feet of the lot thus zoned C-1 or less restrictively and upon which it sides or from which it is thus separated, may be used for any use specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, upon condition that it be improved and maintained in accordance with all the provisions of Chapter 17.62 and of Section 17.08.030; 
5.  Manufactured home; 
6.  Supportive housing; 
7.  Transitional housing. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.40.01—17.40.01.40) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. D), (Exh. E), 1-14-2014)  
17.40.020 - Regulations. 
A.  Building Height. No building or structure shall exceed in height three (3) stories or forty (40) feet. 
B.  Front and Side Yards. The front and side yard setbacks for first and second floors shall be measured as shown below. The second floor setback shall be measured from the building wall line of the first floor. Where a porch or patio has been integrated into the architecture of the first floor, the second floor setback can be measured from the line of the porch or patio structural supports, located closest to the front property line. 
1 st Floor Front Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Front Yard Setback 	1 st Floor Side Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Side Yard Setback 
20 ft. 	2 ft. additional 	10 ft. 	12 ft., measured from property line 
 
C.  Rear Yards. Behind the rear-most main building there shall be rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet, except where a greater distance is otherwise required by law. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Maximum Density and Lot Size Requirements. 
1.  The maximum density of development shall not be more than one dwelling unit per three thousand one hundred eleven (3,111) square feet of net lot area; provided that the lot width is two hundred fifty (250) feet or greater. For lot widths of two hundred (200) to two hundred fifty (250) feet, the maximum density of development shall not be more than one dwelling unit per three thousand nine hundred sixty (3,960) square feet of net lot area. If the lot width is less than two hundred (200) feet, the maximum density of development shall not be more than one dwelling unit per four thousand eight hundred forty (4,840) square feet of net lot area. 
2.  Multiple-family dwelling units (a single building containing more than three (3) dwelling units) shall not be permitted on any lot having a public street frontage of less than seventy (70) feet nor on any lot with an area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
F.  Distance Between Buildings, There shall be a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet between buildings used for dwelling purposes on the same lot. 
1.  There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building. 
2.  There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between accessory buildings. 
G.  Minimum Floor Area. Except as may otherwise be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.24 of this title, no dwelling unit shall contain less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area; provided further, that every dwelling unit containing an area designed and intended to be used primarily as a bedroom shall contain no less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area; that a dwelling unit containing two (2) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms shall contain no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area; and that every dwelling unit containing three (3) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms, shall contain no less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area and that every dwelling unit containing four (4) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms shall contain no less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of floor area; each extra bedroom shall require one hundred fifty (150) additional square feet of floor area to the dwelling unit. 
H.  Usable Open Space. The required usable open space shall be calculated at twenty-five (25) percent of gross living area or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is greater, for each dwelling unit. At least two hundred (200) square feet of the required open space shall be in private open space contiguous to each unit. The remaining usable open space shall be private or common. 
1.  Contiguous private open space shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10) linear feet horizontally in each direction with an unobstructed vertical height of seven (7) feet and shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence. Contiguous private open space shall be directly accessible only from the unit which it serves. 
2.  All areas qualifying as useable common open space shall have a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) linear feet horizontally in each direction with an unobstructed vertical height of seven (7) feet. 
3.  One hundred (100) percent of the useable open space areas (except maximum four-foot wide walkways, balconies and patios) shall be landscaped. The following areas shall not be used in calculating required useable open space; required front and street side yards, driveways, parking spaces, access to parking spaces, pedestrian pathways and roof area over garages except balconies. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space may be in balconies. All balconies must be directly accessible only from the unit which it serves. 
4.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an underground irrigation system. Additionally, a landscaping plan shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission and shall include all three (3) types of landscape elements; trees, shrubbery and ground cover. 
I.  Maximum Length. No exterior building wall shall exceed a length of one hundred sixty (160) feet without a minimum offset of five (5) feet. 
J.  Trash Areas. For all sites serving five (5) or more dwelling units, the outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the buildings. All required walls or screening shall at all times be adequately maintained. 
K.  Fencing. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units, a solid six-foot high masonry wall shall be installed and maintained adjacent to the rear and interior side property lines to the front setback line. When the grade of the property being developed is below the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be approximately six (6) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. When the grade of the property being developed is above the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be above the grade of the adjacent property by the approximate sum of six (6) feet plus one-half (½) of the distance in the elevation of the two (2) properties at the wall. In no event, however, except upon approval of a modification, shall the top of the wall be more than eight (8) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. 
L.  Unit Identification. Numbers and/or letters used to identify individual units shall not correspond to parking space identification. 
M.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units shall be screened from view. 
N.  Undergrounding of Utilities, For all sites serving five (5) or more dwelling units, all utility distribution lines including but not limited to electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV tines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
O.  Lighting Systems. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units, the developer shall install an on-site lighting system in all parking areas, vehicular access ways and along major walkways. Such lighting shall be directed onto driveways and walkways within the project and away from dwelling units and adjacent properties. Such lighting system shall be automated using either an electronic time switch device or photoelectric sensor device and the lighting device shall be equipped with vandal resistant covers. 
(amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.40.02—17.40.180; Ord. 2545 § 4, 2001; Ord. 2662 § 5(F), 2006; Ord. No. 2883, § 43, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 20, 21, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 17.42 - R-4 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.42.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the R-4 high-density multiple-family dwelling zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Any use permitted in the R-3 zone; 
2.  The accessory buildings necessary to any such use located on the same lot or parcel of land; 
3.  Transitional Parking. If any portion of a lot sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, or sides upon a lot which is entirely developed and used for transitional parking and which also sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, that portion thereof within one hundred (100) feet of the lot thus zoned C-1 or less restrictively and upon which it sides or from which it is thus separated may be used for any use specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, upon condition that it be improved and maintained in accordance with all the provisions of Chapter 17.62 and of Section 17.08.030; 
4.  Manufactured home; 
5.  Supportive housing; 
6.  Transitional housing. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.42.01—17.42.01.030) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. D), (Exh. E), 1-14-2014)  
17.42.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the R-4 high-density multiple-family dwelling zone: 
A.  Front and Side Yards. The front and side yard setbacks for first and second floors shall be measured as shown below. The second floor setback shall be measured from the building wall line of the first floor. Where a porch or patio has been integrated into the architecture of the first floor, the second floor setback can be measured from the line of the porch or patio structural supports, located closest to the front property line. 
1 st Floor Front Yard Setback 	2 nd Floor Front Yard Setback 	1 st Floor Side Yard Setback 	2 an Floor Side Yard Setback 
20 ft. 	2 ft. additional 	10 ft. 	12 ft., measured from property line 
 
B.  Rear Yard. Behind the most rear main building there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Lot Area. The minimum lot areas shall be not less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet per dwelling unit provided that multiple-family dwellings shall not be permitted on lots having a frontage of less than seventy (70) feet or a lot area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
E.  Distance Between Buildings. There shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between buildings used for dwelling purposes on the same lot. 
1.  There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building. 
2.  There shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between accessory buildings. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Minimum Floor Area. Except as may otherwise be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.24 of this title, no dwelling unit shall contain less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area; provided further, that every dwelling unit containing an area designed and intended to be used primarily as a bedroom shall contain no less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area; that a dwelling unit containing two (2) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms shall contain no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area; and that every dwelling unit containing three (3) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms, shall contain no less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area and that every dwelling unit containing four (4) areas designed and intended to be used primarily as bedrooms shall contain no less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of floor area; each extra bedroom shall require one hundred fifty (150) additional square feet of floor area to the dwelling unit. 
H.  Usable Open Space. The required usable open space shall be calculated at twenty-five (25) percent of gross living area or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is greater, for each dwelling unit. At least two hundred (200) square feet of the required open space shall be in private open space contiguous to each unit. The remaining usable open space shall be private or common. 
1.  Contiguous private open space shall have a minimum dimension of ten (10) linear feet horizontally in each direction with an unobstructed vertical height of seven (7) feet and shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence. Contiguous private open space shall be directly accessible only from the unit which it serves. 
2.  All areas qualifying as useable common open space shall have a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) linear feet horizontally in each direction with an unobstructed vertical height of seven (7) feet. 
3.  One hundred (100) percent of the useable open space areas (except maximum four-foot wide walkways, balconies and patios) shall be landscaped. The following areas shall not be used in calculating required useable open space; required front and street side yards, driveways, parking spaces, access to parking spaces, pedestrian pathways and roof area over garages except balconies. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space may be in balconies. All balconies must be directly accessible only from the unit which it serves. 
4.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with an underground irrigation system. Additionally, a landscaping plan shall be submitted for review by the Planning Commission and shall include all three (3) types of landscape elements; trees, shrubbery and ground cover. 
I.  Maximum Length. No exterior building wall shall exceed a length of one hundred sixty (160) feet without a minimum offset of five (5) feet. 
J.  Trash Areas. For all sites serving five (5) or more dwelling units, the outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the buildings. All required walls or screening shall at all times be adequately maintained. 
K.  Fencing. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units, a solid six-foot high masonry wall shall be installed and maintained adjacent to the rear and interior side property lines to the front setback line. When the grade of the property being developed is below the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be approximately six (6) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. When the grade of the property being developed is above the grade of the adjacent property, the top of the wall shall be above the grade of the adjacent property by the approximate sum of six (6) feet plus one-half (½) of the difference in the elevation of the two (2) properties at the wall. In no event, however, except upon approval of a modification, shall the top of the wall be more than eight (8) feet above the grade of the adjacent property. 
L.  Unit Identification. Numbers and/or letters used to identify individual units shall not correspond to parking space identification. 
M.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units shall be screened from view. 
N.  Undergrounding of Utilities. For all sites serving five (5) or more dwelling units, all utility distribution lines including but not limited to electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
O.  Lighting Systems. For all sites serving three (3) or more dwelling units, the developer shall install an on-site lighting system in all parking areas, vehicular access ways and along major walkways. Such lighting shall be directed onto driveways and walkways within the project and away from dwelling units and adjacent properties. Such lighting system shall be automated using either an electronic time switch device or photoelectric sensor device and the lighting device shall be equipped with vandal-resistant covers. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.42.02—17.42.180; amended during 1999 recodification; Ord. 2662 § 5(G), 2006; Ord. No. 2883, § 44, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 22—24, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 17.45 - MIXED/MULTIUSE ZONE 
 
17.45.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter to provide regulations that implement the goals and policies of the general plan and other similar long-range planning documents aimed at encouraging mixed-use development within the city. The mixed/multiuse zone is further intended to serve as an implementation tool of the city's housing element of the general plan by facilitating residential development on identified "housing opportunity sites." 
B.  The mixed/multiuse (MMU) zone has the following major objectives: 
1.  Create "by-right" opportunities for new mixed/multiuse housing along major corridors to protect and preserve single-family residential neighborhoods, reduce automobile dependence, improve air quality and revitalize and transition underutilized uses; 
2.  Implement state laws that require cities to demonstrate available land capacity and zoning tools to accommodate the city's projected need for housing; 
3.  Encourage lot assembly to provide quality multi-unit housing at higher densities; 
4.  Encourage commercial and mixed-use development at key intersections and nodes along major corridors and locate exclusively residential developments mid-block; 
5.  Create a pedestrian-oriented mix of uses with convenient access between area neighborhoods, housing, employment centers, and retail services; 
6.  Facilitate well-designed mixed/multiuse development projects that combine residential and nonresidential uses (e.g., office, retail, business services, personal services, public spaces and uses, other community amenities, etc.) vertically integrated (e.g., commercial frontage with residential and/or office uses above the first floor) or horizontally integrated (housing adjacent to commercial and office uses) to promote a better balance of jobs and housing; 
7.  Stimulate economic development and reinvestment through regulations based upon recognized urban design principles that allow property owners to respond with flexibility to market forces; and 
8.  Encourage the development of a unique zone character through a streetscape that provides attractive features (e.g., landscaping, niche or linear parks, public places, courtyards, etc.) designed to integrate the public realm (e.g., streets, sidewalks, etc.) with development on adjacent private property. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.020 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the mixed use/multiuse zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Reserved; 
2.  Any use permitted in the C-1, C-2, and C-O zone; 
3.  Automobile parking lots, surface; 
4.  Automobile parking structure, above ground; 
5.  Bakeries employing not more than ten (10) persons on the premises; 
6.  Bakery products shops; 
7.  Barber shops; 
8.  Beauty shops; 
9.  Care facilities (less than six (6) persons); 
10.  Clothing and wearing apparel shops; 
11.  Confectionary stores; 
12.  Department stores; 
13.  Dwelling, multifamily; 
14.  Financial institutions; 
15.  Florist shops; 
16.  Furniture stores; 
17.  Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet; 
18.  Jewelry stores; 
19.  Live/work. 
20.  Meat markets or delicatessens; 
21.  Mixed-use development, where residential and nonresidential uses are integrated vertically, including live/work opportunities. Nonresidential uses in vertical mixed-use projects shall be limited to: 
a.  Health and fitness centers. 
b.  Schools, specialized education and training. 
c.  Studios, professional. 
d.  Printing and publishing. 
e.  Studios—Art, dance, music, photography, etc. 
f.  Retail trade uses that can only include: 
i.  Appliance sales. 
ii.  Arts, antiques, collectibles, and gifts. 
iii.  Convenience stores. 
iv.  Furniture and furnishings. 
v.  Grocery stores. 
vi.  Pet shops. 
vii.  Restaurants. 
viii.  Retail, general merchandise. 
g.  Bank and financial services. 
h.  Day care centers. 
i.  Laundry and dry cleaning. 
j.  Laundromats, self-service. 
k.  Offices. 
l.  Personal services. 
22.  Music stores; 
23.  Office uses; 
24.  Personal care facility, provided that there are no partitions in excess of four (4) feet in height in the interior of the tenant space, except appropriate interior partitions for a maximum of two (2) restrooms and one storage/office room not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area, and that the front of the facility is not covered with blinds, curtains, or window coverings that block visibility into and through the facility; 
25.  Photography shops and studios; 
26.  Restaurants; 
27.  Retail stores; 
28.  Senior housing; 
29.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops; 
30.  Stationary or book stores; 
31.  Supportive housing; 
32.  Tailors; 
33.  Transitional housing; and 
34.  Video Rentals. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), (Exh. E), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2909, § 4, 4-18-2017) 
_____ 
17.45.030 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure, and use in the mixed/multiuse (MMU) zone: 
Table 17.45.030A 
Development Regulations—Mixed/Multiuse Zone (MMU) 
Development Regulation 	MMU 	Notes 
1. Minimum density 
(residential uses) 	25 du/ac 	Minimum density for residential uses expressed as dwelling units per acre. Density is incentivized through land assembly/lot consolidation. See Section 17.45.040 for lot area per dwelling unit 
2. Maximum density 
(residential uses) 	35 du/ac 	Maximum density for residential uses expressed as dwelling units per acre. The maximum density of 35 dwelling units on a one-acre lot with established percentages of open space required. It is not intended that lots less than one acre in size provide housing at the maximum density of the zone. 
3. Maximum intensity 
(nonresidential uses) 	1.0 FAR 	Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential uses. Podium and underground parking is not counted toward floor area ratio (FAR). 
4. Minimum lot area for any new project which contains residential only or mixed use with a residential component. 	22,000 sq. ft. 	See Section 17.45.040 for lot area per dwelling unit. For sites less than 22,000 sq. ft., new projects shall be non-residential only. 
5. Minimum lot frontage for any new project which contains residential only or mixed use with a residential component. 	100 linear feet 	
6. Minimum dwelling unit size 	Studio: 500 sq. ft. 
1-bdrm: 650 sq. ft. 
2-bdrm: 800 sq. ft. 
3-bdrm: 1,000 sq. ft. 	
7. Maximum building height 	4 stories/50 ft. 	Underground levels and mezzanines lofts are allowed. 
8. Distance between buildings (minimum) 	10 ft. 	Increase of 5 ft. for every 10 ft. of height, or fraction thereof, above 25 ft. 
9. Front yard setback 	5 ft. (min); 15 ft. (max) 	- 
10. Street side setback 	5 ft. (min); 15 ft. (max) 	
11. Interior side setback 	5 ft. (min); No max 	Minimum 15 ft. if abutting residential zone district. 
12. Rear yard setback 	10 ft. (min) for residential portion, no requirement for commercial portion 	Minimum 15 ft. if abutting residential zone district. 
13. Permitted setback encroachments 	6 ft. into setbacks 	Balconies, awning, porches, stairways and similar elements may extend up to 6 ft. into the setback. Cornices, eaves, fireplaces, similar architectural features may extend 4 ft. into the front and rear setbacks and 3 ft. in interior setbacks. 
14. Maximum lot coverage 	None 	
Landscape/open space standards 
15. Publicly accessible open space (nonresidential) 	The non-residential building footprint 	See Section 17.10 for additional standards and Chapter 4.1 of the El Monte Comprehensive Design Standards. 
16. Private open space (multi-family residential) 	1st floor-150 sq. ft. per unit Upper floor-100 sq. ft. per unit 	See Section 17.10 for additional standards and Chapter 4.1 of the El Monte Comprehensive Design Standards. 
17. Common open space (multi-family residential) 	200 sq. ft. per unit 	See Section 17.10 for additional standards and Chapter 4.1 of the El Monte Comprehensive Design Standards. 
Parking Standards 
18. Surface parking 	20 ft. min. setback from front lot line at driveway entrance; 15 ft. min side yard setback at driveway entrance. 	See Section 17.45.050 for additional parking standards. 
19. Garage/tuck-under parking 	Prohibited along front and street side lot lines 	See Section 17.45.050 for additional parking standards. 
20. Underground/podium parking 	Allowed beneath building footprint 	See Section 17.11.050 for additional parking standards. 
21. Above-ground parking structure 	Permitted if screened from views from public right-of-way and adjacent single-family residential districts 	See Section 17.45.050 for additional parking standards. 
 
Abbreviations: sq. ft. = square feet; ft. = feet or foot 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 45, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2928, § 25, 5-15-2018)  
17.45.040 - Lot area per dwelling unit. 
A.  For every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple-family dwelling, dwelling group, or apartment structure, the following table establishes the permitted densities based on gross square footage of the lot. 
B.  When calculating number of units, if insufficient area exists to provide the minimum lot area for the additional unit, the total number of units shall be rounded down to the smaller number. 
Table 17.45.040A 
Permitted Densities/Graduated Scale - Mixed/Multiuse Zone (MMU) 
Lot Size Square Feet 	# of Dwelling Units Square Feet of Lot Area 
22,001—30,000 	1/1,640 square feet 
30,001—39,999 	1/1,500 square feet 
40,000—43,559 	1/1,300 square feet 
Above 43,560 	1/1,244 square feet 
 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 46, 6-21-2016)  
17.45.050 - Parking regulations. 
A.  The mixed/multiuse zone integrates commercial, office and residential uses with varying parking requirements, peak hour demands and vehicle loading needs. Flexibility in meeting these varying requirements and demands is accommodated through parking requirements and inclusion of shared parking, when feasible. This section provides parking standards for buildings in the mixed/multiuse (MMU) zone. 
Table 17.45.050A 
Parking Standards - Mixed/Multiuse Zone (MMU) 
Use 	Required Number of Spaces 	Notes 
Multi-family residential and condominiums 	Studio -1 space per unit 
1 bedroom -1.7 spaces per unit 
Two bedrooms - 2 spaces per unit 
Three or more bedrooms - 2.5 spaces per unit in common parking areas; 3 spaces per unit if private and enclosed. 
Additional guest parking 1/4 space per unit 	Per unit; Tandem parking is allowed in cases where multiple spaces are assigned to a single unit 
Professional office 	1 space per 350 square feet 	
Medical office 	1 space per 250 square feet 	
Retail 	1 space per 250 square feet of floor area for the first 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, 1 space per 400 square feet of floor area for the next 30,000 square feet of gross floor area and 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area after the first 50,000 square feet 	
Restaurants 	1 space per 250 square feet 	
Hotel 	1 space per rentable room 	
Senior housing 	1.0 spaces per unit for developments of 10 units or less. For developments of 11 units or more, the parking shall be 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit, or 10 spaces, whichever is greater. For developments of 10 or more units, 10 percent of the total required parking shall be reserved for guest parking 	
Very low and low income housing units 	1.0 space per very low or low income unit. This parking ratio only applies to those units which are designated for very low or low income. For developments of 10 or more units, ten (10) percent of the total required parking shall be reserved for guest parking 1.1 	
 
1.  Reduced Parking. The Planning Commission and City Council may reduce the required parking after considering documentation and/or study provided by the applicant, staffs recommendation and giving decisive weights to all relevant facts, including but not limited to the following factors: availability and accessibility of alternative parking; impact on adjacent residential neighborhoods; existing or potential shared parking arrangements; the characteristics of the use, including hours of operation and peak parking demand times; design and maintenance of off-street parking that will be provided; and whether the proposed use is new or a small addition to an existing use. 
2.  Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. In accordance with the California Green Building Code (CALGreen Code), new buildings shall be electric vehicle charging station ready. This requires residential and commercial properties alike to provide one 120V AC 20 amp and one 208/240V 40 amp, grounded AC outlet for each required parking space. The number of required parking spaces for electric vehicle charging shall be as follows: 
Table 17.45.050B 
Electric Vehicle Charging Station Standards - Mixed/Multiuse Zone (MMU) 
Total Number of Spaces 	Number of Required Electric Vehicle Charging Spaces 
1—50 	2 
51—200 	3 
201 and over 	5 
 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 47, 6-21-2016) 
_____ 
17.45.060 - Frontage type regulations. 
A.  This section provides frontage type standards for buildings in the mixed/multiuse zone (MMU). Types of frontages include: 
1.  Live-Work/Office Fronts. A frontage that reinforces both residential and work activities that can occur in the building. The elevation of the ground floor is located at or near the grade of sidewalk to provide direct public access to the building. Entrances and windows are provided on the front of the facade to provide eyes on the street and direct sidewalk access to commercial and office uses. The front setback may be improved with landscaping or as an extension of the public sidewalk to create a more pedestrian-friendly environment. 
a.  Elevation of ground floor. The ground floor elevation shall be located near the elevation of the sidewalk to minimize the need for external steps and external ADA ramps at public entrances. 
b.  Minimum Ground Floor Interior Height. Twelve (12) feet minimum (floor-to-floor height - commercial ready). 
c.  Ground Floor Unit Entrances. All ground floor tenant spaces that have street frontage shall have entrances on a facade fronting a street. All other ground floor uses may have a common lobby entrance along the front facade or private entrances along other facades. 
d.  Upper Floor Unit Entrances. Entrances to upper floor units may be provided through a common lobby entrance and/or by a common entrance along a facade fronting a street. 
e.  Recessed Entrances. Entrances may be recessed into the facade. 
f.  Awnings and Marquees. Awnings or marquees may be provided over storefront windows and entrances. Awning and marquees may project up to six (6) feet from the facade and extend over the sidewalk provided that at least eight (8) feet of vertical clearance is provided. 
g.  Projecting Elements (Balconies, Roof Overhangs, Shade Structures, and Bay Windows). Projecting elements on upper floors may project four (4) feet from the facade and project into the setback. 
h.  Sidewalk and Setback Treatment. The public sidewalk shall be improved with street trees with an average spacing of thirty (30) feet on-center and pedestrian-scaled street lights (no taller than fourteen (14) feet). If the front facade is setback from the public sidewalk, the setback shall be landscaped and/or improved as an extension of the public sidewalk. 
2.  Residential Fronts. A frontage that reinforces the residential character and use of the building. The elevation of the ground floor is elevated above the grade of the lot to provide privacy for residences by preventing direct views into the home from the sidewalk. Entrances and windows are provided on the front of the facade to provide eyes on the street and direct sidewalk access to the building. Stoops are allowed to project into the front setback to enhance entrances. The front setback is primarily improved with landscaping. 
a.  Elevation of Ground Floor. The ground floor elevation shall be located within six feet of the ground surface of the adjacent sidewalk or walkway. 
b.  Minimum Ground Floor Ceiling Height. Ten (10) feet minimum (floor-to-floor height). 
c.  Ground Floor Unit Entrances. Entrances to ground floor units that have street frontage may be provided through a common lobby entrance and/or by private entrances from the adjacent sidewalk. 
d.  Upper Floor Unit Entrances. Entrances to upper floor units may be provided through a common lobby entrance and/or by a common entrance along a facade fronting a street. 
e.  Recessed Entrances. Entrances may be recessed into the facade. 
f.  Stoops and Front Porches. Stoops and front porches may be provided in front of building and unit entrances. Stoops and front porches may project up to six (6) feet from the facade and project into the setback. 
g.  Projecting Elements (Balconies, Roof Overhangs, Shade Structures, and Bay Windows). Projecting Elements on upper floors may project four (4) feet from the facade and project into the setback. 
h.  Sidewalk and Setback Treatment. The public sidewalk shall be improved with street trees with an average spacing of thirty (30) feet on-center and pedestrian-scaled street lights (no taller than fourteen (14) feet). If the front facade is setback from the public sidewalk, the setback shall be landscaped (excluding stoops/front porches and paved paths to building entrances). 
3.  Storefronts. A frontage that reinforces the commercial character and use of the ground floor of the building. The elevation of the ground floor is located at or near the grade of sidewalk to provide direct public access into the building. Large storefronts display windows are provided on the front of the facade to encourage visual access to merchandise displays and to encourage window shopping. Awnings or marquees are provided over storefront windows and entrances. The front setback is primarily improved as an extension of the public sidewalk to create a more pedestrian-friendly environment. 
a.  Elevation of Ground Floor. The ground floor elevation shall be located near the elevation of the sidewalk to minimize the need for external steps and external ADA ramps at public entrances. 
b.  Minimum Ground Floor Ceiling Height. Fifteen (15) feet minimum (floor-to-floor height). 
c.  Storefront Entrances. All ground floor tenant spaces that have street frontage shall have storefront entrances on the facade fronting a street. 
d.  Lobby Entrances. Lobby entrances to upper floor uses shall be located on a facade fronting a street. 
e.  Recessed Entrances. Storefront and lobby entrances may be recessed into the facade. 
f.  Awnings and Marquees. Awnings or marquees are required over storefront windows and entrances. Awning and marquees may project up to six (6) feet from the facade and extend over the sidewalk provided that at least eight (8) feet of vertical clearance is provided. 
g.  Projecting Elements (Balconies, Shade Structures, and Bay Windows). Projecting Elements on upper floors may project four (4) feet from the facade and project into the setback. 
h.  Sidewalk and Setback Treatment. The public sidewalk shall be improved with street trees with an average spacing of thirty (30) feet on-center and pedestrian-scaled street lights (no taller than fourteen (14) feet). If the front facade is setback from the public sidewalk, the setback shall be improved as an extension of the public sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.070 - Open space regulations. 
This section provides open space standards for development within the mixed/multiuse zone (MMU). 
A.  Usable Open Space Defined. Usable open space areas are an open area or an indoor or outdoor recreational facility which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. Usable open space shall not include any portion of parking areas, streets, driveways, sidewalks, or turnaround areas. 
B.  The following standards shall apply to the requirements for open space: 
1.  Private Residential Open Space. 
a.  For stand-alone multi-family residential projects or as part of a mixed-use development, each residential unit shall be provided with at least one area of private open space accessible directly from the living area of the unit, in the form of a fenced yard or patio, a deck or balcony at a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per unit for first floor units and one hundred (100) square feet per unit for upper floors. 
b.  The minimum dimension, width or depth, of a balcony shall be five (5) feet. 
2.  Common Residential Open Space. 
a.  For stand-alone multi-family residential developments, each residential unit shall be provided with at least two hundred (200) square feet of common residential open space. 
b.  All common open space shall be conveniently located and accessible to all dwelling units on the site. 
c.  Common open space areas may include landscaping, pedestrian paths, and recreational facilities. 
d.  in projects containing fewer than ten (10) units, the common open space shall have a minimum width and depth of ten (10) feet. In projects containing ten (10) or more units, the minimum width and depth shall be twenty (20) feet. 
3.  Recreational Amenities/Facilities. 
a.  For projects containing twenty-five (25) or more residential units in stand-alone multi-family residential developments and as part of a mixed-use development, one common recreational amenity shall be provided for each twenty-five (25) units or fraction thereof. The following listed amenities satisfy the above recreational facilities requirements. Recognizing that certain facilities serve more people than others, have a wider interest or appeal, and/or occupy more area, specified items may be counted as two (2) amenities, as noted. In all cases, each square foot of land area devoted to a recreational amenity shall be credited as common open space on a 1:1 basis. 
i.  Clubhouse (two (2)). 
ii.  Swimming pool (two (2)). 
iii.  Tennis court (one per court). 
iv.  Basketball court (one per court). 
v.  Racquetball court (one per court). 
vi.  Weightlifting facility. 
vii.  Children's playground equipment. 
viii.  Sauna. 
ix.  Jacuzzi. 
x.  Day care facility (two (2)). 
xi.  Other recreational amenities deemed adequate by the Economic Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.080 - Public space amenities requirements. 
A.  Each project proposed within the mixed/multiuse zone (MMU) must include a public open space amenity, or some form of physical interface for the pedestrian. Such features may include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Formal Plazas. A formal plaza would be a publicly accessible open space which has a design that is influenced by classical urban planning design. A formal plaza would typically include some sort of central water fountain and/or symmetrical landscaping. 
2.  Urban Gardens. An urban garden can be located on the ground level, or on upper levels of a structure. Urban gardens include ornamental landscaping arranged in raised or at-grade planters or planting areas, potted plants and trees. Many times there are sculptures or other forms of public art that are included within the urban garden. 
3.  Covered Colonnades. Colonnades are linear in design and generous in depth. The intent is to provide a comfortably wide, covered pathway that is adjacent to the openings of a building. Sometimes the second floor of a building is utilized to create the "covered" element of the colonnade. 
4.  Sidewalk Dining. Sidewalk dining may occur wherever a sidewalk space is ample enough to accommodate dining furniture without impeding pedestrian access of the sidewalk. Sidewalk dining may be defined with a railing or planters, or be open and accessible. 
5.  Pedestrian Alleys and Walkways. A pedestrian alley or walkway is typically a "lane" that does not follow the alignment of a vehicular street, but provides a pedestrian access to either a public space or some other feature within the interior of a development. Pedestrian alleys or walkways must be designed in such a manner so as to be inviting to pedestrians. Therefore, issues such as lighting, security, line of sight, cleanliness and visual appeal are important considerations to a well designed pedestrian alley or walkway. Sometimes public art, street furniture and access to shops and public spaces are features of pedestrian alleys and walkways. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.090 - Live-work development. 
This section provides operational and compatibility standards for the development of live/work units within the mixed/multiuse zone (MMU). 
A.  Allowed Uses. 
1.  The nonresidential component of a live/work unit shall only be a nonresidential use allowed within the MMU zone, except that certain uses are determined to be not appropriate within a residential environment and are therefore prohibited as provided in subsection B, below. 
2.  The residential component of a live/work unit shall only be a residential use allowed within the MMU zone. 
B.  Prohibited Uses. 
1.  A live/work unit shall not be used for any of the following activities or similar activities as determined by the Director: 
a.  Adult-oriented businesses; 
b.  Animal care or boarding; 
c.  Classroom instruction (e.g., art/music lessons, tutoring, and similar uses) involving five (5) or more students at any one time; 
d.  Commercial food preparation activities; 
e.  Industrial uses; 
f.  Vehicle maintenance or repair (i.e., body or mechanical work, including boats and recreational vehicles), vehicle detailing and painting, upholstery, etc.; 
g.  Storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use; 
h.  Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories (not including chiropractors or counselors/psychotherapists); 
2.  Activities or uses that are not compatible with residential activities or that would clearly conflict with other live/work activities or the character of the surrounding neighborhood as determined by the Director; and 
3.  Activities or uses that would adversely affect the health or safety of live/work unit residents, because of dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or that would be hazardous because of materials, processes, products, or wastes. 
C.  Site Planning and Design Standards. 
1.  Each live/work unit fronting a public right-of-way shall have a pedestrian-oriented frontage that allows views into the interior of the nonresidential areas of the unit. 
2.  Each live/work unit shall have a clearly identified, separate access from other live/work units within the structure or development. Access to individual units shall be from common access areas, parking lots, or walkways. Access to each unit shall be clearly identified to provide for emergency services. 
3.  The living space within the live/work unit shall be contiguous with the working space, with direct access between the two (2) areas. 
D.  Operational Standards. 
1.  No portion of a live/work unit shall be separately sold or rented. 
2.  The owner or developer of a structure containing live/work units shall provide written notice to all occupants, tenants, and users that the surrounding area may be subject to higher impacts associated with nonresidential uses (e.g., noise) than exist in more predominantly residential areas. Performance standards for live/work units shall be those applicable to nonresidential uses allowed in the zone in which the live/work units are located. 
3.  All activities related to the "work" component of a live/work unit shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
4.  Up to two (2) additional persons who do not reside in the live/work unit may work in the unit. 
5.  Client and customer visits to live/work units are allowed. 
6.  Parking for each live/work unit shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.08 (Parking Requirements). 
7.  A live/work unit shall not be converted to either entirely residential use or entirely nonresidential use. 
8.  A live/work use may display a window or building-mounted sign up to a maximum of five (5) percent of the building frontage area used for commercial purposes. Signs shall not be illuminated, including neon signs. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.100 - Vertical mixed-use development. 
This section provides operational and compatibility standards for vertical mixed-use development within the mixed/multiuse zone (MMU). 
A.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Joint tenants and owners association. 
a.  A joint tenants and owners association shall be formed to ensure the well-being of each tenant and owner in a mixed-use project. 
b.  The association bylaws, including voting rights, shall be subject to review by the City Attorney and approval by the Director. The association's bylaws shall include the following: 
i.  Assignment of parking spaces per each use. 
ii.  Identification of maintenance responsibilities for landscaping, parking facilities, and recycling and refuse storage facilities. Noise notification procedures. 
iii.  Relationship between uses regarding association representation 
iv.  Voting procedures. 
v.  Procedures for solving problems that may arise between the different types of uses or residents. 
2.  Loading and Unloading Activities. Where applicable, the covenants, conditions, and restrictions of a mixed-use project shall indicate the times when the loading and unloading of goods may occur on the street, provided that in no event shall loading or unloading take place after 10:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
3.  Noise Notification. 
a.  Residents, whether owners or tenants, of a mixed-use development project shall be notified in writing before taking up residence that they will be living in an urban type of environment and that the noise levels may be higher than a typical residential area. 
b.  The covenants, conditions, and restrictions of a mixed-use project shall require that the residents acknowledge their receipt of the written noise notification. Their signatures shall confirm receipt and understanding of this information 
B.  Parking. Residential parking shall be secured and separated from public parking. 
C.  Bicycle Storage Areas. All vertical mixed use developments shall provide common bicycle storage areas for the residents as follows: two (2) bicycle storage units for every five (5) dwelling units for the first twenty (20) dwelling units, and one bicycle storage unit for every five (5) additional dwelling units. 
D.  Fences and walls. In addition to the regulations in Table 17.06.120 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges), fences and walls shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Separation Wall Required. A masonry separation wall shall be constructed on all property lines adjacent to any single-family residential district. Pedestrian access points are encouraged and may be allowed subject to approval of the Director. The separation wall shall be six (6) feet in height, as measured from the highest elevation of land contiguous to the wall, except in a required front setback area and in a required exterior side setback area for a corner, reverse corner or key lot, where the wall shall be limited to thirty-six (36) inches in height. 
2.  Other Fences and Walls. Fences and walls are allowed in any yard area subject to the following height regulations: 
a.  Front yard and street side yard setback area. In the front yard and street side yard setback area, fences and walls are prohibited. 
b.  All other areas. In all other areas, the height shall be limited to six (6) feet, as measured from the side of the fence or wall with the highest grade. 
3.  Location. All perimeter fences and walls shall be constructed on the property line unless a different location is permitted by the Economic Development Director. No parallel wall or fence shall be constructed less than five (5) feet from an existing wall or fence, unless approved by the Economic Development Director. 
4.  Materials. 
a.  Chain link fencing is prohibited, except that chain link fencing may be used for temporary fencing needs (construction sites, special events, vacant lots, etc.). 
b.  Barbed wire and concertina wire are prohibited. 
E.  Trash Enclosures. Enclosures shall be required for refuse and recycling bins and there location shall be clearly indicated on required site plan. Outside trash enclosures shall be a minimum six (6) feet in height and shall be architecturally compatible with main building. Enclosures are not permitted in required front yard or street side yard setback area. 
F.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with Section 17.10 (Landscaping) and Chapter 4.1 Section E. Landscape Design, of the El Monte Comprehensive Design Standards. 
G.  Screening and Buffering—Mechanical Equipment and Trash Facilities. All mechanical equipment, heat and air-conditioning equipment shall be architecturally screened from view and buffered and trash facilities shall be screened and buffered. 
H.  Signs. Signs shall comply with Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation). In addition, in the MMU zone where both residential and nonresidential uses are allowed, the signage rights and responsibilities applicable to a particular use shall be determined as follows: residential uses shall be treated as if they were located in the residential area where that type of use would be allowed as a matter of right, and nonresidential uses shall be treated as if they were located in a zone where that particular use would be allowed, either as a matter of right or subject to a discretionary process. 
I.  Sound mitigation. Residential dwelling units shall be designed to be sound attenuated against present and future project noise. New projects or new nonresidential uses in existing projects shall provide an acoustical analysis report, by an acoustical engineer, describing the acoustical design features of the structure required to satisfy the exterior and interior noise standards. 
J.  Design Criteria. 
1.  A mixed-use development project shall be designed and constructed to: 
a.  Be pedestrian in its focus by: 
i.  Providing direct pedestrian linkages to adjacent public sidewalks. 
ii.  Creating enhanced pedestrian connections throughout the project between residential and nonresidential uses and parking areas. 
iii.  Providing enhanced pedestrian amenities throughout the project, including seating, pedestrian area lighting, special paving, public art, water features, common open space, directories, and similar items to create a pleasant pedestrian experience. 
b.  Incorporating architectural design elements and materials that relate to a pedestrian scale. 
c.  Locate uses in proximity to one another without large intervening parking lots so that it is convenient for people to walk between the various uses and park their vehicles only once. 
d.  Create a pedestrian scale and character of development along the street by providing significant wall articulation and varying roof heights, incorporating pedestrian scale elements (e.g., doors, windows, lighting, landscaping), and locating storefronts and common open space areas (e.g., plaza, courtyard, outdoor dining) near the public sidewalk to contribute to an active street environment. 
2.  Consistent use of architectural details and materials. Architectural style and use of quality materials shall be compatible and consistent throughout an entire mixed-use project. However, differences in architectural details and materials may occur to differentiate between the residential and nonresidential portions of the project. The overall project design and site layout shall be one that promotes a strong pedestrian environment and active street frontage. This can be accomplished by incorporating features into the project as outlined in subsection 3, below. 
3.  Features. 
a.  Street Level Features. Variations in the front building plane shall be incorporated through the use of varying building setbacks, variations in wall planes, and the inclusion of pedestrian amenities (e.g., plaza, courtyard, outdoor dining, landscaping). Long expanses of blank walls shall be prohibited. 
b.  Pedestrian-Oriented Features. At least seventy-five (75) percent of the building frontage facing a public street, primary pedestrian way, or parking lot shall be devoted to pedestrian-oriented features (e.g., storefronts, pedestrian entrances to nonresidential uses; transparent display windows; landscaping). 
c.  Upper Level Features. Upper floor balconies, bays, and windows shall be provided whenever opportunities exist for these types of features. 
d.  Entrances. When nonresidential and residential uses are located in a vertical mixed use structure, separate pedestrian entrances shall be provided for each use. The entrances for nonresidential uses shall be designed to be visually distinct from the entrances for residential uses. Entrances to individual residential units in a vertical mixed use project shall not be allowed along a street frontage. Instead shared entrances to residential units located above the ground floor shall be from lobbies that serve multiple units. 
e.  Neighborhood Interface. The design of new infill development shall be sensitive to the scale and design characteristics of established structures in abutting residential neighborhoods, with the objective of achieving a harmonious transition between the new development and existing neighborhood. Consideration shall be given to factors including, but not limited to, orientation of architectural features, building articulation, and exterior building treatments. 
f.  Lighting. Lighting shall be incorporated along sidewalks or other pedestrian walkways, plazas, paseos, courtyards, and other common open areas to enhance the pedestrian environment and increase public safety. Lighting for nonresidential uses shall be designed, located, and shielded to ensure that they do not adversely impact the residential uses, but shall provide sufficient illumination for access and security purposes. 
g.  Security. Projects shall be designed to minimize security risks to residents and to minimize the opportunities for vandalism and theft. This may be accomplished by: 
i.  Maximizing visibility to common open space areas, internal walkways, and public sidewalks. Use opportunities for natural surveillance to increase visibility. 
ii.  Using walkways, low fences, lighting, signage, and landscaping to clearly guide people and vehicles to and from the proper entrances. 
iii.  Eliminating areas of concealment, hiding places, and dead spaces. 
iv.  Using lighting to improve the visibility of common areas while enhancing the pedestrian environment. Lighting should not be overly bright and should provide a uniform level of light over the subject area to eliminate dark spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.110 - Outdoor dining. 
This section provides standards for outdoor dining areas within the mixed/multiuse zone (MMU). Outdoor dining restricted is restricted to the ground floor only. 
A.  Public Property. Outdoor dining on public property shall require approval of an encroachment permit by the Public Works Director and compliance with the standards of the Public Works Department. 
B.  Private Property. Outdoor dining on private property shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Coordinated Design Scheme. The design and appearance of proposed improvements or furniture (e.g., tables, chairs, benches, umbrellas, planters, menu boards, etc.) to be placed in an outdoor dining area shall present a coordinated theme and shall be compatible with the appearance and design of the primary structure, as determined by the Director. 
2.  Hours of Operation. Hours of operation for outdoor dining areas shall coincide with those of the associated indoor restaurant. 
3.  Property Maintenance. The operator shall maintain the outdoor dining area(s) in a neat, clean, and orderly condition at all times. This shall include all tables, benches, chairs, displays, or other related furniture. An adequate number of trash receptacles shall be provided to serve the outdoor dining area. 
4.  Outdoor Bar Prohibited. A bar designed and/or operated to sell or dispense any alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed in the outside dining area. 
5.  Location. Outdoor dining areas may be allowed to locate in required setback areas but shall not encroach into required parking areas. They may be allowed to encroach into a public right-of-way with an approved encroachment permit issued by the City Engineer. 
6.  Noise. Amplified sound (e.g., music, television, etc.) shall not be audible beyond the lot line. 
C.  Review Criteria. When reviewing an application to allow outdoor dining, the review authority shall consider the relation of outdoor dining areas to sensitive noise receptors (e.g., hospitals, schools, and residential uses). Mitigation measures shall be applied to eliminate potential impacts related to glare, light, loitering, and noise. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.120 - Signs. 
A.  Signage. All development within the MMU zone shall have a "master sign program" as part of the project design. The sign program shall identify the location for all signage that may be located on the building, the allowable sign materials, lighting methods and sign design. In addition, temporary signs and banners will be included in the sign program, as to whether or not they are allowed, and if they are allowed, then where these signs may be located within the development project. At no time, shall the sign program allow for signage in excess of those standards within Section 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation). "Box" signs, "canister" or "can" signs are prohibited. 
Pedestrian-oriented, way finding and non-illuminated hanging "blade" signs that either hang under a colonnade or canopy, or project from the façade of a building, shall not be counted within the sign area formula that is used to calculate the maximum amount of sign area for each building. In other words, the hanging or projecting blade sign is a "free" sign in regards to being included in calculating the maximum amount of sign area that a development or store may have. In no case, shall a pedestrian-oriented, non-illuminated hanging or projecting blade sign exceed two (2) square feet maximum per sign face, or two (2) square feet for a double-faced blade sign. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.130 - Housing element implementation. 
A.  To comply with housing element law, Government Code Sections 65583.2(h) and (i) and 65583(c)(1) (AB 2348), which requires the city to demonstrate adequate sites for the Housing Element update and facilitate development of affordable housing within the MMU zone, the city must ensure at least ten and one-half (10.5) acres within the MMU zone are designated for exclusively residential uses allowing a minimum twenty (20) dwelling units per acre to accommodate at least fifty (50) percent of the city's lower-income Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). 
B.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 56863, if a designated parcel is developed with a mix of residential and nonresidential uses or at less than twenty (20) units per acre, the city will immediately identify an alternative site with established minimum density requirements. 
C.  The city will report on the progress of residential development in the MMU zone in its annual progress reports required pursuant to Government Code Section 65400 and due on April 1st of each year. The inventory of available sites will also be made available to the development community through various outreach methods. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
17.45.140 - Other applicable regulations. 
In addition to the requirements contained in this Chapter 17.45, regulations contained in the following chapters of this Title 17 shall apply to development in the MMU zone: 
Chapter 17.06: General regulations. 
Chapter 17.08: Parking requirements. 
Chapter 17.10: Landscaping standards. 
Chapter 17.11: Water efficiency. 
Chapter 17.12: Sign standards and signage regulation. 
Chapter 17.24: Conditional use permits. 
Chapter 17.14: Nonconforming provisions. 
Chapter 17.22: Design review. 
Chapter 17.86: Comprehensive design guidelines. 
El Monte Comprehensive Design Guidelines—Chapter 4 Implementing the Vision: Multi-Family Residential and Mixed-Use Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. A), 1-14-2014)  
Chapter 17.48 - C-O ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.48.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the C-O professional office zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following sub-sections: 
1. Professional offices for the following uses only: accountants, architects, attorneys-at-law, chiropractors, chiropodists, dentists, engineers, insurance agents, opticians, optometrists, osteopaths, physicians, real estate brokers and surgeons; 
2. Conservatory of music; 
3. Employment agency; 
4. Interior decorating—no retail sales; 
5. Medical laboratory; 
6. Music and vocal instruction; 
7. Prescription pharmacy; 
8. Offices, business or professional—no retail sales; 
9. Telephone answering service, messenger offices; 
10. The accessory buildings necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land; 
11. Transitional Parking. If any portion of a lot sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, or sides upon a lot which is entirely developed and used for transitional parking and which also sides upon a lot in zone C-1 or in some less restrictive zone, that portion thereof within one hundred (100) feet of the lot thus zoned C-1 or less restrictively and upon which it sides or from which it is thus separated, may be used for any use specified in Chapter 17.62 of this title, upon condition that it be improved and maintained in accordance with all the applicable provisions of said Chapter 17.62 and of Chapter 17.08.030. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.48.01—17.48.110)  
17.48.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the C-O professional office zone: 
A.  Signs. Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted within the building; shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area; shall be attached flat against a wall of the building and parallel with its horizontal dimension, and shall front the principal street, a parking area in the rear or, in the case of a corner building, on that portion of the side street wall within fifty (50) feet of the principal street. In no case shall a sign project above the roof line. 
B.  Building Height. No building or structure shall exceed in height three (3) stories or forty (40) feet; provided, however, that roof equipment and material screening the same may extend not more than an additional ten (10) feet above the roof. 
C.  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than ten (10) feet. The required front yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. 
D.  Side Yard. There shall be a street side yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required street side yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
E.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet measured from the rear lot line. Where there is an alley at the rear of the lot, such rear yard may be measured from center of said alley. 
F.  Lot Area. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the lot area requirements of the R-4 zone. 
G.  Distance Between Buildings. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone regulating distance between buildings. 
H.  Trash Areas. All sites shall construct and maintain a masonry trash enclosure. All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot high wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. 
I.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, shall be screened from view. 
J.  Undergrounding of Utilities. All utility distribution lines, including but not limited to, electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
K.  All utilities and structures (appurtenances) such as gas meters, electrical meters, telephone pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, surface mounted electrical transformers, or other potential obstructions shall not be located within the approved parking and/or turning radius area or any landscaped planting areas. All such facilities located aboveground shall meet with the approval of the Planning Division and serving utility. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.48.02—17.48.02.120)  
Chapter 17.50 - C-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.50.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the C-1 limited commercial zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following sub-sections: 
1. Any use permitted in the C-O zone; 
2. Automobile parking areas, when developed as required in Chapter 17.62 of this title, if adjacent to a residential zone; 
3. Bakery products shops; 
4. Banks; 
5. Barber shops; 
6. Beauty shops; 
7. Confectionery stores; 
8. Dressmaking or millinery shops; 
9. Drug stores, with or without a prescription pharmacy; 
10. Clothes pressing and laundry and dry cleaning agencies; 
11. Dry goods or notions stores; 
12. Appliance stores and repairs, including radios and televisions; 
13. Electric and mechanical game machines: not more than four (4) electric or mechanical game machines or combination thereof or a business with a valid certificate of occupancy and business license for another permitted use and with no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of said business devoted to arcade machines as an incidental use only; 
14. Florist shops; 
15. Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores; 
16. Ice storage houses of not more than five (5) ton capacity; 
17. Jewelry stores; 
18. Meat markets or delicatessen stores; 
19. Photographic shops; 
20. Restaurants (excluding dancing, entertainment and on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages); 
21. Shoe stores or shoe repair shops; 
22. Stationery or book stores; 
23. Clothing or wearing apparel shops; 
24. Tailor shop; 
25. Accessory buildings necessary to any such use, located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a storage garage for the exclusive use of the patrons of the above stores or businesses; 
26. Personal care facility, provided that there are no partitions in excess of 4 feet in height in the interior of the tenant space, except appropriate interior partitions for a maximum of two (2) restrooms and one storage/office room not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area, and that the front of the facility is not covered with blinds, curtains, or window coverings that block visibility into and through the facility; 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.50.01—17.50.01.280) 
(Ord. No. 2779, § 10, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. 2878, § 6, 4-5-2016)  
17.50.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the C-1 limited commercial zone: 
A.  Every store, shop or business specified in this chapter, other than automobile service stations, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
B.  Products made incidental to a permitted use shall be sold only at retail on the premises. 
C.  All public entrances to all stores, shops or businesses hereinbefore in this chapter specified shall be from the principal street upon which the property abuts or within fifty (50) feet thereof, except that a rear or side entrance from the building to a parking area may be provided. 
D.  Any exterior sign display shall pertain only to a use conducted within the building; shall be attached to and be parallel with and not more than twelve (12) inches from the wall of the main building fronting the principal street, a parking area in the rear or, in the case of a corner building, on that portion of the side street wall within fifty (50) feet of the principal street. In no case shall a sign project above the roof line. 
E.  Building Height. No building or structure shall exceed in height three (3) stories or forty (40) feet; provided, however, that roof equipment and material screening the same may extend not more than an additional ten (10) feet above the roof. 
F.  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required front yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front yard provision of the R-4 zone. 
G.  Side Yard. There shall be a street side yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required street side yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
H.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet measured from the rear lot line. Where there is an alley at the rear of the lot, such rear yard may be measured from center of such alley. 
I.  All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the area requirements of the R-4 zone. 
J.  Distance Between Buildings. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone regulating distance between buildings. 
K.  Trash Areas. All sites shall construct and maintain a masonry trash enclosure. All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot high wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. 
L.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, shall be screened from view. 
M.  All utility distribution lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
N.  All utilities and structures (appurtenances such as gas meters, electrical meters, telephone pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, surface-mounted electrical transformers, or other potential obstructions) shall not be located within the approved parking and/or turning radius area or any landscaped planting areas. All such facilities located above ground shall meet with the approval of the Planning Services Manager and serving utility. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.50.020—17.50.02.150)  
Chapter 17.52 - C-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.52.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the C-2 retail commercial zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1. Any use permitted in the C-1 zone; 
2. Retail stores or business not involving any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises, and provided that no more than five (5) persons are employed, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the building is used in the manufacture, processing or treatment of products, and that such operations or products are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes; 
3. Ambulance service; 
4. Automobile parking areas; 
5. Bakeries employing not more than ten (10) persons on the premises; 
6. Blueprinting and photostating shops; 
7. Bird stores or pet shops; 
8. Cleaning and pressing establishments using only noninflammable and nonexplosive cleaning fluid; 
9. Department stores; 
10. Electric distributing substations; 
11. Furniture stores; 
12. Garages, for public parking, including minor servicing only in a subterranean parking area; 
13. Hardware stores; 
14. Music stores; 
15. Public buildings; 
16. Refrigerated lockers; 
17. Restaurant (including entertainment and on-sale of alcoholic beverages), if the perimeter of the lot or parcel of land upon which any portion of such business is conducted is located five hundred one (501) feet or more from all properties used for any public or private elementary or high school or any city park and recreation facilities; 
18. Self-service laundries or launderettes; 
19. Sharpening of knives, saws and lawnmowers; 
20. Studios; 
21. Accessory buildings necessary to any such use, located on the same lot or parcel of land; 
22. Sign painting, excluding sign manufacturing and billboard painting; limited to hand-painted or printed signs of a specialty type, excluding spray painting; 
23. Automobile parts and accessory stores. 
(Ord. 2659 § 5 (part), 2005; zoning ordinance § 17.52.01—17.52.01.250)  
17.52.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the C-2 retail commercial zone: 
A.  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required front yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front yard provisions of the R-4 zone. 
B.  Side Yard. There shall be a street side yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required street side yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
C.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet measured from the rear lot line. Where there is an alley at the rear of the lot, such rear yard may be measured from center of such alley. 
D.  Area. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the area requirements of the R-4 zone. 
E.  Distance Between Buildings. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone regulating distance between buildings. 
F.  Trash Areas. All sites shall construct and maintain a masonry trash enclosure. All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot high wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. 
G.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, shall be screened from view. 
H.  Undergrounding of Utilities. All utility distribution lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
I.  All utilities and structures (appurtenances) such as gas meters, electrical meters, telephone pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, surface-mounted electrical transformers, or other potential obstructions shall not be located within the approved parking and/or turning radius area or any landscaped planting areas. All such facilities located above ground shall meet with the approval of the Planning Services Manager and serving utility. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.52.02—17.52.02.100)  
17.52.030 - Single-room occupancy (SRO)—Requirements. 
Single-room occupancy (SRO) units, also known as efficiency units, shall be subject to a conditional use permit (Chapter 17.24) and shall comply with the following minimum standards and regulations: 
A.  Each SRO facility shall comply with all applicable development standards for the applicable zoning district and minimum standards contained herein below. 
B.  Units shall have a minimum size of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet. 
C.  Each unit shall accommodate a maximum of two (2) persons. 
D.  Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property per the lighting standards of Chapter 18.76 of the Municipal Code. 
E.  Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate enclosed room at the ratio of one washer and one dryer for every twenty (20) units of fractional number thereof, with at least one washer and dryer per floor. 
F.  A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO (efficiency) unit facility. 
G.  Each unit is required to provide a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
H.  Each unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, functioning cooking appliance and a refrigerator, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front. 
I.  Each SRO (efficiency) unit shall have a separate closet. 
J.  SRO (efficiency) units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code. All units shall comply with all applicable accessibility and adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible. 
K.  An SRO (efficiency) unit project with ten (10) or more units shall provide on-site management. A project with less than ten (10) units may provide a management office off-site. 
L.  Tenancy of SRO (efficiency) units shall not be less than thirty (30) days and maximum period of twelve (12) months. 
M.  SRO (efficiency) unit parking shall be provided as follows: 
1.  One uncovered parking space for every three (3) SRO (efficiency) units. 
2.  Two (2) uncovered parking spaces for an on-site manager unit. 
3.  Each efficiency unit shall be provided at least one lockable bicycle parking space in a location that is adjacent to that SRO (efficiency) unit. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. C), 1-14-2014)  
Chapter 17.54 - C-3 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.54.010 - Uses 
permitted. 
A.  No lot, premises, building, or structure in the C-3 general commercial zone shall be used for any use or other purpose than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Any use permitted in the C-2 zone; 
2.  Retail or wholesale stores or businesses not involving any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises, and provided that no more than five (5) persons are employed and that not more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the building is used in the manufacture, processing or treatment of products, and that such operations or products are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes; 
3.  Antique stores; 
4.  Dancing academies; 
5.  Fortunetelling; 
6.  Furniture warehouses for storing personal household goods; 
7.  Public garages, including automobile and truck repairs; except trucks which have a manufacturer's specified gross vehicle weight greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds. All repairs and servicing of automobiles and trucks shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, except emergency serviced and minor repairs; 
8.  Reserved; 
9.  Plumbing shops; 
10.  Printing, lithographing or publishing establishments; 
11.  Sale of house trailers, campers, travel trailers, utility trailers not to exceed ten (10) feet in body; 
12.  Taxidermists; 
13.  Upholstery shops, limited to automobile upholstery; 
14.  Accessory buildings necessary to any such use, located on the same lot or parcel of land; 
15.  Nurseries, flowers or plants; 
16.  Spiritual specialty shops. 
B.  Amortization. Any spiritual specialty shop made legal nonconforming by the adoption of this section shall comply with all the requirements of the municipal code which include the obtaining of a permit pursuant to Section 5.96.090 of this Code by January 1, 2007. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.54.01—17.54.01.240; Ord. 2525 § 5 (part), 2000; Ord. 2659 § 5 (part), 2005; Ord. 2672 § 2, 2006; Ord. No. 2883, § 48, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2914, § 7, 7-18-2017)  
17.54.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the C-3 general commercial zone: 
A.  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required front yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front yard provisions of the R-4 zone. 
B.  Side Yard. There shall be a street side yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required street side yard area shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
C.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet measured from the rear lot line. Where there is an alley at the rear of the lot, such rear yard may be measured from center of such alley. 
D.  Area. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the area requirements of the R-4 zone. 
E.  Distance Between Buildings. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone regulating distance between buildings. 
F.  Trash Areas. All sites shall construct and maintain a masonry trash enclosure. All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot high wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. 
G.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, shall be screened from view. 
H.  Undergrounding of Utilities. All utility distribution lines, including but not limited to, electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
I.  All utilities and structures (appurtenances) such as gas meters, electrical meters, telephone pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, surface mounted electrical transformers, or other potential obstructions shall not be located within the approved parking and/or turning radius area or any landscaped planting areas. All such facilities located above ground shall meet with the approval of the Planning Services Manager and serving utility. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.54.02—17.54.100)  
Chapter 17.56 - C-4 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.56.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the C-4 heavy commercial zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1. Any use permitted in the C-3 zone; 
2. Manufacturing, assembly, compounding or treating of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cloth, felt, fur, glass, leather (except machine belting), paper, plastics, shell, textiles and yarn; 
3. Addressograph service; 
4. Assembly plant, aircraft; 
5. Bakery goods manufacturing; 
6. Bookbinding; 
7. Box lunch preparation and catering establishments; 
8. Candy manufacturing; 
9. Cellophane products manufacturing; 
10. Cigar and cigarette factory; 
11. Cleaning and dyeing wholesale; 
12. Clock factory; 
13. Cosmetics, toiletries (except soap) or perfume manufacturing or blending; 
14. Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, and radios and phonographs, but limited to the manufacturing of small parts only, such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and the like; 
15. Ceramic products manufacturing, provided that the total capacity of all kilns in any one establishment may not exceed eight cubic feet and that there shall be no pulverizing of clay; 
16. Distributing plant for aircraft, electronics; 
17. Furniture refinishing; 
18. Jewelry manufacturing, including manufacturing of products from precious or semi-precious metals or stones; 
19. Laboratory: testing, experimental, motion picture, research and film; 
20. Machine shop (except punch presses of over five (5) ton capacity, drop hammers and automatic screw machines); 
21. Millinery manufacturing; 
22. Motor, electric, repairing and/or rewinding only; 
23. Rubber stamp manufacturing; 
24. Optical goods manufacturing; 
25. Sign painting shops; 
26. Accessory buildings necessary to any such use located on the same lot or parcel of land; 
27. Within Buildings. All activities other than incidental storage shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building; 
28. Nuisances Prohibited. The building shall be so constructed, the machinery and equipment shall be so installed and maintained, and the activity shall be so conducted, that all noise, vibration, dust, odor and all other objectionable factors, shall be confined or reduced to the extent that no annoyance or injury will result to persons residing in the vicinity. Whenever there is any difficulty in determining the application of these provisions to any specific case, the Inspection Bureau or its designated representative shall make such determination; 
29. One hp Motors. No motor exceeding one horse power may be used to operate any lathes, drill press, grinder, shaper, milling machine, saw, polisher or metal cutter; 
30. Prohibited Machinery. No punch press exceeding five (5) tons rated capacity, nor any drop hammer or automatic screw machine, may be used. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.56.01—17.56.01.290)  
17.56.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the C-4 heavy commercial Zone: 
A.  Front Yard. All buildings shall be located not nearer than forty (40) feet from the centerline of a street. In any event, there shall be a front yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required front yard shall be landscaped and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front yard provisions of the R-4 zone. 
B.  Side Yard. There shall be a street side yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required street side yard shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. Where such a property located in this zone is contiguous to any residentially zoned property a minimum twenty (20) foot building setback shall be required. The use of this setback shall be restricted to the parking of operable vehicles, equipment or utilities incidental to the use on site as approved through the Design Review process or maintained as a landscape area with underground irrigation system. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
C.  Rear Yard. Where such a property located in this zone is contiguous to any residentially zoned property a minimum twenty-five (25) foot building setback shall be required. The use of this setback shall be restricted to the parking of operable vehicles, equipment or utilities incidental to the use on site as approved through the design review process or maintained as a landscaped area with underground irrigation system. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the rear yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
D.  Area. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the area requirements of the R-4 zone. 
E.  Distance Between Buildings. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone regulating distance between buildings. 
F.  Trash Areas. All sites shall construct and maintain a masonry trash enclosure. All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot high wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. 
G.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, shall be screened from view. 
H.  Undergrounding of Utilities. All utility distribution lines, including but not limited to, electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
I.  All utilities and structures (appurtenances) such as gas meters, electrical meters, telephone pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, surface mounted electrical transformers, or other potential obstructions shall not be located within the approved parking and/or turning radius area or any landscaped planting areas. All such facilities located above ground shall meet with the approval of the Planning Services Manager and serving utility. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.56.02—17.56.02.100)  
Chapter 17.58 - M-1 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.58.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the M-1 light manufacturing zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1. Any use permitted in the C-4 zone, excluding all uses prohibited in the M-2 zone; 
2. Assembly plants; 
3. Awning manufacture, canvas or metal; 
4. Bag manufacturing; 
5. Battery manufacturing and rebuilding; 
6. Bedspring manufacturing; 
7. Billboard manufacturing; 
8. Blacksmith shop (except power trip hammers); 
9. Boatbuilding, small; 
10. Bottling plant; 
11. Box factory; 
12. Brewery; 
13. Brush manufacturing; 
14. Building material storage yard; 
15. Cabinet or carpenter shop; 
16. Candle making and manufacturing; 
17. Cannery (except fish and meat products); 
18. Canvas manufacturing; 
19. Carpet, awning, blinds, mattress or upholstery shop, including cleaning and repair; 
20. Clay products manufacturing; 
21. Cloth manufacturing; 
22. Coffee roasting; 
23. Cold storage plant; 
24. Compounding cleaning compounds; 
25. Contractor, farming equipment; 
26. Contractor's storage yard; 
27. Cork products manufacturing; 
28. Cornice works; 
29. Creamery; 
30. Distributing plant; 
31. Draying or trucking yard or terminal; 
32. Drive-in theaters; 
33. Drug manufacturing; 
34. Electrical parts manufacturing; 
35. Electric sign manufacturing; 
36. Emergency shelter (less than or equal to thirty (30) occupants); 
37. Equestrian establishment, stable or riding academy; 
38. Equipment, truck rental; 
39. Electronic instruments and devices manufacturing; 
40. Feather products, manufacturing or renovation; 
41. Feed and fuel yard; 
42. Feed mill; 
43. Fiber products manufacturing; 
44. Fixture manufacturing, gas, electric; 
45. Food products manufacturing; 
46. Fumigating contractor; 
47. Furniture manufacturing; 
48. Generators, electric, manufacturing; 
49. Harness manufacturing; 
50. Haybarn; 
51. Heat treating of metal parts; 
52. Horn products manufacturing; 
53. Ice manufacturing and storage; 
54. Ink manufacturing; 
55. Insecticides manufacturing; 
56. Iron works, ornamental; 
57. Knitting mill; 
58. Laundry; 
59. Lumber yard; 
60. Machine shop (except punch presses of over twenty tons rated capacity, drop hammers, and automatic screw machines; 
61. Malt products manufacturing; 
62. Medicine manufacturing; 
63. Metal spinning; 
64. Milk bottling and distributing station; 
65. Milk pasteurization; 
66. Motor, electric, manufacturing and repairing; 
67. Neon sign manufacturing; 
68. Novelty manufacturing; 
69. Packing plant, fruit and vegetable; 
70. Paint mixing (no boiling); 
71. Phonograph manufacturing; 
72. Plating; 
73. Pottery manufacturing; 
74. Produce yard or terminal; 
75. Public utilities service yard, distributing station, electric transmission substation and as transmission and compressor station; 
76. Pumping plant; 
77. Radio manufacturing; 
78. Refrigerating plant; 
79. Rope plant; 
80. Roofing contractor; 
81. Rug manufacturing and cleaning; 
82. Saddlery, saddle making; 
83. Sandpaper manufacturing; 
84. Sash and door manufacturing; 
85. Sheet metal products manufacturing; 
86. Shell products manufacturing; 
87. Shoe manufacturing; 
88. Shooting gallery; 
89. Starch mixing and bottling; 
90. Stone grinding, cutting, dressing; 
91. Storage warehouse or elevator; 
92. Tank truck parking or storage; 
93. Television manufacturing; 
94. Tinsmiths and sheet metal shops; 
95. Tire retreading; 
96. Toy manufacturing; 
97. Trailer, motor home, camper manufacturing; 
98. Truck repair; all repairs and servicing of trucks shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building except emergency services and minor repairs; 
99. Truck semi-trailer and utility trailer sales; 
100. Truck storage or rental; 
101. Upholstering, limited to manufacturing and processing of furniture type upholstery; 
102. Venetian blind manufacturing; 
103. Veterinary and animal hospital; 
104. Welding shops; 
105. Wholesale business; 
106. Accessory buildings necessary to any such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
(Ord. 2525 § 5 (part), 2000; zoning ordinance § 17.58.01) 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. C), 1-14-2014)  
17.58.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the M-1 light manufacturing zone: 
A.  Nuisances Prohibited. No use hereinbefore in this chapter specified shall be permissible in zone M-1 if any such operation, manufacturing, processing or treatment of products is obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, gas fumes, smoke, liquids, wastes, noise, vibrations, disturbances, or other similar causes or may impose hazard to life or property. 
B.  Front Yard. All buildings shall be located not nearer than forty (40) feet from the centerline of a street. In any event, there shall be a front yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required front yard shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front yard provisions of the R-4 zone. 
C.  Side Yard. There shall be a street side yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required street side yard shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. Where such a property located in this zone is contiguous to any residentially zoned or used property a minimum twenty (20) foot building setback shall be required. The use of this setback shall be restricted to the parking of operable vehicles, equipment or utilities incidental to the use on site as approved through the design review process or maintained as a landscape area with underground irrigation system. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
D.  Rear Yard. Where such a property located in this zone is contiguous to any residentially zoned or used property a minimum twenty-five (25) foot building setback shall be required. The use of this setback shall be restricted to the parking of operable vehicles, equipment or utilities incidental to the use on site as approved through the design review process or maintained as a landscaped area with underground irrigation system. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the rear yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
E.  Area. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the area requirements of the R-4 zone. 
F.  Distance Between Buildings. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone regulating distance between buildings. 
G.  Trash Areas. All sites shall construct and maintain a masonry trash enclosure. All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot high wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. 
H.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, shall be screened from view. 
I.  Undergrounding of Utilities. All utility distribution lines, including but not limited to, electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
J.  All utilities and structures (appurtenances) such as gas meters, electrical meters, telephone pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, surface mounted electrical transformers, or other potential obstructions shall not be located within the approved parking and/or turning radius area or any landscaped planting areas. All such facilities located above ground shall meet with the approval of the Planning Services Manager and serving utility. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.58.02—17.58.100)  
17.58.030 - Development standards for emergency shelters. 
Emergency shelters for homeless persons shall be subject to and comply with the following standards and regulations: 
A.  A single emergency shelter for thirty (30) occupants, or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not to exceed thirty (30) occupants, shall be allowed as a permitted use, consistent with Section 65583(4)(A) of the Government Code. All emergency shelters, regardless of the number of occupants, shall meet all applicable development standards applicable to the zoning districts in which they are permitted by-right and minimum standards contained herein below. Any emergency shelter with a capacity greater than thirty (30) occupants shall also be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, as set forth in Chapter 17.24. 
B.  The facility shall operate on a first-come, first serve basis with clients only permitted on-site and admitted to the facility between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during Pacific Daylight Time, and 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during Pacific Standard Time. Clients must vacate the facility by 8:00 a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night. A curfew of 10:00 p.m. (or earlier) shall be established and strictly enforced and clients shall not be admitted after the curfew. 
C.  To avoid over-concentration of emergency shelter facilities, a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter, as measured from the property line, in accordance with Government Code Section 65583(a)(4)(A)(v). 
D.  Emergency shelters shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school (pre-school through twelfth grade), universities, colleges, student housing, senior housing, child care facilities, public parks, off-sale liquor establishment, on-sale liquor establishment, or correctional facility as defined in Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) and as measured from the property line. 
E.  Service providers shall provide sufficient numbers of male and female toilets - restrooms for clients and prospective clients to have access to use on a twenty-four-hour basis. For group housing and other similar shelter programs, adequate private male and female showers shall be provided along with lockers for clients to temporarily store their belongings. 
F.  Any outdoor storage, including, but not limited to, items brought on-site by clients for overnight stays, shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot-tall decorative wall or fence. Shopping carts are not permitted on-site. 
G.  Adequate waiting areas must be provided within the premises for clients and prospective clients including ten (10) square feet per bed, minimum one hundred (100) square feet to ensure that public sidewalks or private walkways are not used as queuing or waiting areas. 
H.  Facility improvements shall comply with the El Monte Municipal Code and the most current adopted Building and Safety Code, specific to the establishment of dormitories and shall additionally provide: 
(1)  A minimum of one toilet for every eight (8) beds per gender. 
(2)  A minimum of one shower for every (8) beds per gender. 
(3)  Private shower and toilet facility for each area designated for use by individual families. 
I.  An emergency shelter facility shall provide off-street parking at the ratio of one space per four (4) beds, and/or one-half (0.5) per bedroom designated as a family unit with children, plus one space per staff member. Service providers are responsible to provide and maintain adequate parking and freight loading facilities for employees, clients and other visitors who drive to the premises. 
J.  Bike rack parking shall be provided at the facility. 
K.  Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property per the lighting standards of Chapter 17.86 of the Municipal Code and the referenced El Monte Comprehensive Design Guidelines. 
L.  The facility may provide the following services in a designated area separate from sleeping areas: 
(1)  A recreation area inside the shelter or in an outdoor area visually separated from public view by a minimum six-foot-tall visually screening decorative wall or fence. 
(2)  A counseling center for job placement, educational, health care, legal services, or mental health services. 
(3)  Laundry facilities to serve the number of clients at the shelter. 
(4)  Kitchen and dining area. 
(5)  Client storage area. 
M.  Similar types of facilities to address the needs of homeless clients, as determined by the Economic Development Director. A shelter management plan shall be submitted as a part of the permit application, which addresses all of the following: 
(1)  Service providers shall maintain sufficient monetary resources to enable them to operate the facility per the shelter management plan, and shall demonstrate to the city prior to approval of the permit application that such funds shall be available for use upon first occupancy of the proposed project and shall reasonably be expected to be available for the life of the project. 
(2)  A minimum of one staff member per ten (10) beds shall be awake and on duty when the facility is open. Facility staff shall be trained in operating procedures, safety plans, and assisting clients. The facility shall not employ staff who has been convicted of a felony or who are required to register as a sex registrant under Penal Code Section 290. 
(3)  Service providers shall maintain up-to-date information and referral sheets to give clients and other persons who, for any reason, cannot be served by the establishment. 
(4)  Service providers shall provide criteria to screen clients for admittance eligibility, with the objective to provide first service to individuals with connections to El Monte. 
(5)  Service providers will maintain information on individuals utilizing the facility and will ensure that the maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days in a three-hundred-sixty-five-day period. 
(6)  Service providers shall continuously monitor waiting areas to inform prospective clients whether they can be served within a reasonable time. If they cannot be served by the provider because of time or resource constraints, the monitor shall inform the client of alternative programs and locations where he or she may seek similar service. 
(7)  Service providers will educate on-site staff to provide adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter and income, including referrals to outside assistance agencies. An annual report on this activity will be provided to the city. 
(8)  Service providers shall provide for the timely removal of litter attributable to clients within the vicinity of the facility every twenty-four-hour period. 
(9)  Service providers will maintain good communication and have procedures in place to respond to operational issues which may arise from the neighborhood, city staff, or the general public. 
(10)  Service providers shall establish standards for responding to emergencies and incidents expelling clients from the facility. Re-admittance policies for clients who have previously been expelled from the facility shall also be established. 
(11)  Alcohol and illegal drug use is prohibited on-site. Service providers shall expel clients from the facility if found to be using alcohol or illegal drugs. 
(12)  The establishment shall implement other conditions and/or measures as determined by the city, in consultation with other city/county agencies necessary to ensure that management and/or clients of the establishment maintain the quiet, safety and cleanliness of the premises and the vicinity of the use. 
(13)  Other requirements as deemed necessary by the city to ensure that the facility does not create an adverse impact to surrounding properties. 
(14)  On a monthly basis, provide an updated list of emergency shelter residents to the Sheriff's Department. 
(15)  All graffiti on the premises shall be removed by the business operator within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(16)  Installation of anti-loitering signs. 
N.  The facility shall comply with all other laws, rules, and regulations that apply including, but not limited to, Building and Fire Codes. The facility shall be subject to city inspections prior to the commencement of operation. In addition, the city may inspect the facility at any time for compliance with the facility's management plan and other applicable laws and standards. 
O.  Emergency shelter operator shall obtain a city business license. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. C), 1-14-2014)  
Chapter 17.60 - M-2 ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.60.010 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the M-2 general manufacturing zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1. Any use permitted in the M-1 zone; 
2. Acetylene and natural gas storage; 
3. Alcohol and alcoholic beverages manufacture; 
4. Automobile assembly plant; 
5. Bag cleaning; 
6. Boiler or tank works (except riveting and power chipping); 
7. Building materials manufacture; 
8. Cement products manufacture; 
9. Cooperage works; 
10. Die casting, electrically operated only; 
11. Dye-stuffs manufacture; 
12. Flour mill; 
13. Foundry; 
14. Grain elevator; 
15. Glass manufacture; 
16. House mover or wrecker; 
17. Lamp black manufacture; 
18. Linoleum or oiled products manufacture; 
19. Motor scooter for amusement purposes, driving or riding; 
20. Paint manufacture by the blending only of ingredients; 
21. Petroleum products storage; 
22. Pickle manufacture; 
23. Plastic manufacture; 
24. Rolling mill; 
25. Rock, sand and gravel storage and distribution; 
26. Sawmill; 
27. Screen door and window screen assembly; 
28. Starch manufacture; 
29. Steam electric generating station; 
30. Stove manufacture; 
31. Stove and shoe polish manufacture; 
32. Sauerkraut manufacture; 
33. Wholesale processing or packaging of fully dressed poultry and rabbits; 
34. Accessory buildings necessary to any such use, located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.60.01)  
17.60.020 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the M-2 general manufacturing zone: 
A.  Front Yard. All buildings shall be located not nearer than fifty (50) feet from the centerline of a street. In any event, there shall be a front yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required front yard shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the front yard provisions of the R-4 zone. 
B.  Side Yard. There shall be a street side yard of not less than five (5) feet. The required street side yard shall be landscaped, maintained and an underground irrigation system installed. Where such a property located in this zone is contiguous to any residentially zoned property a minimum twenty (20) foot building setback shall be required. The use of this setback shall be restricted to the parking of operable vehicles, equipment or utilities incidental to the use on site as approved through the design review process or maintained as a landscape area with underground irrigation system. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
C.  Rear Yard. Where such a property located in this zone is contiguous to any residentially zoned property a minimum twenty-five (25) foot building setback shall be required. The use of this setback shall be restricted to the parking of operable vehicles, equipment or utilities incidental to the use on site as approved through the design review process or maintained as a landscaped area with underground irrigation system. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the rear yard requirements of the R-4 zone. 
D.  Area. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the area requirements of the R-4 zone. 
E.  Distance Between Buildings. All buildings used exclusively for dwelling purposes shall comply with the provisions of the R-4 zone regulating distance between buildings. 
F.  Trash Areas. All sites shall construct and maintain a masonry trash enclosure. All outside trash and garbage collection areas shall be paved and enclosed on at least three (3) vertical sides by a solid five-foot high wall and on the fourth side by a view obscuring gate to screen the containers from view. Trash enclosures shall be of a size sufficient to contain all trash containers maintained outside the building. 
G.  Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, shall be screened from view. 
H.  Undergrounding of Utilities. All utility distribution lines, including but not limited to, electric, communication, natural gas and cable TV lines installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any development shall be placed underground. 
I.  All utilities and structures (appurtenances) such as gas meters, electrical meters, telephone pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, surface mounted electrical transformers, or other potential obstructions shall not be located within the approved parking and/or turning radius area or any landscaped planting areas. All such facilities located above ground shall meet with the approval of the Planning Services Manager and serving utility. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.60.02—17.60.02.090)  
Chapter 17.62 - P ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.62.010 - P automobile parking zone—Combination with R zone. 
Land classified in a "P" zone may also be classified in an "R" zone. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.62.01)  
17.62.020 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premises, building or structure in the P automobile parking zone shall be used for any use or purpose other than those specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Any use permitted in the respective R zone in which the land is classified; 
2.  Open air, temporary parking of transient automobiles, except trucks of over fifteen hundred (1500) pounds capacity. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.62.01.10—17.62.01.30)  
17.62.030 - Regulations. 
The regulations contained in the following subsections shall apply to and be complied with as to every lot, premises, building and structure in the P automobile parking zone: 
A.  Every lot, premises, building or structure used for any use or purpose permitted in any R zone shall be subject to all of the provisions of the chapter applicable to the particular R zone in which the same is classified. 
B.  That every lot established hereinafter in the P automobile parking zone shall conform to Chapter 17.08 of this title. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.62.02—17.62.02.20)  
Chapter 17.64 - RMP ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.64.010 - RMP—Residential mobile home park zone. 
Land classified in an RMP zone may also be classified in another zone. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.64)  
17.64.020 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premise, building, or structure in the RMP zone shall be used for any use other than as specified in the following subsections: 
1.  Any use permitted in another zone in which the land may be classified; 
2.  Residential mobile home parks. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.64.01—17.64.01.20)  
Chapter 17.66 - PRD ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.66.010 - Planned residential development zone. 
Land classified in a PRD zone shall be classified in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3 or R-4 zones. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.66)  
17.66.020 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is as specified in the following subsections: 
A.  To encourage a better environment through greater flexibility of design by means of an overall development plan is possible solely through the strict application of the zoning regulations; 
B.  To encourage a more efficient use of the land and the reservation of a greater proportion of open space for recreational and visual use than is otherwise provided for in the zoning regulations; 
C.  To encourage a variety of dwelling unit types and site arrangement plans so as to give imagination and variety in the physical development pattern of the city; 
D.  To insure that these objectives are carried out and in the process the minimum gross population density within a particular dwelling zone remains in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and with the comprehensive general plan. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.66.02—17.66.02.40)  
17.66.030 - Design objectives. 
Every planned residential development shall be designed to achieve the design objectives specified in the following subsections: 
A.  The plan should provide for a comprehensive and harmonious arrangement of buildings, open spaces, circulation ways, off-street parking and development amenities; 
B.  The project should be related to existing and proposed land use and circulation plans of the community, and not constitute a disrupting element in the neighborhood; 
C.  The internal street system should be designed for the efficient and safe movement of vehicles without disrupting pedestrian circulation and activities and functions of the common areas; 
D.  Open and recreational areas and facilities should be located adjacent to all dwelling units or easily accessible therefrom; 
E.  Open and recreational areas should be made the focal point for the overall design of the development. Various community facilities should be grouped in places well related to these open spaces and easily accessible to pedestrians. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.66.03—17.66.03.50)  
17.66.040 - Uses permitted. 
No lot, premise, building or structure in the PRD zone shall be used for any use other than or specified as follows: any use permitted in the zone in which the land may be classified. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.66.01, 17.66.01.10)  
17.66.050 - Conditional use permit required. 
No planned residential development shall be permitted or constructed other than pursuant to and in accordance with a conditional use permit secured in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 17.24 of this title. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.66.04)  
17.66.060 - Zone restriction. 
No conditional use permit for a planned residential development shall be granted with respect to any property classified in any zone other than the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3 or R-4 zones. New PRDs shall not be permitted in the RHOD. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.66.05) 
(Ord. No. 2928, § 27, 5-15-2018)  
17.66.070 - Zone compliance. 
A conditional use permit for a planned residential development shall be subject to the minimum requirements of the zone in which proposed, unless such requirements are specifically modified pursuant to this chapter. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.66.06)  
17.66.080 - Requirements. 
A conditional use permit for a planned residential development shall be subject to all of the conditions specified in the following subsections: 
A.  Minimum Land Area. A planned residential development shall be of sufficient size, composition and arrangement to enable its feasible development as a complete unit. 
B.  Exception of Zone Regulations. Regulations pertaining to yard requirements, lot dimensions, street frontage of lots and limitations on the number of dwelling units in a building for the zone in which the land is situated need not be applied if the Planning Commission finds and determines that the project meets the intent and purpose of Sections 17.66.020, 17.66.030 and 17.66.050. Lot area, lot dimensions and lot locations shall be determined by the Planning Commission during the conditional use permit public hearing. Final approval of the plan for a planned residential development shall constitute approval of lot area, lot dimension and location as set forth in the approved plan. No reduction of front yard setback adjacent to a public street shall be granted except through modification pursuant to Chapter 17.20. 
C.  Additional Regulations. After reviewing an application for a planned residential development the Planning Commission may, in its approval thereof, impose conditions or requirements in addition to or in excess of those specified in this chapter if it finds that such additional requirements or conditions are necessary for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare. 
D.  Density. Density shall be determined by the underlying zone; however, density shall mean the average density of the entire site, excluding property dedicated for a public purpose. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.66.07—17.66.07.40)  
Chapter 17.67 - SPECIFIC PLANS 
Sections: 
 
17.67.010 - Intent and purpose. 
The specific plan designation serves as a planning tool to enhance development options when current zoning does not adequately provide for an optimal design or development program. The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform procedures for the adoption and implementation of specific plans. The intent of the specific plan designation is as follows: 
A.  To promote comprehensive planning for quality land development, with a viable program for building the infrastructure necessary to support it; 
B.  To encourage a more efficient use of the land; 
C.  To encourage a range of housing and employment activities so as to give imagination and variety in the physical development pattern of the city; 
D.  To encourage the implementation of sustainable community design principles as well as use of renewable construction materials and incorporation of environmental friendly design concepts whenever possible; 
E.  To facilitate development within the city in accordance with the general plan by permitting greater flexibility and encouraging more creative design development projects. 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
17.67.020 - Establishment of the specific plan district. 
When deemed to be necessary for orderly development in the city and for implementation of the general plan, and when deemed to be in the public interest, the city on its own, or upon application by a property owner, may process and adopt a specific plan in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Applications not initiated by the city shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee. 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
17.67.030 - Application requirements. 
A specific plan application form shall be accompanied by a specific plan document, including text and diagrams, which include the following: 
A.  A boundary survey map of the property or project area and a calculation of the gross land area within the district. A tentative subdivision or parcel map may be substituted if processed concurrently; 
B.  A land use plan identifying areas within the proposed district and uses to be developed therein, supported by proposed density, intensity, and size of all existing and proposed land uses, including open space; 
C.  Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable; 
D.  Statement of relationship of the specific plan to the general plan, and an analysis of consistency; 
E.  Where applicable, an affordable housing plan consistent with the requirements of the city's redevelopment plans. Such affordable housing shall be similar in exterior design to market-rate housing within the same project; 
F.  A circulation plan showing existing and proposed public and private streets, pedestrian ways, trails, bus stop locations, and access required to serve the project; 
G.  Preliminary plans for essential urban services, including, but not limited to: water service, sewer service, solid waste disposal, stormwater management, energy, public safety, recreation, schools, and other essential facilities which may be needed to support the proposed development; 
H.  A plan for complying with the City's Local Park Code. Specific plan projects with more than two hundred (200) units are encouraged to provide a portion of their public park requirement on site; 
I.  The location of existing public utilities on and adjacent to the site, and the proposed location of utility extensions; 
J.  The nature and location of any planned off-site improvements to be performed in conjunction with site development; 
K.  Land use regulations, site development standards, and performance standards needed to govern subsequent approval of tract maps or developments within the district; 
L.  Prototypical plans and elevations of residential, commercial, and industrial buildings, or design guidelines for such development, consistent with Section 17.67.070 of this chapter; 
M.  A conceptual landscape plan and plant palette, or landscape design guidelines for public/common landscape and hardscape areas; 
N.  A plan for implementation including any programs, public works projects, and financing measures to implement the project and the required infrastructure; 
O.  A preliminary schedule setting forth phasing of development. The intent is to correlate the general phasing of development with the on- and off-site infrastructure necessary to support it; 
P.  Administrative provisions that address the procedures and conditions for amending, adjusting standards, and interpreting the specific plan, consistent with Section 17.67.050 of this chapter; 
Q.  Supporting studies as deemed necessary by the Planning Director or City Manager's Office, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Parking demand analysis to accompany a mixed-use project where shared parking is desired, 
2.  Fiscal impact analysis of the proposed project. Where a change of zone is proposed, the fiscal analysis should also include a comparison of development potential under the existing zone and the proposed project; 
R.  Other information as is deemed necessary by the Planning Services Manager to assure that the proposed specific plan is consistent with the provisions of state law, the general plan, and any other laws, regulations, and policies of the city. 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
17.67.040 - Pre-application process. 
A.  A pre-application process is required prior to formal submittal of a specific plan. The intent is to establish a preliminary consultation process between city staff and the applicant to identify issues or concerns related to conceptual development plans, and to determine if other information will be required pursuant to Section 17.67.030 of this chapter. The pre-application review does not result in any official recommendation or final decision with respect to the application. The pre-application submittal includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Proposed land uses and development concepts, along with sufficient information to describe the general relationships between land uses, the project vision and design character, and the market(s) served; 
2.  A compatibility analysis of the proposed land uses and development concepts with existing adjacent land uses and developments. This analysis is intended to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed project and special site planning considerations with respect to adjacent properties, uses, aggregate impacts (including railroads) within five hundred (500) feet of the site property line in terms of, including, but not limited to, the following adjacent land use issues: 
a.  Business operations, including hours of operation, transportation activities (e.g., volume and type of delivery traffic, delivery routes, and loading/storage areas), 
b.  Ambient and projected noise levels, including single event noise sources above levels established in the general plan and in Chapter 8.36 of this Code, 
c.  Hazardous materials stored, used, and disposed, including applicable methods, and 
d.  Odors; 
3.  Other information as deemed necessary by the Planning Director based on the nature, scale, and location of the proposed project. This may include requiring submission of an independent market analysis for the uses proposed; 
4.  Presentation of the pre-application materials at a Planning Commission and/or City Council workshop. Such presentation shall be for information purposes only, and shall be in addition to subsequent public review requirements pursuant to a specific plan application. 
B.  Following consultation with the applicant and the review of pre-application materials, the city will provide written comments and a specific plan requirements summary to be used in future project review. 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
17.67.050 - Procedures. 
A.  Review and adoption of specific plans shall be conducted in the same manner as zoning reclassifications under Chapter 17.26 (Zone Change—Zoning Code Amendment). The application for a zone change to a specific plan designation shall be accompanied by a specific plan as described in this chapter. The zone change and specific plan request shall be considered concurrently. 
B.  In connection with approval of a specific plan, the zoning map shall be amended by an ordinance adopted by the City Council to rezone and reclassify the area covered by such specific plan. The specific plan district shall be indicated on the zoning map by an SP designation and a number. 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
17.67.060 - Development standards. 
A.  The allowable uses in each specific plan district shall be as established by a specific plan approved by the City Council. The specific plan may incorporate uses by reference to specific base districts provisions or may establish specific use lists with definitions in the specific plan. 
B.  An existing zone, or zones, may be specified as the underlying base zone(s) for the area covered by a specific plan. Exceptions to the zoning and development standards of the base zone(s) shall be provided in the specific plan. 
C.  The specific plan zoning and development standards shall, upon adoption, supersede the zoning previously established for the area covered by the specific plan. Violations of the specific plan zoning and development standards shall carry the same penalties and shall be enforceable in the same manner as other violations of the Zoning Code. 
D.  Unless otherwise provided in a specific plan, adoption of such specific plan shall have no effect upon other requirements under state law or the Municipal Code for development approval including, but not limited to, subdivision maps, grading, design, engineering, and location of public improvements. 
E.  Any provisions in the specific plan for locations or design of sewers, storm drains or utilities shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer and the Public Utilities General Manager or their designated representatives. 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
17.67.070 - Design criteria. 
A.  A specific plan shall demonstrate compliance with and implement the following design criteria intended to achieve high quality development: 
1.  Coherent architectural style(s) which establishes a clear and distinct image of the development project; 
2.  Varied and articulated building footprints and wall facades, including height variations and roof lines, consistent with the architectural style; 
3.  Context sensitive integration of building(s), open spaces, and landscape and hardscape areas to achieve an overall sense of place; 
4.  Quality materials, with appropriate use of colors, and textures which enhance the total effect; 
5.  Effective softening of parking, loading, and drive areas with landscaping, buffering and lighting; 
6.  Effective screening of mechanical equipment, trash areas, and other ancillary uses, both in terms of on-site and off-site visual impacts; 
7.  Reduced dominance of automobile garages or parking structures, achieved by building design, orientation, location on the site, or incorporation into other structures; 
8.  Effective use of open space for site access, recreation activities, resting, and enhancement of the overall site, including availability for public use; 
9.  Provision of pedestrian, bicycle and bus access to and, where feasible, within the site, including connection to city or regional networks, to reduce dependence on the automobile; and 
10.  Effective buffering from adjacent uses or, in the case of similar uses, effective coordination (such as shared access and parking, consistent landscaping and lighting, etc.). 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
17.67.080 - Findings. 
Prior to approving or conditionally approving any specific plan or amendment thereto, the Planning Commission or City Council shall make the following findings: 
A.  That the property proposed for the specific plan has unique site characteristics such as topography, location, or surroundings that are enhanced by special land use and development standards; 
B.  That the specific plan is consistent with the goals, policies, and vision of the general plan; 
C.  That the specific plan results in development of desirable character and use types that will be compatible with existing and proposed development in the surrounding neighborhood; 
D.  That the specific plan contributes to a balance of land uses throughout the city. 
(Ord. 2678 § 5 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 17.68 - SERVICE STATION STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.68.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
"Advertising structure" means a structure of any kind erected or maintained for outdoor advertising. 
"Permanent reader panel" means a permanently installed, changeable copy bulletin board, whether lighted or unlighted, with detachable or replaceable precut letters and figures. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.68.01—17.68.01.20)  
17.68.020 - General requirements. 
A.  Select Street Frontage. No automobile service station shall be constructed, maintained or operated on any lot or parcel of land that does not abut at least one select system street specified in Section 12.16.010 of this Code. 
B.  Plan Review. No building permit for a service station shall be issued until the plans therefore have been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. If the requirements of this chapter and the other requirements of this Code are met, such permit shall, upon the granting of a conditional use permit therefore, be issued in accordance with all such provisions. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.68.02—17.68.02.30)  
17.68.030 - Site requirements. 
The minimum requirements specified in this section shall apply to all service stations. 
A.  Lot Width and Depth. No service station shall be constructed or operated on a lot having a depth and width of less than one hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Lot Area. No service station shall be constructed or operated on a lot having less than sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet in area. 
C.  Setbacks. 
1.  No service station building shall be located nearer than thirty-five (35) feet from any street property line. Such setback shall be measured at the building foundation. 
2.  No canopy shall be closer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
3.  No gasoline pump or facility for dispensing gasoline nor any pump island on which the same are or may be located shall be nearer than fifteen (15) feet from any property line. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.68.03—17.68.03.30)  
17.68.040 - Site development standards. 
Every service station hereafter constructed or maintained shall comply with the site development standards specified in the following subsections: 
A.  Perimeter Walls. If a lot upon which a service station is constructed or maintained abuts a lot classified in Zone R-4 or in any more restrictive zone, a six-foot high solid masonry wall shall be constructed along the full length of each property line abutting property thus residentially zoned; provided, however, that such wall height shall be reduced to four (4) feet adjacent to the front yard of each adjacent residential property. 
B.  Rest Room Screening. All outdoor rest room entrances shall be screened from view from all adjacent properties and streets by means of a decorative screen six (6) feet in height. The bottom of such screen shall be raised no less than twelve (12) and no more than eighteen (18) inches above finished grade for visibility and ventilation. 
C.  Trash Areas. All outside trash, garbage, refuse and other storage areas shall be enclosed by a masonry structure not less than six (6) feet in height. Provision for adequate vehicular access for collection of such trash and materials shall be provided to and from such areas. 
D.  Landscaping. Every lot or parcel of land upon which a service station is constructed or maintained shall be landscaped as follows: 
1.  Three (3) foot wide planters shall be installed and maintained adjacent to every street frontage for the full length thereof except for driveways. 
2.  Two hundred (200) square feet of planting area shall be installed and maintained at the intersection of the property lines at a street corner. 
3.  A landscaped planter at least three (3) feet wide shall be constructed and maintained along the full length of each building elevation which is parallel to an adjacent street if the view thereof from such parallel street is otherwise unobstructed. 
4.  All planting areas shall be separated from adjacent asphalt paving by curb walls at least six (6) inches in height. 
5.  Landscaping plans for all required planter areas shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and approval. 
6.  Permanent underground irrigation systems shall be installed and maintained for every landscaped area, and all such landscaped areas shall be planted and maintained in a clean and workmanlike manner. 
7.  Planters three (3) feet in width shall be installed and maintained immediately adjacent to all interior property lines from the intersection thereof with the adjacent street right-of-way line to a point fifteen (15) feet distant therefrom; provided, however, that if an interior perimeter wall is required, such planter shall extend to a point even with the actual building line of the automobile service station. 
8.  All plants in any planter adjacent to a perimeter wall shall, when required by the Planning Commission, be of a variety capable of growing to the height of such wall. 
E.  Surface Drainage. Flow lines shall be shown on all service station plot plans. Normal sheet flow may be permitted across sidewalks. Concentrated runoff shall be carried under sidewalks by means of a drainage structure approved by the City Engineer. 
F.  Utilities. All utilities including electrical, telephone, CATV, and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property occupied by an automobile service station shall, within the exterior boundaries of the station property, be installed underground. Related electrical equipment, such as but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, pedestal maintained terminal boxes and meter cabinets, may be placed above ground if they are enclosed. 
G.  Equipment. All hydraulic hoists and pits, and all equipment for lubrication, greasing, automobile washing, and permitted repairs shall be enclosed entirely within a building. 
H.  Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be so arranged and shielded as to prevent any glare or reflection upon and any kind with adjoining streets or properties. 
I.  Architectural Control. All exterior walls should be constructed of rock, brick, stucco, wood, treated metal or any combination thereof. All exterior elevations shall be subject to review by and approval of the Planning Commission. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.68.04—17.68.04.90)  
17.68.050 - Access, parking and circulation. 
Every lot or parcel of land upon which is constructed or maintained a service station shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
A.  Driveways Limited. No such site shall have more than two (2) driveways or means of access to any one street. 
B.  Curb Separation. Every driveway shall be separated from adjacent residential property by a full height curb extending at least five (5) feet in length from the residential property line. 
C.  Driveway Width. No driveway shall exceed a width of thirty-eight (38) feet at the sidewalk. (See Planning Commission for additional regulations). 
D.  Corner Driveways. No driveway shall encroach into the curve of a street corner unless the radius of the curb return is greater than thirty (30) feet, in which case such encroachment shall not exceed one-eighth of such radius. 
E.  Driveway Separation. There shall be a minimum distance of twenty-two (22) feet of full height curb between each service station driveway. 
F.  Required Parking. Two (2) marked parking spaces shall be provided for each service bay, and in addition thereto additional marked parking spaces shall be provided equal in number to the total number of employees employed at any one time at such service station site. 
G.  Prohibited Parking. No person shall park any vehicle on any sidewalk, parkway, driveway, or planting area. 
H.  Vehicles for Sale or Hire. No vehicle on any service station premises may be advertised or offered for sale, lease or hire. No vehicle shall be parked on a service station site other than tow-trucks and other vehicles used in the conduct of the service station business, vehicles of employees used by them for transportation to and from work on the premises, vehicles of persons conducting business on service station site while conducting such business, and vehicles of customers either awaiting service thereon or while being serviced or which have been serviced on the premises and are awaiting delivery to or pickup by the owner thereof. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.68.05—17.68.05.80)  
17.68.060 - Signs and displays. 
All signs and displays on the premises of an automobile service station shall comply with the provisions of and shall be limited to those specifically permitted by this chapter. 
A.  Size. The total advertising area shall not exceed two (2) square feet of sign for each lineal foot of street frontage. 
B.  Number. No more signs than the number specified in this subsection shall be permitted: 
1.  One wall sign per business building face; 
2.  One permanent reader panel; 
3.  One roof sign not to exceed a maximum height of thirty (30) feet, measured from finished grade at the building foundation; 
4.  One freestanding sign not to exceed a maximum height of thirty (30) feet, in no event closer than thirty-five (35) feet to a rear or side property line, and to be located within fifteen (15) feet of all abutting street property lines; 
5.  Four (4) price signs, all at the same height above grade, with maximum dimensions of five (5) feet by six (6) feet, and each attached to the permitted freestanding pole sign; 
6.  In lieu of the wall signs permitted by subsection (B)(5) of this section, not more than two (2) five (5) feet by six (6) feet permanent free standing price signs may be installed at the point where the interior side and street property lines intersect; 
7.  Two (2) permanent directional (self-serve and/or full serve) signs per pump island, not to exceed two (2) feet by two (2) feet in size shall be permitted. 
C.  Sign Lighting. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, all lighted signs shall be internally illuminated and shall cause no glare or reflection or light on other properties or buildings. 
D.  Flashing and Rotating Signs. No sign shall have progressive lighting. Rotating signs shall be limited to a maximum of eight (8) revolutions per minute and shall be limited to trade mark or trade name of the business conducted on the premises. 
E.  Banners. No banners, bunting strips, strings of signal flags or any similar display shall be permitted outside the building; provided, however, that such displays shall be allowed for fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the opening of a new service station. 
F.  No attachment to Light Standards. No signs shall be attached to the light standards. 
G.  Portable Signs. No portable signs shall be allowed outside the building. 
H.  Street Projection. No sign shall project over any portion of public right-of-way or conflict with traffic signalization in the area. 
I.  Display Location. Display of automotive supplies may be located only within an enclosed building, within five (5) feet of the central business office, or on a pump island. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.68.06—17.68.06.90)  
17.68.070 - Operational restrictions. 
Every automobile service station shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Hours of Operation. No automobile service station located within one hundred (100) feet of property zoned exclusively for residential purposes shall be open for or conduct any type of business between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m., except that this section shall not apply to any service station located within three hundred (300) feet of a freeway interchange. This section shall not preclude the wholesale filling of underground storage tanks at any time. 
B.  Repairs and Service. All repairs to and servicing of automobiles shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. This section shall not apply to the supplying of fuel, air, water, and antifreeze, or the cleaning of windows. 
C.  Sales and Rentals. No rentals of trailers, trucks, motor bikes or similar equipment shall be permitted. No sale of any merchandise (such as peat moss, fertilizer, vehicles and toys) not clearly incidental to the automotive industry, shall be permitted; provided, however, that on service station sites containing at least twenty-two thousand, five hundred (22,500) square feet trailers that may be operated by any person with a Class 3 drivers license may be rented subject to all conditions imposed by a conditional use permit obtained pursuant to Chapter 17.24 of this title. No other merchandise shall be sold other than convenience items, such as soft drinks and cigarettes from dispensers within or abutting the main building. 
D.  Cessation of Signals and Exterior Lighting. All signal bells and all lights shall be turned off when the station is not in operation, except that necessary security lights may be left on, which security lights shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the exterior light fixtures by number nor fifty (50) percent of the lamp bulbs in exterior multilamp fixtures. 
(Ord. 2525 § 4 (part), 2000; zoning ordinance §§ 17.68.07—17.68.07.40)  
Chapter 17.70 - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES 
Sections: 
 
17.70.010 - Nonconforming use. 
Every outdoor structure heretofore lawfully erected and in existence upon the effective date of City Council Ordinance No. 2522 may continue thereafter as a legal nonconforming use, however, any improvement or alteration of any part thereof other than advertising copy shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2522 § 7 (part), 2000: zoning ordinance § 17.70.020) 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 8, 7-18-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2914, § 8, adopted July 18, 2017, renamed § 17.70.010 from "nonconforming use—continuation and removal" to "nonconforming use."  
17.70.020 - Relocation. 
Any outdoor advertising structure heretofore lawfully erected and still in existence upon the effective date of City Council Ordinance No. 2522 may be relocated in accordance with Chapter 17.88 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2522 § 7 (part), 2000; zoning ordinance § 17.70.030) 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 9, 7-18-2017)  
17.70.030 - Removal of signs. 
Every outdoor advertising structure heretofore or hereafter unlawfully erected or maintained shall be forthwith removed by the property owner, or by direction of the City Council after a duly noticed public hearing where it is determined such outdoor advertising structure has been unlawfully erected or maintained, and the cost of such removal shall become a lien on the property where such unlawfully erected or maintained outdoor advertising structure was located. The unlawful structure so removed shall be stored by the city and released to the property owner upon tender of payment to the city of the cost of the removal plus a storage fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day or any fraction thereof, excluding the first day such structure is taken into storage. If such illegal structure is not claimed within ten (10) working days after storage, the city shall dispose of such structure in the best interests of the property owner seeking to set off against removal and the best interests of the property owner seeking to set off against removal and storage fees any value received for such structure. 
(Ord. 2522 § 7 (part), 2000; zoning ordinance § 17.70.040)  
17.70.040 - Maintenance. 
All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in a state of safe condition and good repair. Any sign or sign structure that is allowed to deteriorate to such a condition that the paint, lettering or plastic face begins to crack, peel or weather, or sign structures which become bent or damaged in any way, shall be repainted or repaired to its original condition when installed or be entirely replaced or completely removed. 
(Ord. 2522 § 7 (part), 2000; zoning ordinance § 17.70.150)  
17.70.050 - Appendages and attachments. 
Attachment of other on premises or off-premises signs to outdoor advertising structures shall not be permitted. No part of an outdoor advertising structure shall be attached to a building in any manner. 
(Ord. 2522 § 7 (part), 2000; zoning ordinance § 17.70.160)  
17.70.060 - Zone and use restrictions. 
Except as expressly permitted in Section 17.70.010, no outdoor advertising structure may hereafter be maintained unless it complies with the following: 
A.  Outdoor advertising structure, two hundred (200) square feet or greater in area: 
1.  The structure must be located in the C-3 or less restrictive zone. 
2.  The parcel of land upon which the billboard is located shall have a valid certificate of occupancy for commercial or industrial use. 
3.  The parcel of land upon which the billboard is located may not contain a residential use. 
B.  Outdoor advertising structure, two hundred (200) square feet or less in area: 
1.  The structure must be located in the C-3 or less restrictive zone. 
2.  The parcel of land upon which the billboard is located shall have a valid certificate of occupancy for commercial or industrial use. 
3.  The parcel of land upon which the billboard is located may not contain a residential use. 
4.  The structure may not be within a one hundred fifty (150) foot radius of any on-premise freestanding advertising sign located on the same parcel. 
C.  The provisions of this Section 17.70.060 shall only apply to outdoor advertising structures heretofore lawfully erected and still in existence upon the effective date of City Council Ordinance No. 2522. 
(Ord. 2522 § 7 (part), 2000: zoning ordinance § 17.70.170) 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 10, 7-18-2017)  
Chapter 17.72 - DOWNTOWN EL MONTE RETAIL CORE FACADE DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.72.010 - Establishment of the downtown El Monte retail core facade design standards. 
The downtown El Monte retail core facade design standards are intended to implement the policies of the city of El Monte General Plan and the downtown El Monte redevelopment plan. This chapter is intended to provide detailed design standards for: signage, lighting, awnings, color, materials, and other appropriate design factors. The downtown El Monte retail core facade design standards are applicable to the front, rear and sides of all buildings located on property fronting the south side of Valley Boulevard from Santa Anita Avenue on the west to Iris Lane on the east and property fronting the north side of Valley Mall from Santa Anita on the west to a point three hundred forty (340) feet east of the centerline of Tyler Avenue along the east and west side of Monterey Avenue, El Monte Avenue and Center Street north of the centerline of Valley Mall to Valley Boulevard and Lexington Avenue to a point four hundred ninety-four (494) feet on the east side of Lexington Avenue and five hundred twenty-seven (527) feet on the west side of Lexington Avenue south of the centerline of Valley Mall. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.72)  
17.72.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are described as follows: 
"Billboard" means a sign, signboard, or outdoor advertising display, as defined in the California Outdoor Advertising Act, including digital billboards, which is used for advertising purposes or display purposes, except advertising displays used exclusively: (i) to advertise the sale or lease of the property upon which such advertising displays are to be placed; (ii) to designate the name of the owner or the occupant of the premises upon which such advertising display is placed or to identify such premises; or (iii) to advertise good manufactured, produced, or for sale or services rendered on the property upon which such advertising is placed. 
"Block" means an area of land, whether under one or several ownerships, shown on the map and bounded either by streets or the boundary of the ordinance area. 
"Building identification sign" means a sign containing the name and/or address of the building to which the sign is attached. 
"Community service sign" means a sign provided by a nonprofit organization. 
"Facade" means any exterior wall of a building, including front, side and rear. 
"Freestanding sign" means any sign of which the primary structural support is not a building and which has as its primary support a post, pole or other structure which is anchored to, attached to or stands directly on the ground. 
"Ground level" means the highest elevation of the ground surface or existing sidewalk directly under a sign. 
"Hanging sign" means a sign other than a wall or projecting sign suspended from or supported by a building structure. 
"Inanimate sign" shall have the same meaning as the term is given under Section 17.12.030 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the EMMC. 
"Interior store" means any premises with access from a mall or other common area, but without direct access from a public street such as stores within malls or arcades. 
"Map" means the map on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
"Mural" means a large-scale painting for ornament or commemoration, but not for advertising, painted directly onto an exterior wall or a building. 
"Ordinance area" means the area within the shading on the map on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
"Painted wall sign" means any sign painted directly on the exterior surface of the building. Allowed only when precedent can be documented. 
"Pedestrian lighting" means public exterior lighting providing a low level of illumination for the public right-of-way. 
"Premises" means an individual building housing one or more businesses. 
"Project" means any proposed building, structure, facade modification signage change or other development of property or structural alteration or enlargement of a building or structure to be located on a lot within the ordinance area. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a building and projecting out therefrom. 
"Retail sales" means sale of commodities in small quantities to the public, as distinguished from wholesale sales (not available to the general public) and from the provision of services. 
"Roof sign" means any sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet or projecting above a roofline of a building or structure. 
"Security gate" means moveable gate permanently installed over or behind building doors and windows. 
"Sign" means any display board, screen object, device or part thereof used to visually announce, declare, demonstrate, display, identify or otherwise advertise and attract the attention of the public including signs identifying services or products available in the premises or identifying the occupant or premises, but excluding changeable restaurant menus, less than two hundred (200) square inches in size. 
"Sign area" means the area of the smallest rectangle, circle, and/or triangle (or any combination of these) which will enclose all words, letters, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing, background material, colored or illuminated area, and attention-attracting devices forming an integral part of the sign. Sign area refers only to single-facade signs shall be no more than twice that allowed for single-faced sign. 
"Sign lighting" means lighting provided for signs. With the exception of neon signs, all signs will be lit by exterior lighting. 
"Street address sign" means a numeric sign for the purpose of identifying a building's legal address. 
"Temporary sign" shall have the same meaning as the term is given under Section 17.12.030 (Definitions) of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the EMMC. 
"Wall sign" means any sign (excluding a sign that qualifies as temporary sign or an inanimate sign) which is attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in the plane approximately parallel to the plan of said wall. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.72.01—17.72.01.260) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 7, 9-24-2013; Ord. No. 2914, § 11, 7-18-2017)  
17.72.030 - Mandatory facade improvement regulations. 
All building facades which are rendered nonconforming by reason of this chapter shall be brought into conformity within the following time period, which period shall commence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
A.  Time Period for Removal of Nonconforming Items. Removal of nonconforming signs, awnings, lighting, nonpermitted exterior materials and nonpermitted exterior colors: three (3) years. 
B.  Time Period for Facade Rehabilitation. Rehabilitation of building facades in conformance with this chapter four (4) years. 
C.  Nonconforming Facades Deemed Public Nuisances. Upon the conclusion of the abatement period for non-conforming facade improvements within the downtown El Monte retail core area, such nonconforming facade improvements shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city in the manner provided by law. 
D.  Procedures for Compliance. 
1.  Submittal of Review Package. 
a.  Current eight (8) by ten (10) color photos of the existing facade—one each of front, rear, and side(s) as applicable; 
b.  Proposed facade elevation drawing prepared by a licensed architect. Proposed colors and materials shall be indicated. All existing and proposed lighting, signage and awnings shall also be indicated; 
c.  A written report prepared by a structural engineer indicating the seismic safety of the structure and if appropriate, the measures recommended to properly secure such structure from unreasonable risk of loss to persons and property as a result of earthquake; 
d.  In the event that the proposed facade renovation includes an expansion of the floor area of a building or structure, the applicant shall indicate the method by which the required vehicle parking amenities shall be provided. 
2.  Upon determination by the Planning Division that the review package is complete, the Planning Division shall schedule an evaluation of the improvements by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days. 
3.  All proposed improvements shall be reviewed pursuant to this chapter, and the standards for downtown El Monte. 
4.  The City Planning Commission shall review all proposed improvements and authorize the installation and construction thereof subject to reasonable modification and if appropriate, such other conditions as the Planning Commission may require. Subject to such review, the Planning Commission affirms that all improvements have been made in accordance with the specifications of the downtown El Monte retail core facade design standards ordinance. 
5.  The approved facade improvement or necessary construction shall commence within six (6) months after the Planning Commission approval of the improvements. Failure to begin renovation or make diligent efforts toward completion shall render approvals null and void. 
6.  Following the Planning Commission action, the Redevelopment Agency shall review the proposed improvements, as approved by the Planning Commission, to determine consistency with the redevelopment plan. 
7.  The proposal shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this Code and development standards. 
(Amended during 1999 recodification; zoning ordinance §§ 17.72.02—17.72.40)  
17.72.040 - Facade design. 
The front, rear and side (where applicable) of building facades shall be fully improved. 
A.  Common Palette. All building shall maintain a common palette of building facade colors and materials appropriate to the area. 
1.  Building Color Treatment. 
a.  A warm palette of "earthtone" colors with color accents on windows, door frames and awnings shall be provided for building exteriors. 
2.  Building Materials Treatment. 
a.  A common palette of materials and finishes including brick, tile, metal, glass and stucco shall be maintained among building exteriors. 
b.  Continuity in building materials shall be maintained for all lots with more than one commercial occupant sharing continuous frontage. 
c.  The following materials are prohibited for new development or exterior building facade, rehabilitations: imitation rock, crushed rock, reflective glass in ground floor window frontage, corrugated fiberglass, metal sliding, wood siding, imitation brick and artificial turf. 
B.  Minimum Glazed Area. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the building's ground floor walls shall be provided with window openings along street frontage. 
C.  Consistent Treatment of Shared Frontage. All lots with more than one commercial occupant sharing contiguous frontage shall maintain uniform door and window treatment consistent with overall building design. 
D.  Continuity of Roof Design. Roofs and roof lines on single structures shall be continuous in design except where there is a major change on the building elevation. 
E.  Roof Materials. The following roof materials shall be provided for all construction or building rehabilitation where roofing is visible from the adjacent street; clay roof tile in red or earthtones; slate roof in black, gray, blue gray or blue black; composition roofing shingle in a color coordinated with the overall building renovation and approved per the requirements of this chapter. 
F.  Awnings. The design and installation of awnings shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  All lots with more than one commercial occupant sharing contiguous frontage shall maintain a common location and design for building awnings. 
2.  The bottom edge of awnings shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet of the ground. 
3.  All awnings shall be constructed with noncombustible materials such as fireproof canvas or vinyl. 
4.  Awnings shall be centered over doorways and windows. 
5.  Awnings shall be in proportion to door and window openings. 
6.  Awnings shall be of a color which is appropriate to the overall colors of the facade. 
7.  The shape, size and number of awnings shall be appropriate to the overall facade design and building size. 
8.  Awning structure shall be sufficient to support safely the awning and withstand the pressures of wind and weather. 
9.  Awnings which become ripped, tattered, or damaged must be repaired or replaced within three (3) months of the occurrence/appearance of the damage. 
G.  Exterior Building Lighting. The design and installation of exterior building lighting shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Exterior building lighting shall be designed to relate in color, material, size, location and illumination to the building architecture. 
2.  Exterior building lighting designated to illuminate signs shall be mounted above the sign on the facade and shall be appropriate to the size and scale of the signage. 
3.  Pedestrian and auto-oriented street lighting (light posts) will be provided by the city. No private pedestrian street lighting shall be permitted. 
4.  Pedestrian alley lighting (light posts) will be provided by the city. No privately installed light posts shall be permitted. 
5.  Alley lighting, marking building entries must be surface mounted and may be either flush with, recessed or extended from the wall. No fluorescent lighting shall be allowed for this purpose. 
6.  No lights shall be strung between buildings, trees or other objects. 
7.  Fluorescent lighting tubes shall be concealed by a shade or lens. 
8.  Spotlights and up-lights for trees concealed within the alleyway landscaping shall be directed so as not to shine in the eyes of the pedestrians. 
9.  No floodlights shall be permitted. 
10.  All lots with more than one commercial occupant sharing contiguous frontage shall maintain a common location and design for pedestrian lighting as approved under Section 17.08.030 of this title. 
H.  Mechanical Equipment Screening. 
1.  Mechanical equipment on the ground shall be completely screened from street level view with attractive planting, masonry walls or iron fencing with planting which compliment building architecture. All planting shall be provided in accordance with a landscape plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed architect or landscape contractor and approved as set forth in Chapter 17.10 of this title. 
2.  All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be located behind a permanent parapet wall and completely screened from ground level view. 
I.  Security Gates. 
1.  No security gates or security window grilles shall be installed or maintained on the exterior of a building. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.72.03—17.72.03.90)  
17.72.050 - Signage standards. 
The design and installation of signs shall conform with the following standards: 
A.  Auto-Oriented Signage. Auto-oriented signage shall comply with the following signage system: 
1.  The sign message must be the store name only. Sign shall be made of individual cut out letters mounted directly to the building facade with thin rods or pins which hold the letter three-fourths inch off the building surface. A narrow ornamental frame, completely independent of the letters, shall be permitted. Such a frame would be mounted in the same manner as the letters. 
2.  Sign letters shall be of wood, metal or exterior quality, high density foam covered with high pressure plastic laminate at least three-fourths inch thick. Lighted neon glass tubing is also permitted. 
3.  All letters shall be painted with an exterior gloss enamel in an accent color used elsewhere on the building exterior. 
4.  Non-neon signage will be lit externally by fixtures mounted above the sign on the facade. 
5.  Any additional symbols or graphic elements must be three dimensional and shall be subject to approval as part of the review package. 
B.  Pedestrian-Oriented Signage. Pedestrian-oriented signage shall comply with the following signage system. All buildings are required to have a twenty-six (26) by twenty-two (22) inch flag mounted sign as specified below: 
1.  The bottom edge of all signs shall be seven (7) feet nine (9) inches to eight (8) feet six (6) inches above the ground. 
2.  All signs shall be twenty-six (26) inches in length by twenty-two (22) inches in height. 
3.  Signs shall be made of one-eighth inch thick painted sheet metal. 
4.  All signs shall be painted with an exterior grade enamel. The bracket shall be painted in an accent color used elsewhere on the building exterior. 
5.  Signs shall be nonfixed to lessen the impact of vandalism. 
6.  Signs shall be hung from a two (2) feet by eight (8) inches horizontal metal tube (two (2) inches in diameter) and mounted. 
C.  Rear Facade Signage. Rear facade signage shall comply with the following guidelines: 
1.  Signage may be either a painted wall sign, a wall sign or three (3) dimensional signage as specified in subsection A of this section, Auto-Oriented Signage. 
2.  Painted Wall Signs. 
a.  Painted wall signs shall be allowed only on rear building facades. 
b.  Signage shall not cover greater than twenty (20) percent of the surface on which the sign is painted. This determined by the area defined by the edges of the lettering. 
c.  The design and maximum coverage of all painted wall signs shall be subject to Planning Commission approval as part of the review package. 
3.  Wall Signs. 
a.  Wall signs shall be allowed only on rear building facades. 
b.  Wall signs may be made of wood or metal and painted with exterior gloss enamel colors. 
c.  The area of the wall sign shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the wall surface on which it is hung. 
d.  The design and maximum coverage of all wall signs shall be subject to Planning Commission approval as part of the review package. 
D.  Exterior Signage Lighting. 
1.  Signage lighting shall be mounted on the facade above the auto-oriented sign. 
2.  The lights shall not obstruct the signage. 
3.  Signage lighting shall be designed to relate in color, material, size, location and illumination to both the signage being illuminated and to the building facade. 
E.  Other Signage Requirements. Notwithstanding any provision of the El Monte Municipal Code to the contrary, no person shall erect or maintain a sign or signs within the area designated the downtown El Monte retail core facade overlay zone unless it conforms to the following regulations: 
1.  Pursuant to an inventory of existing signs, that signage which is identified as legal nonconforming shall be removed simultaneously along with the facade improvement. 
2.  No sign shall be constructed, placed, created or maintained on any premises which advertises other than a bona fide business conducted, product sold or service rendered on the premises where the sign is located, or which identifies by name, logo and address the building or premises on which the sign is located. 
3.  No more than two signs shall be constructed, placed, created or maintained on any premises except that (a) premises, situated in buildings located on corner lots, may have one sign on each exterior wall which abuts a street; (b) premises with accessways to an alley or parking lot may have one additional sign directly adjacent to the alley accessway; (c) theaters may have additional wall signs, not to exceed a total of one hundred (100) square feet, for the purpose of advertising their current and forthcoming shows. 
4.  Existing theater wall signs and existing theater marquees shall be permitted three and one-half (3 ½) square feet for each one foot of street frontage. First story street frontage must be calculated separately for each street which the premises abuts and may not be accumulated for determining the size of any sign. 
5.  Double-faced signs shall be considered as one sign and shall be limited to one sign per premises. A double-faced sign shall have two parallel faces. The total thickness of the sign shall be no more than two (2) inches. 
6.  Each building which contains interior stores shall be permitted one sign on each exterior wall which abuts a street. The permitted sign may, pursuant to the design process contained herein, identify all businesses conducted in the interior premises but may not exceed a total area of twelve (12) square feet. 
7.  No projecting sign shall have a vertical dimension exceeding four (4) feet. 
8.  No painted wall signs shall be permitted unless a historical precedent can be documented with the exception of those signs on the rear building facade as outlined in subsection C of this section, Rear Facade Signage. 
9.  No signs painted on metal, wood, plastic or surfaces other than the wall of the building shall be permitted with the exception of those signs on the rear building facade as outlined in subsection C of this section, Rear Facade Signage. 
10.  The top of any sign shall not extend more than twenty (20) feet above ground level. 
11.  No more than one projecting sign shall be constructed, placed, created or maintained on any premise. 
12.  No wall sign shall project more than nine (9) inches from the face of the building to which it is attached. 
13.  Signs permanently attached or affixed to exterior windows or doors shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the total window or door area to which they are attached or affixed. 
14.  Premises with awnings may have painted on or affixed to the valances thereof in letters, numbers or symbols not to exceed nine (9) inches in height the name, occupation and/or address of the tenant or owner. 
15.  All lots with more than one commercial occupant sharing contiguous frontage shall maintain a common size, location and height for signs as measured from the adjacent sidewalk level. 
16.  The regulation of temporary signs and inanimate signs shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 17.12 (Sign Standards and Signage Regulation) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
17.  One street address sign shall be allowed on each building face for which the property has a legal address. The numeric signs shall be white, four (4) inch, Helvetica Medium vinyl die cut numbers located above the doorway of each property. 
18.  No sign shall be installed or maintained above the building parapet. 
19.  Foreign language signs are permitted; however, all established business trade names or the basic business product name appearing on those shall also be written with the English alphabet and the street address with Arabic numerals. 
F.  Prohibited Signs. 
1.  No roof signs shall be permitted. 
2.  No freestanding signs shall be permitted. 
3.  No portable signs shall be permitted. 
4.  No billboards shall be permitted. 
5.  No flashing or blinking signs shall be constructed, placed, created or maintained. 
6.  No internally lit rectangular box signs with overall plexiglass faces shall be permitted. 
7.  No banners, flags, bunting, balloons, or similar temporary advertising shall be permitted, except pursuant to Section 17.12.090A. 
G.  Exceptions. The provisions of subsections C, D and E of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Signs required by law; 
2.  Signs owned by a governmental agency; 
3.  Public utility signs which contain no advertising copy and which are customarily utilized in the performance of the utility's function; 
4.  One construction sign located on a lot where a building or structure is being erected or remodeled and which identifies the architects, engineers, financing agent and/or contractors involved in the project, provided, however, that such sign shall not extend more than eight (8) feet above the ground level, nor exceed forty (40) square feet in area; 
5.  Mural decorations intended for ornament or commemoration which have been determined by the Planning Commission to have artistic merit and to be supportive of the goals and objectives of this chapter and the Downtown El Monte design plan; 
6.  One temporary real estate sign on the building face of each premises which abuts a street, alley, exit court, or parking lot, indicating the building or land or premises is for sale, lease or rent; provided such signs are located on the property to which they relate and do not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in size; 
7.  Signs which are contained on the list of cultural or historical monuments prepared by the city; 
8.  Freestanding community service signs which are existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Zoning ordinance §§ 17.72.04—17.72.04.70.) 
(Ord. No. 2831, § 8, 9-24-2013)  
Chapter 17.74 - MULTIPLE TENANT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.74.010 - General. 
Multiple tenant development shall be subject to the regulations specified in this chapter and to such additional regulations as may be specified in the conditional use permit authorizing the same. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.74)  
17.74.020 - Site area. 
The site for any proposed multiple tenant development shall consist of an area not less than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet in size, sites under forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet in size shall not be developed for multiple nonresidential tenant uses. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.74.10)  
17.74.030 - Floor area. 
The floor area ratio of dissimilar uses shall be identified on an approved floor plan submitted by the developer. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.74.20)  
17.74.040 - Recordation of covenant. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit, the owner of a multiple tenant development shall submit to the Planning Division a covenant which runs with the land and benefits the city in recordable form that the owner will: 
A.  Maintain the buildings and the premises in the multiple tenant development in a good and first class condition; 
B.  Maintain the landscaping on the site in a good and first class condition; 
C.  Control signage in the multiple tenant development; and 
D.  Maintain or reserve for occupancy by a single tenant twenty (20) percent of the leasable floor area of the multiple tenant development or of five thousand (5,000) square feet of the improved useable commercial tenant or commercial user structures on the site, whichever is lesser. 
(Zoning ordinance § 17.74.30)  
Chapter 17.75 - CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES 
 
17.75.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all definitions, including that of "correctional facility," will be defined as outlined under Chapter 17.04 (Definitions) of Title 17 (Zoning) of the EMMC. 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 16, 1-22-2013)  
17.75.020 - Permitted locations. 
A.  Correctional facilities may be permitted in any C-3 or less restrictive zone with a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 17.24.040 (Conditionally permitted uses in specified zones) of Chapter 17.24 (Conditional Use Permits). 
B.  Correctional facilities shall not be permitted in any of the following locations: 
1.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any type of community care facility or similar type of facility, measured from property line to property line; 
2.  Within one mile of another correctional facility, measured from property line to property line; 
3.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a school, library, public park, or recreation area, measured from property line to property line; 
4.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a property zoned for residential development, measured from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 16, 1-22-2013)  
17.75.030 - Operational and space regulations. 
A.  Correctional facilities shall provide a minimum of sixty (60) square feet of sleeping space per bed, not including closet space, storage space, multi-purpose rooms, bathrooms, dining rooms, and halls. 
B.  Correctional facilities shall provide a minimum of ten (10) square feet of multi-purpose space per bed, not including sleeping space and kitchen areas. Multi-purpose space shall be used for games and activities, visiting, television lounge, meetings, and quiet space for study, counseling and reading. This space shall be designed so that several activities can occur simultaneously without conflict. 
C.  Correctional facilities shall provide a minimum of eight (8) cubic feet of closet and drawer space for clothing and personal belongings per bed. The required closet and drawer space may consist of portable or permanent fixtures and shall be located in the sleeping space. 
D.  Correctional facilities shall provide a minimum of fifteen (15) square feet of dining area for each resident, not including kitchen areas and sleeping space. 
E.  Correctional facilities shall provide at least one toilet and wash basin for every eight (8) beds. At least one shower or bathtub shall be provided for every twelve (12) beds. Correctional facilities shall provide for individual privacy in all toilet, shower, and bath areas. 
F.  Correctional facilities shall provide an exercise area of at least five hundred (500) square feet, not including required yards and required landscape areas. 
G.  Correctional facilities shall provide at least one parking space for every three (3) beds or one parking space for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
H.  Correctional facility residents shall be regularly employed, regularly attending job training, or regularly attending a learning institution. 
I.  Correctional facility shall be liable for costs to the City for dispatch calls and other Police Department costs, up to a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per dispatch call, relating to dispatch calls caused by the actions of correctional facility residents or correctional facility personnel in which the Police Department ultimately determines that the dispatch call was the result of a crime or alleged crime that resulted in a police report or enforcement agency investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 16, 1-22-2013)  
17.75.040 - Electronic and written record maintenance. 
A.  Correctional facilities shall maintain a list of all correctional facility residents, which shall detail the sentences and offenses precipitating each resident's stay at the correctional facility. This list shall be made available upon written City request within fifteen (15) calendar days of City request. 
B.  Correctional facilities shall maintain electronic and written records, including but not limited to Department of Motor Vehicle registration and licensing pertaining to all vehicles being driven by residents of the correctional facility and shall provide the electronic and written records to the City upon written request within fifteen (15) calendar days of City request. 
C.  Correctional facilities shall maintain a list of residents returned to higher security federal, state or county prison or jail for violation of correctional facility rules and/or parole which list shall be provided to the City upon written request fifteen (15) calendar days of City request. 
D.  Correctional facilities shall install recorded camera surveillance systems as approved by the City as a crime prevention measure. The installation of such recorded camera surveillance systems shall be a condition precedent to the City's issuance of a certificate of occupancy for correctional facilities. Such systems shall be set up for a forty-five-day rotation period. All video recordings shall be kept onsite for at least five (5) years from the date of recordings and shall be made available to the City upon written request within fifteen (15) calendar days of City request. 
E.  Failure to timely make electronic and written records available to the City, as provided for in this Section 17.75.040, within the time period allowed shall result in the assessment of a five hundred dollars ($500.00) penalty due to the City per day until the requested records are made available. Notwithstanding this imposition of monetary penalties, the City shall reserve the right to commence conditional use permit revocation proceedings, as outlined under EMMC Section 17.24.100, for the repeated and recurring failure to timely make requested electronic and written records available to the City as provided for in this Section 17.75.040. 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 16, 1-22-2013)  
17.75.050 - Personnel requirements. 
A.  All correctional facility personnel shall be trained in accordance with Title 15, Sections 11-358 of the California Code of Regulations and maintained at levels mandated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons. 
B.  Correctional facilities shall provide at least two CPR trained, uniformed custodial guards or monitors on duty at all times on correctional facility premises. CPR training must be made in accordance with the most current American Heart Association CPR guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 16, 1-22-2013)  
17.75.060 - Excludable offenses. 
A correctional facility shall not accept persons that were convicted of any of the following offenses, as are defined in the California Penal Code, to be correctional facility residents or personnel: 
1.  Murder; 
2.  Vehicular manslaughter; 
3.  Voluntary manslaughter; 
4.  Mayhem; 
5.  Kidnapping; 
6.  Robbery (including bank robbery); 
7.  Assault with intent to rape or rob; 
8.  Assault with a deadly weapon; 
9.  Rape; 
10.  Forcible sodomy; 
11.  Lewd act on a child; 
12.  Forcible oral copulation; 
13.  Forcible penetration by foreign object; 
14.  Arson; 
15.  Grand theft using a firearm; 
16.  Assault by a life prisoner on a non-inmate; 
17.  Assault with a deadly weapon by an inmate; 
18.  Holding of a hostage by a prisoner; 
19.  Personal use of a deadly weapon; 
20.  Personal use of a firearm; 
21.  Personal infliction of a great bodily injury; 
22.  Exploding a destructive device with intent to injure; 
23.  Exploding a destructive device with intent to murder; 
24.  Exploding a destructive device with intent to cause mayhem or great bodily injury; 
25.  Selling and/or furnishing drugs to a minor; 
26.  Sale or possession for sale of a controlled substance; 
27.  Any felony punishable by death or life imprisonment; 
28.  An attempt to commit any of the crimes listed; 
29.  Any sex offense, either a misdemeanor or a felony, wherein the victim is a child under the age of eighteen (18), including all offenses registerable as sex offenses under California Penal Code Section 290, and also offenses involving child pornography as described in California Penal Code Sections 311 through 312.3; 
30.  Any person convicted of a crime whom the sentencing judge deems unacceptable for community access; 
31.  Any person sentenced for a federal crime that is similar in nature or type, to any of the crimes listed. 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 16, 1-22-2013)  
17.75.070 - Repeat residence prohibition. 
Correctional facilities shall not accept persons to be facility residents that have previously resided in any correctional facility within the City limits and were subsequently released, after service of his or her sentence, or returned to federal, state or county prison or jail for violation of correctional facility rules and/or parole. 
(Ord. No. 2812, § 16, 1-22-2013)  
Chapter 17.76 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT* 
Sections: 
 
17.76.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store" means any establishment which on a regular and substantial basis sells or rents, or offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, sculptures, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas;" 
2.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities," including goods which are replicas of, or which simulate "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities," and goods which are designed to be placed on or in "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult business" means a business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage, either by law and/or operators of such business, and which is characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas. "Adult business also means and includes any adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel or motel, adult theater, sexual encounter establishment, nude modeling studio, adult tanning salon, sex supermarket/sex mini-mall, and any other business or establishment that, on a regular and substantial basis, offers its patrons entertainment or services which involve, depict, describe or relate to "specified sexual activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle shop, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which, on a regular and substantial basis, features: (1) persons or entertainers who appear on stage; (2) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" or (3) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult dance studio" means any business or commercial establishment which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter involving, depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult motel or hotel" means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, on a regular and substantial basis": (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities;" and/or (2) offers, rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a ten (10) hour period; or (3) offers or allows a tenant or occupant to rent or subrent a sleeping room for a period of less than ten (10) hours. 
"Adult motion picture theater" means any establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, video cassette players, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used on a regular and substantial basis to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult-oriented business" or "sexually-oriented business" has the same meaning in all respects as adult business and shall be subject to all conditions and requirements of an adult business as defined in this section. 
"Adult tanning salon" means a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two (2) or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas. "Adult tanning salon" or "tanning parlor" shall also include a business establishment where the employees thereof are nude or expose "specified anatomical areas" for any form of consideration. 
"Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, and on a regular and substantial basis, features live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on "specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified sexual activities." 
"Advertise" means public notice or announcement of items or services through the use of newspaper, handbills, radio, television, or other means of public communication. 
"Employee of an adult business" means a person who works or performs, as an employee or as an independent contractor, in and/or for an adult business, regardless of whether said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the business. 
"Entertainer" or "live entertainer" means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an Adult Business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult business. 
"Escort" means any person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a "striptease" for another person. Escort shall not include any person hired by a state licensed school for purposes of modeling in any art education class while such person acts in that capacity or any federal, state and/or city-licensed limousine or taxi service. 
"Establishment of an adult business" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not it is a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; 
3.  The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or to another existing nonsexually-oriented business, with or without expansion of floor area; 
4.  The relocation of any sexually-oriented business; or 
5.  The substantial enlargement of the premises of an adult business. 
"Figure model" means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire, or reward, poses in a nude modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise depicted. 
"Notice" means written notice given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, upon placing the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service. 
"Nude modeling studio" means a business which provides, for compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Nude modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education, or any classroom of any school licensed under State law to provide art education while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license. "Nude Modeling Studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit or make available "specified sexual activities." 
"Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the showing or display of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered genitals in a discernable turgid state. 
"Off-premises" means any business where the primary services or entertainment are provided at a location or locations other than the premises of the subject business. 
"Operate an adult business" means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult business or activities within an adult business. 
"Operator of an adult business" means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed business. 
"Private viewing area" means an area or areas in a sexually-oriented business designed to accommodate no more than five (5) or less patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie, or other presentation. 
"Public nudity" means "nudity" or a "state of nudity" that occurs in a business open to the public, whether or not a fee is charged for admission to such business. 
"Public park" means a park, playground, swimming pool, athletic field, or similar recreational facility within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city or any other public agency. 
"Regular and substantial basis." An activity or performance shall be deemed to be regular or substantial basis when it constitutes more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total performance time, stock-in-trade, revenue, floor space, advertisement or similar element of the business. For purposes of this definition, revenue shall include gross revenue generated by the business, including revenue received by entertainers and others who work as independent contractors. For purposes of this definition, the floor space devoted to a regulated activity shall include all the area devoted to the activity, including, but not limited to, display area, sales area, performance areas, viewing areas, dressing rooms, and all aisles and pathways between and within such areas. 
"Religious institution" means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, including, but not limited to a church, temple, mosque, chapel or similar place of worship. 
"Residential use or residential zone" means property which is zoned for a residential use and/or a single family dwelling, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family dwelling or mobile home park/subdivision or recreational vehicle park, but not including a caretaker's/security house or trailer, or a legal nonconforming residential use in a "C" or "M" zone as permitted by this Code. 
"Schools means any child care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes, but is not limited to, a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school or middle school, senior high school or any special institution of education within the city. 
"Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolas of the female breast. 
"Sex supermarket/sex mini-mall" means the establishment or operation of more than one-type of sexually-oriented business or use as defined in this title within the same building. 
"Sexual encounter establishment" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with "specified sexual activities" and/or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas." This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in sexual therapy. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
3.  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections 1 or 2 of this definition. 
"Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals for purpose of sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; 
3.  Masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or ejaculation of human or animal, actual or simulated; 
4.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
5.  Excretory functions, urination, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subdivisions 1 through 4 of this definition. 
"Substantial enlargement of an adult business" means an increase or expansion, over the lifetime of an adult business, of more than ten (10) percent or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less in the portion of the floor area of the business which is devoted to products, services or entertainment with an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to "specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified sexual activities." 
"Transfer of ownership or control of an adult business" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
2.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
3.  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership of control. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate adult businesses which, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious negative secondary effects on the community, which effects include, but are not limited to, the following; depreciation of property values and increase in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners' enjoyment of their property when such property is located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise and vandalism; higher crime rates in the vicinity of adult businesses; and blighting conditions such as low-level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the adult businesses. 
B.  It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to communication materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended market. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
D.  Notwithstanding any provision of Title 9 (Public Peace, Morals and Safety) of the this Code, the regulations set forth under this chapter shall apply specifically to adult businesses. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.030 - Applicability and exceptions. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to the establishment of an adult business, as defined in Section 17.76.010 (Definitions). 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to any of the following businesses or activities: 
1.  Any massage establishment holding a valid massage establishment certificate and whose owner(s) and manager(s) are also the holders of valid operating certificates, all issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.56 of the El Monte Municipal Code; 
2.  Any massage practitioner holding a valid state certificate and in full compliance with all requirements, restrictions and obligations set forth under Chapter 5.56 of the El Monte Municipal Code; and 
3.  Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person holding a valid license or certificate issued by the State of California to practice such art or profession under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code or any other applicable state law. 
For purposes of this subsection (B), the terms "massage establishment," "massage establishment certificate," "massage practitione,r, "operating certificate(s)," and "state certificate" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Chapter 5.56 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2779, § 4, 10-18-2011)  
17.76.040 - Establishment of an adult business. 
The establishment of an adult business shall be permitted only in the M-1 (light manufacturing) zone and M-2 (general manufacturing) zone, subject to the following regulations: 
A.  An adult business shall not be established or located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of: 
1.  Any religious institution, including a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, mortuary, cemetery, or building or portion of a building or structure which is used for religious worship or related religious activities; 
2.  The boundary of any residentially zoned land, whether in the city, in an adjoining city or within a residential zone; 
3.  Any residential use in any zone; 
4.  Any public park or recreational area or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use, including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, or other similar public land; 
5.  Any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, libraries, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, and special education schools. This category of uses does not include vocational or professional institutions of higher education including, but not limited to, community or junior colleges, colleges, and universities. 
The uses and zones set forth in subsection A of this section shall be collectively known as "sensitive uses". 
B.  An adult business shall not be established or located within seven hundred-fifty (750) feet of another adult business, whether in the city, in an adjoining city or within an unincorporated area. 
C.  If two (2) or more existing Adult Businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than seven hundred-fifty (750) feet, in determining which of the businesses is nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous uninterrupted operation of the businesses. 
D.  Where two (2) or more adult business applications are submitted for businesses which would be located in closer proximity to each other than seven hundred fifty (750) feet, the application which was accepted first in time shall be processed by the city, with any latter submitted applications deemed incomplete until such time as a determination is made by the city on the initial application. 
E.  The locational standards set forth in subsections A through C, inclusive, of this section shall pertain to legally established land uses in adjacent jurisdictions. 
F.  Each such adult business must, prior to commencement or continuation or substantial enlargement of such business, first apply for and receive an adult business license in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.98 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.050 - Measurement of distance. 
For the purposes of this section, the distance between any two (2) adult businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the city and to intervening structures, from the nearest portion of the property line of the lot where such adult business is conducted, to the nearest property line of another adult business. The distance between any adult business and any residential use, religious institution, school, public park or other sensitive use shall also be measured in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the city and to intervening structures, from the nearest portion of the property line of the lot where such adult business is conducted, to the nearest property line of a residential use, religious institution, school, public park or sensitive use. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.060 - Misdemeanor offenses. 
In addition to all other offenses specified in this chapter, this Code and state statutes, an adult business shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Notwithstanding that it is not a criminal offense for a person to operate or cause to be operated an adult business to be in violation of the nudity limitation set forth in Chapter 5.98 of this Code, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor to establish, substantially enlarge or operate an adult business within the city without first complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate or cause to be operated an adult business outside of the zones specified in this chapter. 
C.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate or cause to be operated an adult business in violation of the locational standards set forth in Section 17.76.050 of this chapter. 
D.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one adult business within the same building, structure or portion thereof, or cause the increase of floor area of any adult business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult business. 
E.  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of a sex supermarket/sex mini-mall as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.070 - Violations/Penalties. 
Any firm, corporation or person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed, permitted, caused or continued. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.080 - Civil injunction. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.090 - Public nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties set forth above, any adult business which is operating in violation of this chapter or any provision thereof, or Chapter 5.98 of this Code, or any provision thereof, is declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.100 - Administrative penalties. 
In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative penalties, as set forth by city ordinance. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.110 - Amortization and regulation of nonconforming adult business uses. 
A.  Establishment of Nonconforming Use. Any adult business which was legally established and lawfully operating prior to December 12, 2000, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, and shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein. 
B.  Amortization. Any use of real property existing on December 12, 2000, which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, but which was constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued until December 12, 2003, after which time all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the Planning Services Manager or his/her designee, pursuant to Section 17.76.120 of this chapter. 
C.  Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult business for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use. 
D.  Amortization—Annexed Property. Any adult business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be terminated within one year of the date of annexation, unless an extension of time has been approved by the Planning Services Manager, or his/her designee, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.76.120 of this chapter. 
E.  Alteration/Enlargement. Any nonconforming adult business shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
F.  Conflicting Adult Businesses. If two (2) or more adult businesses are within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult business which was first established and has continually operated at the particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming. 
G.  Subsequent Approvals. Any adult business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of an adult business permit and/or license, of a school, public park, religious institution, public building likely to be frequented by minors, residential or other sensitive use within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the adult business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
17.76.120 - Extension of time for termination of nonconforming use. 
The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in Section 17.76.110(B) or (D) may apply under the provisions of this section to the Planning Services Manager, or his/her designee for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use, as follows: 
A.  Time and Manner of Application. An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such application must be filed with the Planning Services Manager, or his/her designee, at least sixty (60) days but no more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the time established in Section 17.76.110 for termination of such use. 
B.  Content of Application—Fees. The application shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the City Council. An application which fails to state a basis upon which an extension may be granted, as set forth in subsection D of this section, shall be returned to the applicant, as nonresponsive, together with the application fee less any administrative costs of processing the application. 
C.  Hearing procedure. The Planning Services Manager shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within twenty (20) business days of receipt of the application. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. 
D.  Approval of Extension—Findings. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the hearing officer makes all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law. 
1.  For uses which are rendered nonconforming by virtue of their proximity to other uses, pursuant to Section 17.76.110 and Section 17.76.040: 
a.  The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to December 12, 2000, or prior to the date of annexation; and 
b.  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
c.  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with Section 17.76.040. 
2.  For uses which comply with the requirements of Section 17.76.040, but whose business operations must be modified in order to comply with other provisions of this chapter: 
a.  The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted so as to comply with the requirements of this chapter within the time period provided in Section 17.76.050; and such investment was made prior to December 12, 2000, or prior to the date of annexation; and 
b.  The applicant will be unable to recoup such investment as of the date established for modification or termination of the use; and 
c.  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and has filed plans with the city which demonstrate the ability and intent to comply with the requirements of this chapter within a reasonable time, but needs additional time within which to make the required modifications. These findings shall be made with respect to each aspect of compliance, and no extension shall be granted for modifications which are required by this chapter and which can be made without additional time. 
(Ord. 2536 § 4 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 17.77 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
 
17.77.010 - Applicability. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any disabled person, his or her representative, a developer providing housing for disabled persons, or a provider of housing for disabled persons, when the application of a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 2813, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
17.77.020 - Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process. 
Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at public information counters in the Planning and Building Divisions, advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public in the Planning and Building Divisions. 
(Ord. No. 2813, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
17.77.030 - Requesting reasonable accommodation. 
A.  In order to make housing available to disabled persons, any eligible person as defined in Section 17.77.010 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures. 
B.  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
2.  Location of the subject property, including address and assessor's parcel numbers; 
3.  Name and address of the property owner and the owner's written consent to the application; 
4.  The current actual use of the subject property; 
5.  Verifiable documentation of the individual's disability status; 
6.  Description of the requested accommodation; 
7.  The regulation(s), policy or procedure for which accommodation is sought; 
8.  Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling; and 
9.  Additional information necessary for Planning or Building Division staff to facilitate proper consideration of the request, consistent with fair housing laws. 
C.  Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
D.  A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
E.  If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the City will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. 
(Ord. No. 2813, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
17.77.040 - Reviewing authority. 
A.  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the Economic Development Director in conjunction with the Chief Building Official, or their designees (the "reviewing authority") using the criteria set forth in Section 17.77.050. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall review requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for review with other discretionary land use applications, such as conditional use permits, variances, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2813, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
17.77.050 - Required findings. 
The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following factors: 
A.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by a disabled person protected under fair housing laws; 
B.  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to disabled persons protected under the fair housing laws; 
C.  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the jurisdiction; and 
D.  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the jurisdiction's land use and zoning or building program. 
(Ord. No. 2813, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
17.77.060 - Written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation. 
A.  The reviewing authority shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within thirty (30) calendar days of the application's completion, which may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in Section 17.77.050. 
B.  The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the reviewing authority's findings on the criteria set forth in Section 17.77.050. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail. 
C.  The written decision of the reviewing authority shall become final unless an applicant appeals it to the City's Planning Commission in accordance with Section 17.77.070. 
D.  If the reviewing authority fails to render a written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation within the thirty (30) calendar day time period allotted by subsection (A) above, the request shall be deemed granted. 
E.  While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2813, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
17.77.070 - Appeals. 
A.  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the reviewing authority's written decision, an applicant may appeal an adverse decision. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. 
B.  If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the City will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible. 
C.  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
D.  All Planning Commission determinations on the appeal shall address and be based upon the same findings set forth in Section 17.77.050. 
E.  Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other state or federal remedy available. 
F.  Decisions on appeal shall be effective on the date of the decision and no further administrative appeals may be heard. 
G.  Appeals of requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for review to the Planning Commission with other discretionary land use applications, such as conditional use permits, variances, etc. shall be made in accordance with the appeal process set forth in the El Monte Municipal Code pertaining to the accompanying discretionary land use application in issue. 
(Ord. No. 2813, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
Chapter 17.78 - RECYCLING FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
17.78.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter, and any rules, regulations and specifications adopted pursuant thereof is to control and regulate the recycling of reusable materials. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following words or phrases shall have the meaning specified: 
"Administrative permit" means a permit, issued by the Permit Committee, for a reverse vending machine(s) or a smaller collection facility, which complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
"Bulk reverse vending machine" means a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and will pay by weight instead of by container. A "bulk reverse vending machine" may be permitted in all commercial and industrial zones, subject to the standards enumerated in this chapter and an approved zoning clearance pursuant to Chapter 17.18 of this title. 
"Collection container" means a drop-off box, container, receptacle, trailer or similar facility that accepts textiles, shoes, books and/or other salvageable items of personal property. 
"Collection container, small" means a collection container that occupies no more than eighty-four (84) cubic feet. 
"Collection container, large" means a collection container that occupies more than eighty-four (84) cubic feet. 
"Convenience zones" means an area within a two (2) mile radius of a supermarket. 
"Director" means the Community Development Director or his or her designee. 
"Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A "mobile recycling unit" also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA Section 307, 402, 318, and 405. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Program" is an enforcement mechanism legislated by the Clean Water Act of 1977. 
NPDES permits are issued to municipal and industrial dischargers to ensure that pollutant discharges do not result in violation of water quality standards, EMMC Section 13.20.010. 
"Owner" means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity who or which owns, or otherwise exercises possession and control over the recycling facility or the mobile recycling unit, including any officer, employee, or agent of such person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or entity. 
"Planning Services Manager" means the Planning Services Manager or his or her designee. 
"Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Act of 1986. A "recycling facility" does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following: 
1.  Collection Facility. A "collection facility" is a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from the public. Such facility does not include the power-driven processing equipment. Collection facilities may include the following: 
a.  "Reverse vending machine" means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value of not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A "reverse vending machine" may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three (3) container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. 
"Supermarket" means a full-service, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or more and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 2936, §§ 2—4, 9-18-2018)  
17.78.030 - Permits required. 
No person shall permit the placement, construction, or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. Recycling facilities may be permitted as set forth in the following table: 
Type of Facility Required 	Zones Permitted 	Permit 
Reverse vending machine(s) 	C and M 	Permit Committee 
Small collection 	C and M 	Permit Committee 
 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.040 - Criteria and standards. 
Those recycling facilities permitted with an administrative permit shall meet all of the applicable criteria and standards listed. The Permit Committee may find that the presence of more than one recycling facility in any convenience zone established by the California State Department of Conservation to be an over-concentration of recycling facilities and on this basis the Permit Committee may deny the permit. 
Development standards for recycling facilities are as follows: 
A.  Reverse Vending Machine(s). Reverse vending machine(s) shall require an administrative permit. Reverse vending machines outside a commercial structure, do not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers and may be permitted within the designated commercial or industrial zone with an administrative use permit provided that they comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility, which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes; 
2.  Shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any street-side property line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
3.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use; 
4.  Shall occupy no more than one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight (8) feet in height; 
5.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material; 
6.  Development plans for reverse vending machines shall be submitted to the Planning Services Manager for review and approval prior to installation; 
7.  Proposals for reverse vending machines shall be submitted to the Planning Services Manager for preliminary review prior to submittal for Permit Committee and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a plot plan drawn to scale showing the entire site including all existing structures, and parking stalls, perimeter walls, landscape planters and the proposed location of the reverse vending machine; shall conform to the exterior colors/finish and design themes of the host use; 
8.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative; 
9.  Shall have a sign area of a maximum of four (4) square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions; 
10.  Shall be limited to one machine per host business; 
11.  Shall be maintained in a litter-free condition on a daily basis; 
12.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn. 
B.  Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities may be sited in commercial and industrial zones with an administrative permit provided that they comply with all of the following conditions: 
1.  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility, which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes; 
2.  Shall be no larger than five hundred (500) square feet and occupy no more than five (5) parking spaces, not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers; not including space needed for material removal or transfer; 
3.  Shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any street-side property line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
4.  Shall accept only glass, metal, plastic containers, papers and cardboard; 
5.  Shall use no power-drive processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
6.  Development plans for small collection (recycling) facilities shall be submitted to the Planning Services Manager for review and approval prior to submittal to Permit Committee for review and approval. Permit Committee approval, a certificate of occupancy, business license, and a building permit is required prior installation; 
7.  Proposals for small collection (recycling) facilities shall be submitted to the Planning Services Manager for preliminary review prior to submittal for Permit Committee and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a plot plan drawn to scale showing the entire site including all existing structures, and parking stalls, perimeter walls, landscape planters and the proposed location of the small (collection) recycling facility; a floor plan drawn to scale of the proposed small recycling facility; elevations of the recycling collection facility with all architectural features as well as building material and finish to which shall conform to the exterior colors/finish and design themes of the host use. Small recycling facilities shall be designed and constructed in a manner to conform to design and development specifications. At a minimum, the facility shall conform to the following design guidelines: 
a.  Height shall not exceed twelve (12) feet, 
b.  Roofing material shall be decorative metal seem or similar material, 
c.  Exterior siding shall be a smooth painted finish and weatherproof, 
d.  Signs shall require a separate sign permit and be professional vinyl letters or similar material; 
8.  Shall use containers that are clearly marked to identify the type of recyclables to be deposited. The name and telephone number of the owner or manager of the facility shall be conspicuously posted; 
9.  Shall be covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule; 
10.  Shall store all recyclable materials in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present; 
11.  Shall store all recyclable materials in containers or mobile recycling units, shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present and mobile recycling units must be removed from the site when not operating; 
12.  Shall maintain a dust-free and litter-free condition and shall sweep site on a daily basis. 
13.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required for any concurrent use or any permit issued; 
14.  The facility shall not operate power-driven sorting and consolidating equipment, such as crushers or balers; 
15.  Use the facility for the deposit of solid waste is not permitted; 
16.  If permits expire without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the date following the permit expiration; 
17.  Mobile recycling units, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day; 
18.  Mobile recycling facilities shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during the hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; such hours shall be between nine a.m. to seven p.m. if located within one hundred (100) feet of property zoned or occupied for residential use; 
19.  Shall not exceed noise levels of fifty (50) dBA as measured at the property line of nearest residentially zoned or occupied property; 
20.  Otherwise, shall not exceed sixty-five (65) dBA as measured at the property line; 
21.  Shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use and shall operate only during the hours between nine a.m. and seven p.m.; 
22.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce the number of parking spaces below the minimum required for the primary host unless all the following conditions exist: 
a.  The facility is located in a convenience zone, as designated by the California Department of Conservation; 
b.  The facility is certified by the California Department of Conservation; 
c.  The permit will be considered at the end of twelve (12) months; and 
d.  Parking credits in an established parking facility for a commercial host use may then be granted as follows: 
Required Maximum Parking 	Parking Space Reduction 
0-25 	0 
26-35 	2 
36-49 	3 
50-99 	4 
100+ 	5 
 
23.  Signs may be provided as follows: 
a.  Shall have identification signs with a maximum of ten (10) percent on one side only, in addition to the required informational signs; in the case of a mobile recycling unit, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container; 
b.  Signs must be consistent with the character of the location; 
c.  Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the Planning Services Manager if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
24.  The facility shall not impair any required landscaping by local ordinance for any concurrent use; 
25.  No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed; 
26.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
27.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use; 
28.  To ensure compliance, all improvements required by this section shall be in place prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; 
29.  Small recycling facility shall comply with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Program requirements. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.050 - Nonconforming facilities. 
Recycling facilities which are lawfully in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which are not in compliance are considered nonconforming. Existing and new facilities shall have obtained a building permit within one hundred eighty (180) days at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes law. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.060 - Abatement of facilities. 
A.  Whenever the Community Development Department Director is advised that a recycling facility has been installed or is being maintained in violation of this chapter, the Director shall so notify the person in whose name the recycling facility is registered, or in the absence of such registration, the property owner. Such notice shall state the nature of the violation, the intention to impound the facility if the violation is not corrected or a hearing is not requested before the Director, within seven (7) calendar days after the giving of such notice, and provide the procedure for requesting such a hearing. A timely request for a hearing shall stay any impounding, provided that if the violation is not corrected within five (5) calendar days after the decision at such hearing becomes final, the Director may impound the recycling facility in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
B.  Whenever a recycling facility is impounded pursuant to subsection A of this section, the recycling facility shall be removed by the Director, and stored in any convenient place. The Director shall notify the owner or property owner thereof by mailing a "notice of removal" to the last known address. Such notice shall state the date the facility was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the facility and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director if desired. Any such recycling facility removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty-five (45) calendar days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage therefor. Upon failure of the owner to claim such recycling facility and pay the reasonable charges within forty-five (45) calendar days after the mailing of written notice of removal, such recycling facility shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in the possession of the city and may be disposed of at the discretion of the city. 
C.  Any recycling facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter, which violation creates an immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, and which violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning the recycling facility, may be immediately removed and stored in a convenient location so as to eliminate the danger to the health or safety of the public. The Director shall notify the owner or property owner thereof by mailing a "notice of removal" to the last known address. Such notice shall state the date the facility was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the facility, and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director, if desired. Any such facility removed and stored pursuant to this section shall be released to the owner thereof, if claimed within forty-five (45) calendar days after the mailing of written notice of removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage. Upon failure of the owner to claim such facility and pay the reasonable charges within the forty-five (45) calendar day period, such facility shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the city and may be disposed of. 
D.  Within seven (7) calendar days of the notice of violation, or notice of removal of a facility summarily impounded, the person in whose name the facility is registered, if such registration has been completed or other person who provides satisfactory proof of ownership, may request a hearing before the Director. The request shall be in writing, shall state the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the Director. 
E.  The hearing shall be held within five (5) business days of the filing of the request, unless continued for good cause. At the hearing, any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the facility has violated this chapter. Within two (2) working days after the close of the hearing, the Director shall render a decision in writing. Notice of the decision shall forthwith be given to the person who requested the hearing. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.070 - Appeal of Director's decision. 
A.  The owner may appeal a decision of the Director to the Planning Commission by filing with the Planning Division Secretary a written notice of appeal with respect to such decision within ten (10) calendar days after completion of service of such order of the Commission. The written notice of appeal shall be submitted on a form provided to the applicant by the Planning Division Secretary and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the person filing the appeal and the name, address and telephone number of the owner(s); 
2.  A brief description regarding the applicant's reason for seeking an appeal of the decision of the Director including, if applicable, a brief specification of the contents of the decision of the Director which the applicant contends are inaccurate, unduly burdensome, or unlawful; 
3.  A brief description of the manner in which the owner proposes to resolve any deficiencies in the recycling facilities, if any, including a time schedule for resolving such problems, if applicable; 
4.  Any other relevant information which the applicant may wish to provide to the Planning Commission for its consideration including photographs of the recycling facility or other materials; 
5.  A written notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the following declaration attested by the applicant: 
I declare under penalty of perjury that the factual information contained in the foregoing written Notice of Appeal is true and correct to the best of my knowledge or is based upon information which I believe to be true and correct. I further declare that each and every opinion stated in this Notice of Appeal is stated in good faith. 
6.  A filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to the city shall be submitted to the Planning Division Secretary upon the filing of a written notice of appeal. 
B.  Consideration by the Planning Commission of an Appeal from the Decision of the Director. Appeals shall be reviewed as a regular agenda item. The filing of a written notice of appeal shall stay the effect of the decision of the Director. Upon review of a written notice of appeal, the Planning Commission may by minute order or by resolution deny the appeal, affirm the decision of the Director and reinstate the effective date thereof, or the Planning Commission may set a date for a public hearing on such appeal for the purpose of receiving additional evidence or testimony which is not included in the record of the proceedings of the Director or the written notice of appeal. Notice of such a public hearing shall be transmitted to the person whose name appears on the notice of appeal. The public hearing on the appeal shall be conducted at a regular or adjourned regular meeting of the Planning Commission on a date for which a special meeting has been ordered for consideration of such a matter and the Planning Commission may continue such public hearing from time to time. Upon the close of the public hearing regarding the appeal, the City Council may modify or affirm the decision of the Director and reinstate or modify the effective date thereof. The decision of the Planning Commission with respect to the disposition of a written notice of appeal or any action ordered following a public hearing thereon shall be final and conclusive. In the event that the decision of the Director may be reversed or modified by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission may authorize the refund to the applicant of the filing fee which accompanied the written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.080 - Notice. 
Any notices or written communications which are required by this chapter shall be conclusively deemed received by the owner on the date of personal service or five (5) consecutive days following deposit of the same in the United States mail, certified and properly addressed. All notices shall be sent to the owner's last known address. In the event the owner's contact information changes, owner shall provide the Director an update within three (3) business days. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.090 - Penalties. 
A.  Any owner who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, is punishable as set forth in Section 1.24.010(A) of this Code. 
B.  In lieu of criminal prosecution pursuant to subsection A of this section, an administrative citation may, at the sole discretion of the Director be issued for violation of this chapter. All administrative citations issued pursuant to this subsection shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 1.18 of this Code. 
C.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest an alleged violation of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 1.18 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
17.78.100 - Cumulative effect. 
The provisions of this chapter are cumulative in addition to any and all other procedures or remedies provided in ordinances of the city or by state law for the abatement of, or prosecutions for, nuisances, and proceedings for abatement pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice nor affect any other action, whether civil, criminal, equitable or administrative, for the abatement or other remedy of such conditions. Without limitation upon the foregoing, violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be, and are, enforceable under the provisions of Chapter 1.18 (Administrative Citations) of this Code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to invalidate, supersede, or render ineffective any other provision of this Code or any ordinance of this city. Neither the inclusion nor the failure to include, under the terms of this chapter, any act or condition otherwise in violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of this city, unlawful or constituting a nuisance, shall be deemed to render such act or condition lawful. 
(Ord. 2648 § 1 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 17.79 - COLLECTION CONTAINERS 
Sections: 
 
17.79.010 - Purpose. 
The city has experienced a proliferation of collection containers and their placement in required parking spaces, required landscaped areas, and residential zoning districts of the city, often without the property owner's permission. The proliferation of these containers contribute to visual clutter; and in areas throughout the state, collection containers have contributed to blight due to graffiti and poor maintenance, and the accumulation of debris and excess items outside of the collection containers. They can also interfere with the proper collection of data concerning the diversion of waste within the city from landfills. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public and protect the property rights of the owners of the parcels on which the collection containers are located by providing minimum blight-related performance standards for the operation of collection containers, including establishing criteria to ensure that: 
A.  Material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the collection containers; 
B.  The collection containers remain free of graffiti and blight; 
C.  The collection containers are maintained in sanitary conditions; 
D.  The collection containers are not placed without the approval of property owners; 
E.  The collection containers are placed appropriately and in locations approved pursuant to this Code; and 
F.  Contact information is readily available so that the operators can be contacted if there are any blight-related questions or concerns, and that operators properly report information concerning the diversion of materials from landfills. This section regulates the size, number, placement, installation and maintenance of collection containers, as is necessary to accomplish the foregoing purposes. 
These content neutral regulations are also intended to respect and observe that collection containers provide a channel of communication deserving of First Amendment protection. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.020 - Definitions. 
The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meanings and definitions as set forth in 17.78.020 of the code. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.030 - Conflicting Provisions. 
Where a conflict exists between the regulations or requirements in this chapter and applicable regulations or requirements contained in other sections of the code, the applicable regulations or requirements of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  Collection containers that are located within an entirely enclosed and lawfully constructed and permitted building or otherwise cannot be seen from outside of the boundaries of the property on which the containers are located, provided that such collection containers satisfy the operational requirements set forth below. 
B.  Refuse or recycling containers that comply with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.050 - Application form. 
The initial application form shall include the following: 
A.  The signatures of the property owner and the operator of the collection container, acknowledging that they will be equally responsible for compliance with all applicable laws and conditions related to the collection containers for which they are seeking approval. 
B.  A non-refundable initial application fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone number of the operator of the collection container and property owner on which the collection container is to be located, including 24-hour contact information. 
D.  A vicinity map showing: 
1.  The proposed location of the collection containers; and 
2.  The distance between the site and all existing collection containers within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed location for the collection containers. 
E.  Photographs of the location and adjacent properties. 
F.  A site plan containing: 
1.  Location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries; 
2.  Location of all buildings; 
3.  Proposed collection container location; 
4.  Distance between the proposed collection container and parcel lines and buildings; and 
5.  Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed driveways, garages, carports, parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, pavement and striping/marking. 
G.  Elevations showing the appearance, materials, and dimensions of the collection container, including the information required in this section to be placed on the collection container and notice sign. 
H.  A description and/or diagram of the proposed locking mechanism of the collection container. 
I.  A maintenance plan (including graffiti removal, pick-up schedule, and litter and trash removal on and around the collection container). 
J.  Any other information regarding time, place, and manner of the collection container's operation, placement, and maintenance that is reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposal's consistency with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.060 - Permit expiration and renewal. 
A permit issued under this section shall expire and become null and void annually on the anniversary of its date of issuance, unless renewed prior to its expiration. An application for renewal must be submitted prior to the expiration of the permit on a form provided by the Economic Development Department, and shall include: 
A.  The signatures of the property owner and the operator of the collection container, acknowledging that they will be equally responsible for compliance with all applicable laws and conditions related to the collection containers for which they are seeking approval; 
B.  A non-refundable renewal application fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council; 
C.  Photographs of the location and adjacent properties taken within ten (10) days of the submittal of the renewal application; 
D.  A detailed description of any information that is different from the information submitted on the previous application; and 
E.  Any other information regarding time, place, and manner of the collection container's operation, placement, and maintenance that is reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposal's consistency with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.070 - Decision on application. 
A.  The Economic Development Director or designee shall make reasonable efforts to approve or deny an application within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a completed application. 
B.  The Economic Development Director shall approve the application if all of the following are true, otherwise the Economic Development Director may deny the application: 
1.  The applicant has submitted a complete, fully executed and accurate application accompanied by the applicable fee; 
2.  The property on which the collection container is to be located has been free of graffiti (as defined in subsection (e) of California Government Code Section 53069.3 or any successor statute) for at least six (6) months prior to the submission of the application; 
3.  The property on which the collection container is to be located has been free of any conditions constituting a public nuisance (as defined in section 8.44 of this Code) for at least six (6) months prior to submission of the application; 
4.  The applicant is neither currently in violation of, nor has not been found in violation of this section or of this Code within one year prior to submission of the application; and 
5.  The application will be in compliance with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The Economic Development Director shall mail written notice to the applicant of the Economic Development Director's decision by First Class United States mail, addressed to the applicant at the address provided on the application. If the application is denied, or approved subject to conditions, the notice shall set forth the reasons for the denial or conditions, as well as the facts supporting the reasons. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.080 - Regulations. 
A.  Location of containers. 
1.  Collection containers shall be located only in the C-2, C-3, C-4 zoning districts, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
2.  No collection container shall be located within five hundred (500) feet from any other collection container. The separation shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest part of one facility to the closest part of the other facility. 
3.  No collection container shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned parcel. The separation shall be measured from the closest part of the facility to the residential property line. 
4.  No collection container shall be located on a vacant property. 
5.  No collection container shall be located on or within: 
a.  The public right-of-way (including sidewalks); 
b.  A required landscaping area; 
c.  A required parking space; 
d.  A required building setback area; and 
e.  Within twenty (20) feet of a street fronting property line. 
B.  No collection container shall be located in or block or impede access to any: 
1.  Required parking or driveway areas; 
2.  Pedestrian routes; 
3.  Emergency vehicle routes; 
4.  Building ingress and egress; 
5.  Required disabled access routes; 
6.  Required easements; 
7.  Trash enclosure areas or access to trash bins or trash enclosures; 
8.  Any place that would impede the functioning of exhaust, ventilation, or fire extinguishing systems. 
C.  No more than one collection container shall be located on any parcel. 
D.  No collection container shall be located on a parcel containing a residential use. 
E.  Physical Attributes. All collection containers, shall: 
1.  Be fabricated of durable and waterproof materials; 
2.  Be placed on ground that is paved with durable cement; 
3.  Have a tamper-resistant locking mechanism for all collection openings; 
4.  Not be electrically or hydraulically powered or otherwise mechanized; 
5.  Not be considered a fixture of the site or an improvement to real property. 
F.  A small collection container shall be no taller than seven (7) feet above the finished grade of the parcel on which it is located. 
G.  Small collection containers shall have the following information conspicuously displayed in at least two (2) inch type visible from the front on the collection container: 
1.  The name, address, 24-hour telephone number, and, if available, the Internet Web address, and email address of the operator of the collection container and the agent for the property owner; 
2.  The type of material that may be deposited; 
3.  A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the collection container; and 
4.  A sticker, certificate or other form of identification from the Planning Division with the permit number and date of city approval or inspection. 
H.  Large collection containers shall have the following information conspicuously displayed in at least four-inch type visible on all sides of the collection container: 
1.  The name, address, 24-hour telephone number, and, if available, the Internet Web address, and email address of the operator of the collection container and the agent for the property owner; 
2.  The type of material that may be deposited; 
3.  A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the collection container; and 
4.  A statement that no items may be left for collection unless an attendant is on duty. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.090 - Maintenance and operation. 
A.  No overflow collection items, litter, debris or dumped materials shall be allowed to accumulate within twenty (20) feet of any collection container. 
B.  Collection containers shall be maintained and in good working order, and free from graffiti, removed or damaged signs and notifications, peeling paint, rust, and broken collection operating mechanisms. 
C.  Collection containers shall be serviced not less than weekly between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends. This servicing includes maintenance of the container, the removal of collected material and abatement of any graffiti, litter, or nuisance condition as defined in of this Code. 
D.  The operator shall maintain an active email address and a 24-hour telephone service with recording capability for the public to register complaints. 
E.  Any conditions that are in violation of this section must be remedied or abated within forty-eight (48) hours of being reported to the operator or property owner. 
F.  Collection containers cannot be used for the collection of solid waste and/or any hazardous materials except as authorized by of this Code or other applicable law. 
G.  The operators of the collection containers shall report all tonnage collected within city limits on an annual basis by June 1 of the following year to the public works department (pursuant to the requirements of Integrated Waste Management Act, (AB 939, Chapter 1095, Statutes of 1989) and the Per Capita Disposal Measurement Act of 2008 (Chapter 343, Statutes of 2008 [Wiggins, SB 1016] and SB 1016, the Per Capita Disposal Measurement System i) and any related successor laws or regulations in order to properly account for the city's waste diversion and recycling efforts. 
H.  Large collection containers shall have an attendant present at the container at all times that items are being received. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.100 - Permit revocations. 
A.  The Economic Development Director may revoke a permit if: 
1.  The collection container pertaining to the permit is not operated or maintained in accordance with this chapter; 
2.  The permittee submitted materially false or misleading information during the application process; or 
3.  The permittee or an employee or agent of permittee knowingly operated the collection container when the permittee's permit was suspended or otherwise invalid. 
B.  Upon revocation of a permit, the operator of the collection container for which such permit was revoked shall not be issued a permit for the siting of a collection container on the same property subject to the revocation for a period of one year from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
17.79.110 - Appeals. 
Decisions of the Economic Development Director shall be appealable to the Planning Commission upon the filing of an appeal with the Secretary of the Planning Commission and payment of the requisite appeal fee within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the Economic Development Director's decision. The decision of the Planning Commission on such appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2936, § 5, 9-18-2018)  
Chapter 17.80 - SP-1 (EL MONTE GATEWAY SPECIFIC PLAN)[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2780, § 3, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, changed the title of Ch. 17.80 from "SP-1 (Transit Village Specific Plan)" to "SP-1 (El Monte Gateway Specific Plan" and changed all references to "Transit Village" in this Code to "El Monte Gateway." 
 
17.80.010 - Adoption. 
A.  The City Council makes the following findings with respect to the adoption of the El Monte gateway specific plan: 
1.  The property proposed to be included in the specific plan area has site characteristics such as topography, location, or surroundings that are enhanced by special land use and development standards. The site has several unique characteristics. It is bounded by Santa Anita Avenue, Interstate 10, and the Rio Hondo Channel and is physically distinct from surrounding areas. There are no private residences or business that must be relocated. In addition, there is a major regional bus station at the center of the site. The site will support high-density, mixed-use, transit-oriented development that is not currently allowed in the El Monte Municipal Code. 
2.  The El Monte gateway specific plan contains revisions which are consistent with the goals, policies, and vision of the 1991 city general plan as amended by this chapter. The land use element of the general plan designates the specific plan site as an "urban core" use. With the concurrent adoption of a proposed general plan amendment addressing conforming development standards in the general plan to those contained in the specific plan, the specific plan is consistent with the general plan. 
3.  The implementation of the specific plan shall result in development of desirable character and use types that will be compatible with existing and proposed development in the surrounding neighborhood and that will promote higher rates of public mass transit utilization by city residents. The mixed-use nature of the specific plan area, including the location of street level retail and institutional uses on the west side of Santa Anita Avenue, is compatible with similar uses located on the east side of Santa Anita. 
4.  The implementation of the specific plan shall contribute to a balance of land uses throughout the city. Due to the mixed-use nature of the specific plan area, various uses, including residential, institutional, retail, commercial, entertainment, hotel, public open space, institutional, and public mass transit uses are incorporated into a master planned village environment, providing a balance on the site. 
5.  Furthermore, the adoption and implementation of the specific plan shall promote comprehensive planning for quality land development, with a viable program for building the infrastructure necessary to support it; it encourages a more efficient use of the land; it encourages a range of housing and employment activities so as to give imagination and variety in the physical development pattern of the city; it encourages the implementation of sustainable community design principles as well as use of renewable construction materials and incorporation of environmentally friendly design concepts; and it facilitates development within the city in accordance with the general plan by permitting greater flexibility and encouraging more creative design development projects. 
B.  The City Council approves the El Monte gateway specific plan in the form of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as submitted to the Planning Commission, as such July 20, 2007 draft text is modified by the other sections of this chapter, subject to further modifications to the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as set forth in subsection C below. 
C.  The City Council notes that supplemental motions of the recommendation of the Planning Commission require the City Council to approve certain technical further amendments to the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as noted below in this subsection: 
1.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 1, the City Council approves: 
a.  The editorial revisions to specific plan Table 4-1 (page 4-2 of the specific plan); 
b.  The editorial revision to specific plan Map 4-2; 
c.  The editorial revisions to specific plan Table 4-2 (at pages 4-8 and 4-9 of the specific plan); and 
d.  The editorial revisions to specific plan Section 4.1.2.E (at page 4-10 of the specific plan), all as set forth in the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan. 
2.  The City Council does not accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission under its supplemental motion number 2, and the City Council reinstates and approves the text of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as relates to this item in the form as originally submitted to the Planning Commission. 
3.  The City Council does not accept the portion of the recommendation of the Planning Commission under its supplemental motion number 3 as relates to a sixty (60) dwelling-unit-per-acre density calculation, and the City Council reinstates and approves the text of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as relates to this item in the form as originally submitted to the Planning Commission. 
4.  The City Council does not accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission supplemental motion number 4, and the City Council modifies Section 6.18.B the text of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan to read as follows: 
(B) Establishment of Specific Plan Conformity Review Committee for the Specific Plan. 
Upon adoption of this Specific Plan, the City of El Monte shall form a Specific Plan Conformity Review Committee ("CRC") for the purpose of reviewing each subsequent development project proposal within the boundaries of the Specific Plan area. The CRC shall consist of five (5) members appointed as follows: 
• Two (2) members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed to the CRC by the City Council as the regular members of the CRC, plus two (2) other members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council to serve as alternate members of the CRC in the event of the absence of one or more of the regular members of the CRC appointed by the City Council; 
• The City Manager shall designate one (1) member to serve on the CRC; 
• The Deputy City Manager for Community Development shall designate one (1) member to serve on the CRC; 
• The Redevelopment Director shall designate one (1) member to serve on the CRC. 
At the discretion of the City Council, ex officio members may be appointed to the CRC from time-to-time for the purpose of providing additional guidance to the CRC. All meetings of the CRC shall be open to the public and shall adhere to the Brown Act. Upon the completion of its review, the CRC shall submit its recommendation and written report for each development project proposal to the Planning Commission. Voting procedures of the CRC for the purpose of submitting a recommendation of approval to the Planning Commission for each development project application shall be unanimous vote of the members of the CRC participating. 
1. Duties of the CRC. 
Subsequent to the adoption of the Specific Plan. The CRC shall be granted the authority to review individual development applications to ensure consistency with the standards and guidelines expressed in this Specific Plan. 
2. Review of Development Project Applications by the CRC. 
The CRC shall be granted the authority to make a recommendation to the Planning Commission that the design concept each individual development project application meets the spirit and intent of the Specific Plan. 
3. Action by CRC. 
No recommendation for approval of a development project application may be issued by the CRC except by the majority vote of the members of the CRC. If any development project application reviewed by the CRC is not recommended for approval by majority vote of the members of the CRC, then such development project application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for action and consideration without a recommendation for approval by the CRC. If a development project application is not recommended for approval by a majority vote of the CRC then the members of the CRC shall prepare a written report addressed to the applicant and the Planning Commission which sets forth the reasons the CRC does not recommend the approval of the particular development project permit application. 
4. Development project application filing, processing and review. Each development project application for any development project to be undertaken within the Specific Plan area shall be reviewed by the CRC, and following such review by the CRC, by the Planning Commission, using the same procedure as set forth in Chapter 16, Chapter 17.22 and Chapter 17.24, as applicable, of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
5. The recommendation of the CRC as submitted to the Planning Commission with regard to each development project application is advisory in nature and is subject to the independent review of the Planning Commission. 
5.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 5, the City Council notes that the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan has been edited to eliminate the "minor CUP procedure," and accordingly, the City Council approves Table 6-1 of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as Table 6-1 of the specific plan. 
6.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 6, the City Council notes that the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan (at pages 2-1 through 2-3), includes a statement of the objectives of the specific plan, and accordingly, the City Council approves Section 2.1 of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as Section 2.1 of the specific plan. 
7.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 7, the City Council notes the specific provisions of the general plan amendment as set forth in Section 4(c)(2) of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the final text of Section 4.1.1.F, of the specific plan as approved by the city under Section 6(c)(3)(B) of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
8.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 8, the City Council modifies Section 6.18.D of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan to add a new first sentence to Section 6.18.D to read as follows: 
Prior to the submission by an applicant of a development project permit application to the City, the applicant shall conduct intrusive soil testing and sampling (a "Phase II environmental assessment") of the development project site proposed to be improved under such development project permit application, to preliminarily assess whether contaminating or hazardous substances or petroleum product residual compounds may be present in the soils at concentrations in excess of applicable maximum contamination levels for each such contaminating or hazardous substances or petroleum product compound and the results of such a Phase II environmental assessment shall be delivered to the City by the applicant as part of each development project permit application. 
The City Council further amends the first sentence of Section 6.18.D of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan to read as follows: 
Prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit for any portion of the lands included within the Specific Plan area, including lands within the Parks and Open Space Sub District, an applicant shall submit a further written plan to the City for conducting a Phase II environmental assessment of the lands proposed for development consistent with the findings set forth in PEIR Appendix 8 and ASTM guidelines and any specific findings obtained as a result of the initial Phase II environmental assessment described in the first sentence of this Section 6.18.D. 
As modified by Section 6(c)(8)(B) of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City Council approves Section 6.18.D of the specific plan. 
9.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 9, the City Council notes that Chapter 5 of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan contains the edits which are referred to in the July 30, 2007 City Planning Division staff report. The City Council further notes that adoption of the final text of Chapter 5 of the specific plan (Design Guidelines) shall be accomplished by approval of a separate resolution of the City Council following the adoption of this chapter which shall incorporate certain additional technical and conforming revisions to Chapter 5 of the specific plan as recommended by the city staff to the City Council after July 30, 2007. 
10.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 10, the City Council notes that the CEQA errata sheet for the FEIR as approved by the City Council at the public hearing preceeding the adoption of this chapter, corrects the misstatement contained in draft PEIR Section 3.2.3.3 (fire station relocation). The City Council adds a new Section 7.11 to the specific plan to read as follows: 
7.11 City Fire Station No. 166 
In the event that the use or development of the Park and Open Space Sub District by the City or the Agency may require the relocation of the fire suppression and emergency rescue service operations at City Fire Station No. 166 to a new location, either inside the Specific Plan area or outside of the Specific Plan area, no such relocation of fire suppression and emergency rescue service operations and/or a change in the use of the existing fire station building at City Fire Station No. 166 shall occur until such time as both: (i) a new location for City Fire Station No. 166 operations has been approved by the City Council, in consultation with Los Angeles County Consolidated Fire Protection District following a public hearing, and (ii) a new fire suppression and emergency rescue facility for City Fire Station No. 166 is fully operational and available for occupying by the fire department at its new location. 
11.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 11, the City Council adds a new Section 7.12 to the Specific Plan to read as follows: 
7.12 City Public Works Yard 
The development and use of the Rio Paseo Village within the Mixed Use Sub District for transit oriented development will require the relocation of the City Public Works Yard from its current location on Santa Anita Avenue to a new location either inside the Specific Plan area or outside of the Specific Plan area. No such relocation shall occur of the City Public Works Yard operations shall occur until such time as both: (i) a new location for the City Public Works Yard operation has been approved by the City Council following a public hearing and (ii) City Public Works Yard operations facilities are available for occupancy by the City at the new location by the City. 
12.  The City Council does not accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission under its supplemental motion number 12, and the City Council reinstates and approves the text of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan as relates to this item in the form as originally submitted to the Planning Commission. 
13.  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 13, the City Council approves a modification of specific plan Map 4-2, to indicate that the proposed "linear public park area" be depicted on specific plan Map 4-2 as being included within the parks and open space subdistrict, and that such linear public park area as depicted on specific plan Map 4-2 have an approximate land area of one and eighty-four hundredths (1.84) acres. 
14.  The City Council does not accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission under its supplemental motion number 14, and the City Council adds a new Section 6.12.C.2.1 to the specific plan to read as follows: 
2.1 Residential Dwelling Unit Minimum Size 
Minimum interior building areas for residential dwelling units shall be as follows: 
(i) studio unit not less than 500 sq. feet; 
(ii) senior unit (age covenant restricted) not less than 500 sq. feet; 
(iii) one (1) bedroom: not less than 600 sq. feet; 
(iv) two (2) bedroom: not less than 750 sq. feet; 
(v) three (3) bedrooms: not less than 1,100 sq. feet. 
(15)  In light of Planning Commission supplemental motion number 15, the City Council notes that the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan contains the automotive related use CUP provision as recommended by the Planning Commission. 
(16)  The City Council does not accept the recommendation of the Planning Commission under its supplemental motion number 16, and the City Council reinstates and approves the text of the mitigation monitoring and reporting program as relates to this item in the form as originally submitted to the Planning Commission on July 30, 2007. 
D.  The provisions of Chapter 5 of the specific plan, as approved, shall not be further implemented following the adoption of this chapter until such time as the City Council has adopted a separate Resolution ratifying and approving the final technical and conforming changes to the text of Chapter 5 of the specific plan as approved upon the adoption of this chapter. Following the adoption of such a resolution by the City Council, Chapter 5 may be amended from time to time following applicable notice and public hearing by the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
E.  Within thirty (30) days following the introduction and adoption of this chapter, the Planning Services Manager shall cause the text of the July 20, 2007 draft text of the specific plan to be revised to contain the appropriate final edits as mandated by this chapter. The Planning Services Manager shall add an appropriate editorial note on the cover page of the specific plan that states that the printed text of the specific plan as on file with the city as the official final version of such document includes the textual revisions as mandated by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2703 § 6, 2007)  
Chapter 17.81 - SP-4 (DOWNTOWN TRANSIT-ORIENTED DISTRICT SPECIFIC PLAN) 
 
17.81.010 - Adoption. 
A.  The City Council makes the following findings with respect to the adoption of the Downtown El Monte Transit-Oriented District Specific Plan: 
1.  The property proposed to be included in the specific plan area has site characteristics such as topography, location, or surroundings that are enhanced by special land use and development standards. The site has several unique characteristics. It is bounded by Santa Anita Avenue, Ramona Boulevard, and the Metrolink tracks and is physically distinct from surrounding areas. There are no private residences or business that must be relocated. In addition, there is a major regional bus station adjacent to the site on the west. The site will support high-density, mixed-use, transit-oriented development that is not currently allowed in the El Monte Municipal Code. 
2.  The Downtown El Monte Transit-Oriented District Specific Plan contains revisions which are consistent with the goals, policies, and vision of the 2011 City General Plan as amended by this chapter. The land use element of the general plan designates the specific plan site as a "Downtown Core" use. With the concurrent adoption of a proposed General Plan Amendment addressing conforming development standards in the general plan to those contained in the specific plan, the specific plan is consistent with the general plan. 
3.  The implementation of the specific plan shall result in development of desirable character and use types that will be compatible with existing and proposed development in the surrounding neighborhood and that will promote higher rates of public mass transit utilization by city residents. The mixed-use nature of the specific plan area, including the location of street level retail and multiple-family residential uses, is compatible with the regional bus facility and Metro tracks located in proximity to the specific plan area. 
4.  The implementation of the specific plan shall contribute to a balance of land uses throughout the city. Due to the mixed-use nature of the specific plan area, various uses, including residential, institutional, retail, commercial, entertainment, hotel, public open space, institutional, and public mass transit uses are incorporated into a master planned village environment, providing a balance of land uses in the area. 
5.  Furthermore, the adoption and implementation of the specific plan shall promote comprehensive planning for quality land development, with a viable program for building the infrastructure necessary to support it; it encourages more efficient use of the land; it encourages a range of housing and employment opportunities so as to give variety in the physical development pattern of the city; it encourages the implementation of sustainable community design principles as well as use of renewable construction materials and incorporation of environmentally friendly design concepts; and it facilitates development within the city in accordance with the general plan by permitting greater flexibility and encouraging more creative design development projects. 
B.  The City Council approves the El Monte Downtown Transit-Oriented Development Specific Plan in the form of the draft text of the specific plan as submitted to the City Council on April 4, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 2909, § 5, 4-18-2017; Ord. No. 2928, § 28, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 17.82 - NEW AND SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGED WIRELESS FACILITIES[6] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2930, § 2, adopted August 7, 2018, in effect, repealed ch. 17.82, §§ 17.82.010—17.82.165 and enacted a new ch. 17.82 as set out herein. Former ch. 17.82 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2739, adopted March 17, 2009; and Ord. No. 2923, adopted September 5, 2017; 
 
17.82.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The City of El Monte intends this Chapter 17.82 to establish reasonable, uniform and comprehensive standards and procedures for wireless facilities deployment, construction, installation, collocation, modification, operation, relocation and removal within the city's territorial boundaries, consistent with and to the extent permitted under federal and California state law. The standards and procedures contained in this chapter are intended to, and should be applied to, protect and promote public health, safety and welfare, and also balance the benefits that flow from robust, advanced wireless services with the city's local values, which include without limitation the aesthetic character of the city, its neighborhoods and community. This chapter is also intended to reflect and promote the community interest to (1) ensure that the balance between public and private interest is maintained on a case-by-case basis; (2) protect the city's visual character from potential adverse impacts or visual blight created or exacerbated by telecommunications infrastructure; (3) protect and preserve the city's environmental resources; and (4) promote access to high-quality, advanced telecommunication services for the city's residents, businesses and visitors. 
B.  This chapter is not intended to, nor shall it be interpreted or applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit any personal wireless service provider's ability to provide personal wireless services; (2) prohibit or effectively prohibit any entity's ability to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service, subject to any competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory rules, regulations or other legal requirements for rights-of-way management; (3) unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; (4) deny any request for authorization to place, construct or modify personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such wireless facilities comply with the FCC's regulations concerning such emissions; (5) prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not deny under federal or California state law; (6) impose any unfair, unreasonable, discriminatory or anticompetitive fees that exceed the reasonable cost to provide the services for which the fee is charged; or (7) otherwise authorize the city to preempt any applicable federal or California law. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.020 - Definitions. 
The abbreviations, phrases, terms and words used in this chapter will have the meanings assigned to them in this Section 17.82.020 or, as may be appropriate, in Section 17.04.020 (Definitions), as may be amended from time to time, unless context indicates otherwise. Undefined phrases, terms or words in this section will have the meanings assigned to them in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as may be amended from time to time, and, if not defined therein, will have their ordinary meanings. In the event that any definition assigned to any phrase, term or word in this section conflicts with any federal or state-mandated definition, the federal or state-mandated definition will control. 
A.  "Approval authority" means the commission or official responsible for review of permit applications and vested with the authority to approve or deny such applications. The approval authority for a conditional use permit is the Planning Commission or, on appeal, the City Council. The approval authority for an administrative wireless permit is the Economic Development Director or, on appeal, the Planning Commission. The approval authority for a temporary wireless permit is the Economic Development Director or, on appeal, the City Manager. The foregoing notwithstanding, the approval authority for administrative wireless permits or temporary wireless permits relating to wireless facilities within the public rights-of-way is the Public Works Director, or on appeal, the Planning Commission or City Manager, respectively. 
B.  "Base station" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(1), as may be amended, which defines that term as a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(9) or any equipment associated with a tower. The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks). The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section, supports or houses equipment described in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(1)(i)-(ii) that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this section, does not support or house equipment described in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(1)(i)-(ii). 
C.  "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of El Monte, or the City Manager's designee. 
D.  "Concealed" or "concealment" means camouflaging techniques that integrate the transmission equipment into the surrounding natural and/or built environment such that the average, untrained observer cannot directly view the equipment but would likely recognize the existence of the wireless facility or concealment technique. Camouflaging concealment techniques include, but are not limited to: (1) facade or rooftop mounted pop-out screen boxes; (2) antennas mounted within a radome above a streetlight; (3) equipment cabinets in the public rights-of-way painted or wrapped to match the background; and (4) an isolated or standalone faux-tree. 
E.  "CPCN" means a "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" granted by the CPUC or its duly appointed successor agency pursuant to California Public Utilities Code §§ 1001 et seq., as may be amended. 
F.  "CPUC" means the California Public Utilities Commission established in the California Constitution, Article XII, § 5, or its duly appointed successor agency. 
G.  "Economic Development Director" or "Director" means the Economic Development Director of the City of El Monte, or the Economic Development Director's designee. When used in the context of applications related to wireless facilities on private property, the Director refers to the Economic Development Director. 
H.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or its duly appointed successor agency. 
I.  "FCC Shot Clock" means the reasonable time frame within which the city generally must act on a given wireless application, as defined by the FCC and as may be amended from time to time. 
J.  "OTARD" means any over-the-air reception device subject to 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.4000 et seq., as may be amended, and which includes satellite television dishes not greater than one meter in diameter. 
K.  "Personal wireless services" means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services. 
L.  "Personal wireless service facilities" means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as facilities that provide personal wireless services. 
M.  "Planning Commission" means the Planning Commission of the City of El Monte. 
N.  "Planning Division" means the Planning Division of the Economic Development Department of the City of El Monte or its duly appointed successor agency. 
O.  "Public Works Department" means the Public Works Department of the City of El Monte or its duly appointed successor agency. 
P.  "Public Works Director" or "Director" means the Public Works and Utilities Director of the City of El Monte, or the Public Works Director's designee. When used in the context of applications related to wireless facilities in the public right-of-way, the Director refers to the Public Works Director. 
Q.  "RF" means radio frequency or electromagnetic waves generally between thirty (30) kHz and three hundred (300) GHz in the electromagnetic spectrum range. 
R.  "Routine maintenance and repair" means work performed solely to maintain or repair the existing transmission equipment approved in accordance with the regulatory approvals or permits required at the time the subject wireless facility was constructed or modified. As an illustration, routine maintenance and repair includes fixing the internal components of damaged, inoperable or malfunctioning transmission equipment or replacing such equipment with new equipment of the same make, model and size of the equipment being replaced. Maintenance or repair that involves adding any new transmission equipment, increasing the size or dimensions of any existing transmission equipment, or implementing technology upgrades shall not be considered routine. 
S.  "Section 6409" means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), as may be amended. 
T.  "Stealth" means concealment techniques that completely screen all transmission equipment from public view and integrate the transmission equipment with the surrounding natural and/or built environment such that, given the particular context, the average, untrained observer does not recognize the existence of the wireless facility or concealment technique. These facilities are so integrated and well-hidden that the average, untrained observed would need special knowledge to recognize their existence. Stealth concealment techniques include, but are not limited to: (1) transmission equipment placed completely within existing architectural features such that the installation causes no visible change to the underlying structure and (2) new architectural features that mimic the underlying building in architectural style, physical proportion and quality of construction materials. Architectural features commonly used as stealth concealment include, but are not limited to, church steeples, cupolas, bell towers, clock towers, pitched faux-roofs, water tanks and flagpoles. Further, whether a wireless facility qualifies as a stealth facility depends on the context that exists at a given location and is evaluated on a case-by-case basis. 
U.  "Temporary wireless facilities" means portable wireless facilities intended or used to provide personal wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis, such as a large-scale special event in which more users than usual gather in a confined location or when a disaster disables permanent wireless facilities. Temporary wireless facilities include, without limitation, cells-on-wheels ("COWs"), sites-on-wheels ("SOWs"), cells-on-light-trucks ("COLTs") or other similarly portable wireless facilities not permanently affixed to site on which is located. 
V.  "Tower" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b)(9), as may be amended, which defines that term as any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. Examples include, but are not limited to, monopoles (i.e., a bare, unconcealed pole solely intended to support wireless transmission equipment), mono-trees and lattice towers. 
W.  "Transmission equipment" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(8), as may be amended, which defines that term as equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
X.  "Wireless" means any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.030 - Applicability. 
A.  Applicable Wireless Facilities. This chapter applies to all existing wireless facilities within the city and all applications and requests for approval to construct, install, modify, collocate, relocate or otherwise deploy wireless facilities in the city, whether located or proposed to be located on private property or in the public right-of-way, unless exempted under Section 17.82.030(B) (Exempt Wireless Facilities) or governed under Chapter 17.83 (Eligible Facilities Requests) pursuant to Section 17.82.030(C) (Requests for Approval Pursuant to Section 6409). 
B.  Exempt Wireless Facilities. Notwithstanding the provisions in Section 17.82.030(A) (Applicable Wireless Facilities), the provisions in this chapter will not be applicable to: (1) wireless facilities owned and operated by the city for public purposes; (2) wireless facilities installed on city property located outside the public right-of-way (3) wireless facilities installed on city property in the public right-of-way pursuant to a valid master license agreement with the city; (4) amateur radio facilities; (5) OTARD antennas; (6) wireless facilities installed completely indoors and intended to extend signals for personal wireless services in a personal residence or a business (such as a femtocell or indoor distributed antenna system); (7) wireless facilities or equipment owned and operated by CPUC-regulated electric companies for use in connection with electrical power generation, transmission and distribution facilities subject to CPUC General Order 131-D; and (8) routine maintenance and repair performed on existing wireless facilities. 
C.  Request for Approval Pursuant to Section 6409. Any requests for approval to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station submitted pursuant to Section 6409 will be first reviewed under Chapter 17.83 (Eligible Facilities Requests). Qualifying requests for Section 6409 approval will not be subject to an administrative wireless permit or conditional use permit under Section 17.82.040. To the extent that the applicant's request does not qualify for approval under Section 6409, the applicant may submit the same or a substantially similar application for approval under this chapter. 
D.  Special Provisions for Small Wireless Facilities. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter 17.82, including any exemption under Section 17.82.030.B., all small wireless facilities, as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(1), as may be amended or superseded, are subject to a permit, as specified in a City Council policy to be adopted by City Council resolution. All small wireless facilities shall comply with the City Council's policy. If the policy is repealed, an application for a small wireless facility shall be processed pursuant to this Chapter 17.82. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018; Ord. No. 2940, § 3, 1-8-2019)  
17.82.040 - Required approvals. 
A.  Administrative Wireless Permit. An administrative wireless permit, subject to the approval authority's prior review and approval in accordance with the procedures and standards in this chapter, is required for: 
1.  All new wireless facilities and collocations, modifications or other changes to existing wireless facilities located in the public rights-of-way on non-residential used or zoned property; 
2.  All new stealth wireless facilities; 
3.  All collocations, modifications or other changes to existing stealth facilities. 
B.  Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use permit, subject to the Planning Commission's prior review and approval in accordance with the procedures and standards in Chapter 17.24 (Conditional Use Permits), is required for: 
1.  All new wireless facilities and collocations, modifications or other changes to existing wireless facilities that require a limited exception pursuant to Section 17.82.070(C) (Limited Exception for Personal Wireless Service Facilities); 
2.  All new wireless facilities and collocations, modifications or other changes to existing wireless facilities not subject to an administrative wireless permit. 
C.  Temporary Wireless Permit. A temporary wireless permit, subject to the approval authority's prior review and approval in accordance with the procedures and standards in Section 17.82.110 (Temporary Wireless Facilities), is required for any temporary wireless facility, unless deployed in connection with an emergency pursuant to Section 17.82.110.B. (Temporary Wireless Facilities for Emergencies). 
D.  Other Permits and Regulatory Approvals. In addition to any conditional use permit, administrative wireless permit, temporary wireless permit or other permit or approval required under this chapter, the applicant must obtain all other permits and regulatory approvals as may be required by any other federal, state or local government agencies, which includes without limitation other any permits and/or regulatory approvals issued by other departments or divisions within the city. Furthermore, any permit or approval granted under this chapter or deemed granted or deemed approved by law shall remain subject to any and all lawful conditions and/or legal requirements associated with such other permits or regulatory approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.050 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application Required. The approval authority shall not approve any request for a conditional use permit, administrative wireless permit or temporary wireless permit except upon a duly filed application consistent with this Section 17.82.050 and any other written rules the city or the Director may establish from time to time in any publicly-stated format. 
B.  Application Content. All applications for a conditional use permit, administrative wireless permit or temporary wireless permit must include all the information and materials required by the Director for the application. The City Council authorizes the Director to develop, publish and from time to time update or amend permit application requirements, forms, checklists, guidelines, informational handouts and other related materials that the Director finds necessary, appropriate or useful for processing any application governed under this Chapter. The City Council further authorizes the Director to establish other reasonable rules and regulations, which may include without limitation regular hours for appointments with applicants, as the Director deems necessary or appropriate to organize, document and manage the application intake process. All such rules and regulations must be in written form and publicly stated to provide applicants with prior notice. 
C.  Procedures for a Duly Filed Application. Any application for a conditional use permit or administrative wireless permit will not be considered duly filed unless submitted in accordance with the procedures in this Section 17.82.050.C. 
1.  Pre-Submittal Conference. Before application submittal, the applicant must schedule and attend a pre-submittal conference with the Director for all proposed projects (a) subject to a conditional use permit or (b) that involve the deployment of more than five (5) facilities in the public right-of-way. Pre-submittal conferences for all other proposed projects are strongly encouraged but not required. The pre-submittal conference is intended to streamline the review process through informal discussion that includes, without limitation, the appropriate project classification and review process, any latent issues in connection with the proposed or existing wireless tower or base station, including compliance with generally applicable rules for public health and safety; potential concealment issues or concerns (if applicable); coordination with other city departments responsible for application review; and application completeness issues. To mitigate unnecessary delays due to application incompleteness, applicants are encouraged (but not required) to bring any draft applications or other materials so that city staff may provide informal feedback and guidance about whether such applications or other materials may be incomplete or unacceptable. The Planning Division or Public Works Department, as the case may be, shall use reasonable efforts to provide the applicant with an appointment within five (5) working days after receiving a written request and any applicable fee or deposit to reimburse the city for its reasonable costs to provide the services rendered in the pre-submittal conference. 
2.  Submittal Appointment. All applications must be submitted to the city at a pre-scheduled appointment with the Director. Applicants may submit up to ten (10) applications per appointment whenever feasible for city staff and not prejudicial to other applicants. The Director shall use reasonable efforts to provide the applicant with an appointment within five (5) working days after the Director receives a written request and, if applicable, confirms that the applicant complied with the pre-submittal conference requirement. Any application received without an appointment, whether delivered in-person, by mail or through any other means, will not be considered duly filed unless the applicant received a written exemption from the Director at a pre-submittal conference. 
D.  Applications Deemed Withdrawn. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, any application governed under this chapter will be automatically deemed withdrawn by the applicant when the applicant fails to tender a substantive response to the Planning Division or Public Works Department, as the case may be, within ninety (90) calendar days after the Director deems the application incomplete in a written notice to the applicant. The Director may, in the Director's discretion, grant a written extension for up to an additional thirty (30) calendar days when the applicant submits a written request prior to the 90th day that shows good cause to grant the extension. Delays due to circumstances outside the applicant's reasonable control will be considered good cause to grant the extension. 
E.  Peer and Independent Consultant Review. 
1.  Authorization. The City Council authorizes the Director to, in the Director's discretion, select and retain an independent consultant with specialized training, experience and/or expertise in telecommunications issues satisfactory to the Director in connection any permit application. 
2.  Scope. The Director may request an independent consultant review on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with wireless facilities deployment or permit applications for wireless facilities, which include without limitation: (a) permit application completeness and/or accuracy; (b) pre-construction planned compliance with applicable regulations for human exposure to RF emissions; (c) post-construction actual compliance with applicable regulations for human exposure to RF emissions; (d) whether and to what extent a proposed project will address a gap in the applicant's wireless services; (e) whether and to what extent any technically feasible and/or potentially available alternative sites or concealment techniques may exist; (f) the applicability, reliability and/or sufficiency of any information, analyses or methodologies used by the applicant to reach any conclusions about any issue with the city's discretion to review; and (g) any other issue identified by the Director that requires expert or specialized knowledge. The Director may request that the independent consultant prepare written reports, testify at public meetings, hearings and/or appeals and attend meetings with city staff and/or the applicant. 
3.  Consultant Fees; Deposit. Subject to applicable law, in the event that the Director elects to retain an independent consultant in connection with any permit application, the applicant shall be responsible for the reasonable costs in connection with the services provided, which may include without limitation any costs incurred by the independent consultant to attend and participate in any meetings or hearings. Before the independent consultant may perform any services, the applicant shall tender to the city a deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost for the services to be provided, as determined by the Director until the city adopts the initial required deposit by fee schedule. The Director may request additional deposits as reasonably necessary to ensure sufficient funds are available to cover the reasonable costs in connection with the independent consultant's services. In the event that the deposit exceeds the total costs for consultant's services, the Director shall promptly return any unused funds to the applicant after the wireless facility has been installed and passes a final inspection by the Building Official or his or her designee. In the event that the reasonable costs for the independent consultant's services exceed the deposit, the Director shall invoice the applicant for the balance. The city shall not issue any construction or grading permit to any applicant with any unpaid deposit requests or invoices. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.060 - Notice. 
A.  General Notice Requirements. Public notice and a hearing in accordance with the provisions in Section 17.24.020.D. (Public Notice) shall be required for all conditional use permit applications. The approval authority shall administratively review a complete and duly filed application for an administrative wireless permit and may act on such application without a public hearing not less than ten (10) calendar days after the applicant posts notice at the project site. The posted notice must contain (1) a general explanation of the proposed project; (2) the applicant's identification and contact information as provided on the application submitted to the city; and (3) contact information for the applicable city department. 
B.  Deemed-Approval Notice. Not more than thirty (30) days before the applicable FCC timeframe for review expires, and in addition to the public notice required in Section 17.82.060.A. (General Notice Requirements), an applicant for a conditional use permit or administrative wireless permit must provide a posted notice at the project site that contains (1) a statement the project will be automatically deemed approved pursuant to California Government Code § 65964.1 unless the city approves or denies the application or the applicant tolls the timeframe for review within the next thirty (30) days; (2) a general explanation of the proposed project; (3) the applicant's identification and contact information as provided on the application submitted to the city; and (4) contact information for the applicable city department. The public notice required under this Section 17.82.060.B. will be deemed given when the applicant delivers written notice to the Director that shows the appropriate notice has been posted at the project site. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Chapter, the approval authority shall be permitted to act on an application at any time so long as the public notice required in Section 17.82.060.A. (General Notice Requirements) has occurred. 
C.  Decision Notices. Within five (5) days after the approval authority acts on an application for a conditional use permit or administrative wireless permit or before the FCC Shot Clock expires (whichever occurs first), the approval authority or its designee shall send a written notice to the applicant. In the event that the approval authority denies the application (with or without prejudice), the written notice to the applicant must contain (1) the reasons for the decision and (2) instructions for how and when to file an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.070 - Decisions; limited exemptions; appeals. 
A.  Required Findings for Administrative Wireless Permit Approval. The approval authority may approve or conditionally approve an application for an administrative wireless permit submitted under this chapter when the approval authority finds all of the following: 
1.  The proposed wireless facility complies with all applicable site location guidelines and development standards in Sections 17.82.090 (Site Location Guidelines) and 17.82.100 (Development Standards); and 
2.  The applicant has demonstrated that its proposed wireless facility will be in compliance with all applicable FCC rules and regulations for human exposure to RF emissions. 
B.  Required Findings for Conditional Use Permit Approval. In addition to the conditional use permit findings under Section 17.24.050 (Findings) and the required findings in Section 17.82.070.A, the approval authority may approve or conditionally approve an application for a conditional use permit submitted under this chapter when the approval authority also finds all of the following: 
1.  The applicant has demonstrated a good-faith effort to identify and evaluate more-preferred alternative locations and potentially less-intrusive alternative designs for the proposed wireless facility; and 
2.  The applicant has provided the approval authority with a meaningful comparative analysis that shows all more-preferred alternative locations and less-intrusive alternative designs identified in the administrative record are either technically infeasible or unavailable. 
C.  Conditional Approvals; Denials Without Prejudice. Subject to any applicable limitations in federal or state law, nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the approval authority's ability to conditionally approve or deny without prejudice any application for a conditional use permit or administrative wireless permit as may be necessary or appropriate to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare, and to advance the goals or policies in this chapter, the El Monte Municipal Code or the General Plan. 
D.  Limited Exceptions for Personal Wireless Service Facilities. In the event that an applicant claims that strict compliance with the site location guidelines in Section 17.82.090 (Site Location Guidelines) or the development standards in Section 17.82.100 (Development Standards) would effectively prohibit the applicant's ability to provide personal wireless services, the Planning Commission may grant a limited exception from such requirements to the extent necessary to prevent an effective prohibition when the Planning Commission finds all of the following: 
1.  The proposed wireless facility qualifies as a "personal wireless service facility" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii), as may be amended or superseded; and 
2.  The applicant has provided the Planning Commission with a reasonable and clearly defined technical service objective to be achieved by the proposed wireless facility; and 
3.  The applicant has provided the Planning Commission with a written statement that contains a detailed and fact-specific explanation as to why the proposed wireless facility cannot be deployed in compliance with the applicable provisions in this Chapter, the El Monte Municipal Code, the General Plan and/or any specific plan; and 
4.  The applicant has provided the Planning Commission with a meaningful comparative analysis with the factual reasons why all alternative locations and/or designs identified in the administrative record (whether suggested by the applicant, the city, public comments or any other source) are not technically feasible or potentially available to reasonably achieve the applicant's reasonable and clearly defined technical service objective to be achieved by the proposed wireless facility; and 
5.  The applicant has demonstrated to the Planning Commission that the proposed location and design is the least non-compliant configuration that will reasonably achieve the applicant's reasonable and clearly defined technical service objective to be achieved by the proposed wireless facility, which includes without limitation a meaningful comparative analysis into multiple smaller or less intrusive wireless facilities dispersed throughout the intended service area. 
E.  Appeals. Any interested person or entity may appeal any decision by the approval authority to approve or deny an application for a conditional use permit or administrative wireless permit. Appeals must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days following the approval authority's issuance of the decision notice required under Section 17.82.060.C. (Decision Notices). On the next available meeting date after the appeal period lapses, or as soon as reasonably feasible thereafter, the appellate authority shall hold a de novo public hearing to consider and act on the application in accordance with the applicable provisions in the General Plan, any applicable specific plan and all applicable provisions in the El Monte Municipal Code. Appeals from an approval will not be permitted to the extent that the appeal is based on environmental effects from RF emissions that comply with all applicable FCC regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.080 - Standard conditions of approval. 
In addition to all other conditions adopted by the approval authority, all conditional use permits and administrative wireless permits, whether approved by the approval authority or deemed approved by the operation of law, shall be automatically subject to the conditions in this Section 17.82.080. The approval authority (or the appellate authority on appeal) shall have discretion to modify or amend these conditions on a case-by-case basis as may be necessary or appropriate under the circumstances to protect public health and safety or allow for the proper operation of the approved facility consistent with the goals of this chapter. 
A.  Permit Term. This permit will automatically expire ten (10) years and one day from its issuance, except when California Government Code § 65964(b), as may be amended or superseded in the future, authorizes the city to establish a shorter term for public safety or substantial land use reasons. Any other permits or approvals issued in connection with any collocation, modification or other change to this wireless facility, which includes without limitation any permits or other approvals deemed-granted or deemed-approved under federal or state law, will not extend this term limit unless expressly provided otherwise in such permit or approval or required under federal or state law. Upon an application for permit renewal submitted within one year from the expiration date of this permit, the Director may renew this permit for an additional 10-year term provided that the permittee's wireless facility is in compliance with all applicable conditions of approval and all applicable provisions in the El Monte Municipal Code that exist at the time of the renewal. 
B.  Compliance with Approved Plans. Before the permittee submits any applications to the Building Department, the permittee must incorporate this permit, all conditions associated with this permit and the approved photo simulations into the project plans (the "Approved Plans"). The permittee must construct, install and operate the wireless facility in substantial compliance with the Approved Plans, as determined by the Director. Any material alterations, modifications or other changes to the approved plans, whether requested by the permittee or required by other departments or public agencies with jurisdiction over the wireless facility, must be submitted in a written request subject to the Director's prior review and approval, who may refer the request to the original approval authority if the Director finds that the requested alteration, modification or other change substantially deviates from the Approved Plans or implicates a significant or substantial land-use concern. 
C.  Build-Out Period. This permit will automatically expire one year from the approval or deemed-granted date unless the permittee obtains all other permits and approvals required to install, construct and/or operate the approved wireless facility, which includes without limitation any permits or approvals required by the any federal, state or local public agencies with jurisdiction over the subject property, the wireless facility or its use. The Director may grant one written extension to a date certain, but not to exceed one additional year, when the permittee shows good cause to extend the limitations period in a written request for an extension submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the automatic expiration date in this condition. 
D.  Maintenance Obligations; Vandalism. The permittee shall keep the site, which includes without limitation any and all improvements, equipment, structures, access routes, fences and landscape features, in a neat, clean and safe condition in accordance with the approved plans and all conditions in this permit. The permittee shall keep the site area free from all litter and debris at all times. The permittee, at no cost to the city, shall remove and remediate any graffiti or other vandalism at the site within forty-eight (48) hours after the permittee receives notice or otherwise becomes aware that such graffiti or other vandalism occurred. 
E.  Compliance with Laws. The permittee shall maintain compliance at all times with all federal, state and local statutes, regulations, orders or other rules that carry the force of law ("Laws") applicable to the permittee, the subject property, the wireless facility or any use or activities in connection with the use authorized in this permit, which includes without limitation any laws applicable to human exposure to RF emissions. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that this obligation is intended to be broadly construed and that no other specific requirements in these conditions are intended to reduce, relieve or otherwise lessen the permittee's obligations to maintain compliance with all Laws. In the event that the city fails to timely notice, prompt or enforce compliance with any applicable provision in the El Monte Municipal Code, any permit, any permit condition or any applicable law or regulation, the applicant or permittee will not be relieved from its obligation to comply in all respects with all applicable provisions in the El Monte Municipal Code, any permit, any permit condition or any applicable law or regulation. 
F.  Adverse Impacts on Other Properties. The permittee shall use all reasonable efforts to avoid any and all undue or unnecessary adverse impacts on nearby properties that may arise from the permittee's or its authorized personnel's construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal and/or other activities at the site. The permittee shall not perform or cause others to perform any construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal or other work that involves heavy equipment or machines except during normal construction work hours authorized by the El Monte Municipal Code. The restricted work hours in this condition will not prohibit any work required to prevent an actual, immediate harm to property or persons, or any work during an emergency declared by the city. The Director or the Director's designee may issue a stop work order for any activities that violates this condition. 
G.  Inspections; Emergencies. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city's officers, officials, staff or other designee may enter onto the site and inspect the improvements and equipment upon reasonable prior notice to the permittee; provided, however, that the city's officers, officials, staff or other designee may, but will not be obligated to, enter onto the site area without prior notice to support, repair, disable or remove any improvements or equipment in emergencies or when such improvements or equipment threatens actual, imminent harm to property or persons. The permittee will be permitted to supervise the city's officers, officials, staff or other designee while any such inspection or emergency access occurs. 
H.  Permittee's Contact Information. The permittee shall furnish the Director with accurate and up-to-date contact information to reach a live person responsible for the wireless facility, which includes without limitation a direct telephone number, facsimile number, mailing address and email address. The permittee shall keep such contact information up-to-date at all times and immediately provide the Director with updated contact information in the event that the contact information changes. 
I.  Indemnification. The permittee and, if applicable, the property owner upon which the wireless facility is installed shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, City Council and City boards, commissions, agents, officers, officials, employees and volunteers from any and all (1) damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands, law suits, writs and other actions or proceedings ("claims") brought against the city or its agents, officers, officials, employees or volunteers to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city's approval of this permit, and (2) other claims of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, that arise from or in connection with the permittee's or its agents', directors', officers', employees', contractors', subcontractors', licensees', or customers' acts or omissions in connection with this permit or the wireless facility. In the event the city becomes aware of any claims, the city will use best efforts to promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the city's defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall promptly reimburse city for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course of the defense. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the permittee's indemnification obligations under this condition are a material consideration that motivates the city to approve this permit, and that such indemnification obligations will survive the expiration or revocation of this permit. 
J.  Performance Bond. Before the applicable city department issues any construction or encroachment permit, as applicable, in connection with this permit, the permittee shall post a performance bond from a surety and in a form acceptable to the Director in an amount reasonably necessary to cover the cost to remove the improvements and restore all affected areas based on a written estimate from a qualified contractor with experience in wireless facilities removal. The written estimate must include the cost to remove all equipment and other improvements, which includes without limitation all antennas, radios, batteries, generators, utilities, cabinets, mounts, brackets, hardware, cables, wires, conduits, structures, shelters, towers, poles, footings and foundations, whether above ground or below ground, constructed or installed in connection with the wireless facility, plus the cost to completely restore any areas affected by the removal work to a standard compliant with applicable laws. In establishing or adjusting the bond amount required under this condition, and in accordance with California Government Code § 65964(a), the Director shall take into consideration any information provided by the permittee regarding the cost to remove the wireless facility and restore any areas affected by the removal work to a standard compliant with applicable laws. In addition, the Director may modify this condition to the extent reasonably necessary to comply with any reasonable requirements imposed by the permittee's surety. 
K.  Recall to Approval Authority; Permit Revocation. This permit shall be subject to the provisions in El Monte Municipal Code Section 17.24.100 (Revocation). 
L.  Record Retention. The permittee must maintain complete and accurate copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in connection with the wireless facility, which includes without limitation this approval, the approved plans and photo simulations incorporated into this approval, all conditions associated with this approval and any ministerial permits or approvals issued in connection with this approval. In the event that the permittee does not maintain such records as required in this condition, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an inspection of the missing records will be construed against the permittee. The permittee may keep electronic records; provided, however, that hard copies or electronic records kept in the city's regular files will control over any conflicts between such city-controlled copies or records and the permittee's electronic copies, and complete originals will control over all other copies in any form. 
M.  Undergrounded Utilities. In the event that other electric or communications utilities in the public right-of-way underground their facilities where the permittee's wireless facility is located, and the permittee's wireless facility is located in the public right-of-way, the permittee must underground its equipment except the antennas and antenna supports. Such undergrounding shall occur at the permittee's sole cost and expense except as reimbursed pursuant to law. 
N.  Electric Meter Removal. In the event that the electric utility provider adopts or changes its rules obviating the need for a separate or ground-mounted electric meter and enclosure in the public right-of-way, the permittee on its own initiative and at its sole cost and expense shall apply to the city for the required encroachment and/or other ministerial permit(s) to remove the separate or ground-mounted electric meter and enclosure and restore the affected area to its original condition. 
O.  Rearrangement and Relocation. The permittee acknowledges that the City, in its sole discretion and at any time, may: (1) change any street grade, width or location; (2) add, remove or otherwise change any improvements in, on, under or along any street owned by the city or any other public agency, which includes without limitation any sewers, storm drains, conduits, pipes, vaults, boxes, cabinets, poles and utility systems for gas, water, electric or telecommunications; and/or (3) perform any other work deemed necessary, useful or desirable by the City (collectively, "City Work"). The city reserves the rights to do any and all City Work without any admission on its part that the city would not have such rights without the express reservation in this permit. In the event that the Public Works Director determines that any City Work will require the permittee's wireless facility located in the public right-of-way to be rearranged and/or relocated, the permittee shall, at its sole cost and expense, do or cause to be done all things necessary to accomplish such rearrangement and/or relocation. If the permittee fails or refuses to either permanently or temporarily rearrange and/or relocate the permittee's wireless facility within a reasonable time after the Public Works Director's notice, the city may (but will not be obligated to) cause the rearrangement or relocation to be performed at the permittee's sole cost and expense. The city may exercise its rights to rearrange or relocate the permittee's wireless facility without prior notice to permittee when the Public Works Director determines that the City Work is immediately necessary to protect public health or safety. The permittee shall reimburse the city for all costs and expenses in connection with such work within ten (10) days after a written demand for reimbursement and reasonable documentation to support such costs. In addition, the permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold the city, its agents, officers, officials, employees and volunteers harmless from and against any claims in connection with rearranging or relocating the permittee's facility, or turning on or off any water, oil, gas, electricity or other utility service in connection with the permittee's facility. 
P.  Abandoned Wireless Facilities. The wireless facility authorized under this permit shall be deemed abandoned if not operated for any continuous six-month period. Within ninety (90) days after a wireless facility is abandoned or deemed abandoned, the permittee and/or property owner shall completely remove the wireless facility and all related improvements, and shall restore all affected areas to a condition compliant with all applicable laws, which includes without limitation the El Monte Municipal Code. In the event that neither the permittee nor the property owner complies with the removal and restoration obligations under this condition within said 90-day period, the city shall have the right (but not the obligation) to perform such removal and restoration with or without notice, and the permittee and property owner shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with such removal and/or restoration activities. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.090 - Site location guidelines. 
A.  Locations. All applicants must, to the extent feasible, propose new wireless facilities on private property or in the public rights-of-way in locations according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
1.  City-owned property or structures located outside the public rights-of-way; 
2.  City-owned property or structures located in the public rights-of-way; 
3.  Manufacturing zones; 
4.  Commercial zones; 
5.  Office professional zones; 
6.  Mixed/multi-use zones; 
7.  Open space; 
8.  Residential zones or uses. 
B.  Preferred Support Structures. In addition to the preferred locations described in Section 17.82.090.A. (Locations), the city also expresses its preference for installations on certain support structures (which include support structures on private property or in the public rights-of-way). The approval authority will take into account whether any more preferred support structures are technically feasible and potentially available. The city's preferred support structures are as follows, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
1.  Collocations with existing building or other support structure-mounted wireless facilities; 
2.  Collocations with existing wireless facilities on electric transmission towers; 
3.  Collocations with existing freestanding wireless facilities; 
4.  New installations on existing buildings or other support structures; 
5.  New installations on existing electric transmission towers; and 
6.  New freestanding wireless towers. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.100 - Development standards. 
A.  Generally Applicable Development Standards. All new wireless facilities and collocations, modifications or other changes to existing wireless facilities not covered under Section 6409 must conform to the generally applicable development standards in this Section 17.82.100.A. 
1.  Concealment. Wireless facilities must incorporate concealment elements, measures and techniques that blend the equipment and other improvements into the natural and/or built environment in a manner consistent and/or compatible with the uses germane to the underlying zoning district and existing in the immediate vicinity. As an illustration and not a limitation, a wireless facility designed to mimic a native tree species or a rock outcrop may be appropriate in an open space or hillside location where other natural elements exist to provide effective camouflaging and/or concealment. 
2.  Overall Height. Except as provided in Section 17.82.100.D. (Right-of-Way Facilities), wireless facilities may not exceed the applicable height limit for structures in the applicable zoning district or overlay zone. 
3.  Setbacks. Wireless facilities may not encroach into any applicable setback for structures in the subject zoning district. Applicable setbacks for private property do not apply to wireless facilities located in the public rights-of-way. 
4.  Noise. Wireless facilities and all accessory equipment and transmission equipment must comply with all applicable noise control standards and regulations in Chapter 8.36 (Noise Control), and shall not exceed, either individually or cumulatively, the applicable ambient noise limit in the subject zoning district. The approval authority may require the applicant to incorporate appropriate noise-baffling materials and/or strategies whenever necessary to avoid any ambient noise from equipment (such as backup power generators) reasonably likely to exceed the applicable limit. In the event a duly authorized federal, state, county or city official declares an emergency within a region that includes the city in whole or in part, backup power generators may exceed the applicable noise control standards and regulations to the extent reasonably necessary to operate the facility until the declared emergency is lifted or power is restored to the affected facility. 
5.  Landscaping. All wireless facilities must include landscape features and a landscape plan when proposed to be placed in a landscaped area. The landscape plan must include existing vegetation, and vegetation proposed to be removed or trimmed, and the landscape plan must identify proposed landscaping by species type, size and location. Landscape maintenance must be performed in accordance with Chapter 17.10 (Landscaping Requirements). The approval authority may require additional landscape features to screen the wireless facility from public view, avoid or mitigate potential adverse impacts on adjacent properties or otherwise enhance the concealment required under this chapter. 
6.  Site Security Measures. Wireless facilities may incorporate reasonable and appropriate site security measures, such as fences, walls and anti-climbing devices, to prevent unauthorized access, theft or vandalism. Site security measures must be designed to enhance concealment to the maximum extent possible, such as installing equipment within an enclosure designed to mimic a trash-can corral rather than within a chain link fence. The approval authority may require additional concealment elements as the approval authority finds necessary to blend the security measures and other improvements into the natural and/or built environment. The approval authority shall not approve barbed wire, razor ribbon, electrified fences or any similar security measures. 
7.  Backup Power Sources. The approval authority may approve permanent backup power sources and/or generators on a case-by-case basis. The city strongly disfavors backup power sources installed on the ground or mounted on poles within the public rights-of-way. The approval authority shall not approve any diesel generators or other similarly noisy or noxious generators in or within two hundred fifty (250) feet from any residence; provided, however, the approval authority may approve sockets or other connections used for temporary backup generators. 
8.  Lights. Wireless facilities may not include exterior lights other than (a) as may be required under Federal Aviation Administration, FCC or other applicable governmental regulations; and (b) timed or motion-sensitive lights for security and/or worker safety. All exterior lights permitted or required to be installed must be installed in locations and within enclosures that mitigates illumination impacts on other properties to the maximum extent feasible. 
9.  Signage; Advertisements. All wireless facilities must include signage that accurately identifies the equipment owner/operator, the owner/operator's site name or identification number and a toll-free number to the owner/operator's network operations center. Wireless facilities may not bear any other signage or advertisements unless expressly approved by the city, required by law or recommended under FCC or other United States governmental agencies for compliance with RF emissions regulations. 
10.  Future Collocations and Equipment. To the extent feasible and aesthetically desirable, all new wireless facilities should be designed and sited in a manner that accommodates potential future collocations and equipment installations that can be integrated into the proposed wireless facility or its associated structures with no or negligible visual changes to the outward appearance. 
11.  Utilities. All cables and connectors for telephone, primary electric and other similar utilities must be routed underground to the extent feasible in conduits large enough to accommodate future collocated wireless facilities. Meters, panels, disconnect switches and other associated improvements must be placed in inconspicuous locations to the extent possible. The approval authority shall not approve new overhead utility lines or service drops merely because compliance with the undergrounding requirements would increase the project cost; provided, however, that the Director may waive this requirement to the extent the approval of new overhead lines or service drops would amount to a de minimis visual change. Microwave or other wireless backhaul is discouraged when it would involve a separate and unconcealed antenna. 
12.  Parking; Access. Any equipment or improvements constructed or installed in connection with any wireless facilities must not reduce any parking spaces below the minimum requirement for the subject property. Whenever feasible, wireless facilities should use existing parking and access rather than construct new parking or access improvements. Any new parking or access improvements should be the minimum size necessary to reasonably accommodate the proposed use. 
13.  Compliance with Laws. All wireless facilities must be designed and sited in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, rules, restrictions and conditions, which include without limitation the California Building Standards Code, General Plan and any applicable specific plan, the El Monte Municipal Code and any conditions or restrictions in any permit or other governmental approval issued by any public agency with jurisdiction over the facility. 
B.  Freestanding Wireless Facilities. In addition to the requirements in Section 17.82.100(A) (Generally Applicable Development Standards), all new freestanding wireless facilities and collocations, modifications or other changes to existing freestanding wireless facilities not covered under Section 6409 must conform to the requirements in this Section 17.82.100(B). 
1.  Tower-Mounted Equipment. All tower-mounted equipment must be mounted as close to the vertical support structure as possible to reduce its overall visual profile. Applicants must mount non-antenna, tower-mounted equipment (including, but not limited to, remote radio units/heads, surge suppressors and utility demarcation boxes) directly behind the antennas to the maximum extent feasible. All tower-mounted equipment, cables and hardware must be painted with flat colors subject to the approval authority's prior approval. 
2.  Ground-Mounted Equipment; Shelters. All ground-mounted equipment must be concealed underground or within an existing or new structure, opaque fences or other enclosures subject to the approval authority's prior approval. The approval authority may require additional concealment elements as the approval authority finds necessary to blend the ground-mounted equipment and other improvements into the natural and/or built environment. 
C.  Building-Mounted Wireless Facilities. In addition to the requirements in Section 17.82.100.A. (Generally Applicable Development Standards), all new building-mounted wireless facilities and collocations, modifications or other changes to existing building-mounted wireless facilities not covered under Section 6409 must conform to the requirements in this Section 17.82.100C. 
1.  Preferred Concealment Techniques. All applicants should, to the extent feasible, propose new non-tower wireless facilities that are completely concealed and architecturally integrated into the existing facade or rooftop features with no visible impacts from any publicly accessible areas at ground level (examples include, but are not limited to, antennas behind existing parapet walls or facades replaced with RF-transparent material and finished to mimic the replaced materials). Alternatively, when integration with existing building features is not feasible, the applicant should propose completely concealed new structures or appurtenances designed to mimic the support structure's original architecture and proportions (examples include, but are not limited to, cupolas, steeples, chimneys and water tanks). Facilities must be located behind existing parapet walls or other existing screening elements to the maximum extent feasible. 
2.  Facade-Mounted Equipment. When wireless facilities cannot be placed behind existing parapet walls or other existing screening elements, the approval authority may approve facade-mounted equipment in accordance with this section. All facade-mounted equipment must be concealed behind screen walls and mounted as flush to the facade as practicable. The approval authority may not approve "pop-out" screen boxes unless the design is architecturally consistent with the original building or support structure. Except in manufacturing zones, the approval authority may not approve any exposed facade-mounted antennas, including but not limited to exposed antennas painted to match the facade. To the extent feasible, facade-mounted equipment must be installed on the facade(s) along the building frontage that is the least prominent or publicly visible. 
3.  Rooftop-Mounted Equipment. All rooftop-mounted equipment must be screened from public view with concealment measures that match the underlying structure in proportion, quality, architectural style and finish. The approval authority may approve unscreened rooftop equipment only when it expressly finds that such equipment is effectively concealed due to its low height and/or setback from the roofline. 
4.  Ground-Mounted Equipment; Shelters. All ground-mounted equipment must be concealed underground or within an existing or new structure, opaque fences, building interior equipment room, or other enclosures subject to the approval authority's prior approval. The approval authority may require additional concealment elements as the approval authority finds necessary to blend the ground-mounted equipment and other improvements into the natural and/or built environment. 
D.  Right-of-Way Wireless Facilities. In addition to the applicable requirements in Section 17.82.100.A. (Generally Applicable Development Standards), all new right-of-way wireless facilities and collocations, modifications or other changes to existing right-of-way wireless facilities not covered under Section 6409 must conform to the requirements in this Section 17.82.100.D. 
1.  Concealment. All wireless facilities in the right-of-way must be concealed to the maximum extent feasible with design elements and techniques that mimic or blend with the underlying support structure, surrounding environment and adjacent uses. In addition, wireless facilities in the rights-of-way may not unreasonably subject the public use, for any purpose including expressive or aesthetic purposes, to inconvenience, discomfort, trouble, annoyance, hindrance, impediment or obstruction. 
2.  Overall Height. Wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way may not exceed either (a) the minimum separation from supply lines required by CPUC General Order 95, as may be amended or superseded, plus four (4) feet or (b) four (4) feet above the height of the existing support structure. To the extent that in the Director's discretion the four-foot height allowance would cause the applicant's wireless facility to be materially incompatible with the overall height or appearance of the surrounding support structures in the public right-of-way, the Director may require the applicant to propose an alternative design (such as mounting the antenna(s) on the side of the pole) or location to the extent technically feasible. 
3.  Existing Support Structures. All wireless facilities in the public right-of-way must be installed on existing above-ground structures (such as light standards or utility poles) whenever possible. The approval authority shall not approve any wireless facility proposed to be installed on a traffic control pole unless the Public Works Director finds, in the Public Works Director's sole discretion, that the traffic control pole has sufficient capacity to support the wireless facility. 
4.  Replacement Support Structures. Existing above-ground structures may be replaced with structurally hardened, fitted or reinforced support structures so long as the replacement structure is, in the Public Works Director's discretion, substantially similar to the existing structure to be replaced. 
5.  New Support Structures. The approval authority shall not approve any new, non-replacement support structures unless: (a) the applicant demonstrates that above-ground support structures within the intended service area either do not exist or are not potentially available to the applicant; or (b) the approval authority specifically finds that a new, non-replacement support structure would be more aesthetically desirable and consistent with the objectives in this chapter than installations on existing structures near the project site. The approval authority shall have the discretion to require that any new support structure must be a streetlight that conforms to the city's streetlight standards and specifications, which the city shall maintain for street illumination and public safety purposes. 
6.  Undergrounded Equipment. To conceal the equipment to the maximum degree feasible, applicants must install all equipment (other than the antenna and any electric meter) underground in any area in which the existing utilities are primarily located underground. In all other areas, applicants shall install all equipment (other than the antenna and any electric meter) underground when the approval authority finds that the above-ground equipment would unreasonably interfere with the public's ability to use the right-of-way for uses that include without limitation travel, social, expressive and/or aesthetic uses. When making a determination on whether to require undergrounded equipment, the approval authority shall take into account the presence of existing above-ground utilities. Mere additional expense to install and maintain an underground equipment enclosure does not exempt an applicant from this requirement. If an applicant proposes to install a facility in an area in which the existing utilities are primarily located underground, the approval authority shall have the discretion, consistent with Sections 17.82.100.D.3.—5., to require that the applicant install a new streetlight that conforms to the city's streetlight standards and specifications as the facility support structure. 
7.  Pole-Mounted Equipment. All pole-mounted equipment must be installed as close to the pole as technically and legally feasible to minimize the overall visual profile. All pole-mounted equipment and required or permitted signage must face toward the street or otherwise placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures to the extent feasible. All cables, wires and other connectors must be routed through conduits within the pole whenever possible, and all conduit attachments, cables, wires and other connectors must be concealed from public view to the extent feasible. 
8.  Ground-Mounted Equipment. To the extent that the equipment cannot be placed underground as required, applicants may be permitted to install ground-mounted equipment in a location that does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. All ground-mounted equipment must be placed in the least conspicuous location available within a reasonable distance from the pole. The approval authority may condition approval on new or enhanced landscaping to conceal ground-mounted equipment. The approval authority shall not approve a ground-mounted electric meter pedestal or other electric meter enclosure to the extent feasible. 
E.  Administrative Design Guidelines. The Director may develop, and from time to time amend, design guidelines consistent with the generally applicable development standards and any facility-specific development standards to clarify the aesthetic goals and standards in this chapter for city staff, applicants and the public. In the event that a conflict arises between the development standards adopted under Sections 17.82.100.A.—D. and the design guidelines adopted under this Section 17.82.100.E., the development standards adopted under Sections 17.82.100.A.—D. shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.110 - Temporary wireless facilities. 
A.  General Requirements for Temporary Wireless Facilities. Except as provided in Section 17.82.110.B. (Temporary Wireless Facilities for Emergencies), the requirements, procedures and standards in this section shall be applicable to all applications for a temporary wireless permit for a temporary wireless facility. 
1.  Applications for Temporary Wireless Facilities. The Director shall not approve any temporary wireless facility subject to a temporary wireless permit except upon a duly filed application consistent with this Section 17.82.110.A.1. and any other written application requirements or procedures the Director may publish in any publicly-stated format. Applicants for a temporary wireless permit must submit, at a minimum: (1) a temporary wireless permit application on the most current form prepared by the Planning Department; (2) the applicable fee for the application; (3) a site plan that shows the proposed temporary wireless facility and its equipment, physical dimensions and placement on the proposed site relative to property lines and existing structures; (4) an RF compliance report in accordance with the City's requirements; and (5) an insurance certificate for general commercial liability that names the City as an additional insured, includes coverage for the time period in which the temporary wireless facility will be placed and a carries at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in coverage per occurrence. Applications must be submitted in person to the Director unless the Director grants written consent to receive an application by mail or electronic means. No pre-submittal conference or appointment is required for a temporary wireless permit application. 
2.  Administrative Review for Temporary Wireless Facilities. After the Director receives a duly filed application for a temporary wireless permit, the Director shall review the application for completeness. After the Director deems the application complete, the Director shall review the application for conformance with the required findings in Section 17.82.110.A.3. (Required Findings for Temporary Wireless Facilities) and render a written decision to the applicant. Any denials must include the reasons for the denial. The review shall be administrative in nature and shall not require notice or a public hearing. 
3.  Required Findings for Temporary Wireless Facilities. The Director may approve or conditionally approve a temporary wireless permit for a temporary wireless facility only when the Director finds all of the following: 
a.  The proposed temporary wireless facility will not exceed fifty (50) feet in overall height above ground level unless the Director finds that exceeding the 50-foot overall height limit is necessary to integrate a non-freestanding temporary wireless facility with the underlying support structure; and 
b.  The proposed temporary wireless facility will be placed as far away from adjacent property lines as possible, or otherwise in a location that will be least likely to cause adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and 
c.  Any excavation or ground disturbance associated with the temporary facility will not exceed two (2) feet below grade; and 
d.  The proposed temporary wireless facility will be compliant with all generally applicable public health and safety laws and regulations, which includes without limitation compliance with maximum permissible exposure limits for human exposure to RF emissions established by the FCC; and 
e.  The proposed temporary wireless facility will not create any nuisance or violate any noise limits applicable to the proposed location; and 
f.  The proposed temporary wireless facility will be identified with a sign that clearly identifies the (I) site operator, (II) the operator's site identification name or number and (III) a working telephone number answered twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week by a live person who can exert power-down control over the antennas; and 
g.  The proposed temporary wireless facility will be removed within thirty (30) days after the Director grants the temporary wireless permit, or such longer time as the Director finds reasonably related to the applicant's need or purpose for the temporary wireless facility; and 
h.  The applicant has not been denied a use permit for any permanent wireless facility in the same or substantially the same location within the previous three hundred sixty five (365) days. 
4.  Appeals for Temporary Wireless Facilities. Any applicant may appeal the Director's written decision to deny an application for a temporary wireless permit. The written appeal together with any applicable appeal fee must be tendered to the city within ten (10) days from the Director's written decision, and must state in plain terms the grounds for reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The City Manager shall be the appellate authority for all appeals from the Director's written decision to deny a temporary wireless permit. The City Manager shall review the application de novo; provided, however, that the City Manager's decision shall be limited to only whether the application should be approved or denied in accordance with the provisions in this chapter and any other applicable laws. The City Manager shall issue a written decision that contains the reasons for the decision, and such decision shall be final and not subject to any further administrative appeals. 
B.  Temporary Wireless Facilities for Emergencies. Temporary wireless facilities may be placed and operated within the City without a temporary wireless permit only when a duly authorized federal, state, county or city official declares an emergency within a region that includes the city in whole or in part. Any temporary wireless facilities placed pursuant to this Section 17.82.110.B. must be removed within fifteen (15) days after the date the emergency is lifted. Any person or entity that places temporary wireless facilities pursuant to this section must send a written notice that identifies the site location and person responsible for its operation to the Director as soon as reasonably practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.82.120 - Amortization of nonconforming wireless facilities. 
Any non-conforming wireless facilities in existence at the time this chapter becomes effective must be brought into conformance with this chapter in accordance with the amortization schedule in this Section 17.82.120. As used in this section, the "fair market value" will be the construction costs listed on the building permit application for the subject wireless facility and the "minimum years" allowed will be measured from the date on which this chapter becomes effective. 
Fair Market Value on Effective Date 	Minimum Years Allowed 
Less than $50,000 	5 
$50,000 to $500,000 	10 
Greater than $500,000 	15 
 
The Director may grant a written extension to a date certain when the wireless facility owner shows (1) a good faith effort to cure non-conformance; (2) the application of this section would violate applicable laws; or (3) extreme economic hardship would result from strict compliance with the amortization schedule. Any extension must be the minimum time period necessary to avoid such extreme economic hardship. The Director may not grant any permanent exemption from this section. 
Nothing in this section is intended to limit any permit term to less than ten (10) years. In the event that the amortization required in this section would reduce the permit term to less than ten (10) years for any permit granted on or after January 1, 2007, then the minimum years allowed will be automatically extended by the difference between ten (10) years and the number of years since the city granted such permit. Nothing in this section is intended or may be applied to prohibit any collocation or modification covered under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) on the basis that the subject wireless facility is a legal nonconforming wireless facility. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
Chapter 17.83 - ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUESTS 
Sections: 
 
17.83.010 - Legislative intent. 
A.  Background. Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. 112-96, codified as 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) ("Section 6409"), generally requires that state and local governments "may not deny, and shall approve" requests to collocate, remove or replace transmission equipment at an existing tower or base station. Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") regulations interpret this statute and establish procedural rules for local review, which generally preempt certain subjective land-use regulations, limit permit application content requirements and provide the applicant with a potential "deemed granted" remedy when the state or local government fails to approve or deny the request within sixty (60) days after submittal (accounting for any tolling periods). Moreover, whereas Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-104, codified as 47 U.S.C. § 332, applies to only "personal wireless service facilities" (e.g., cellular telephone towers and equipment), Section 6409 applies to all "wireless" facilities licensed or authorized by the FCC (e.g., cellular, Wi-Fi, satellite, microwave backhaul, etc.). 
B.  Findings. The City Council finds that the overlap between wireless deployments covered under Section 6409 and other wireless deployments, combined with the different substantive and procedural rules applicable to such deployments, creates a potential for confusion that harms the public interest in both efficient wireless facilities deployment and carefully planned community development in accordance with local values. The City Council further finds that a separate permit application and review process specifically designed for compliance with Section 6409 contained in a separate section devoted to Section 6409 will mitigate such potential confusion, streamline local review and preserve the city's land-use authority to maximum extent possible. 
C.  Intent. The city intends this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform standards and procedures in a manner that protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare, consistent with and subject to federal and California state law, for collocations and modifications to existing wireless facilities pursuant to Section 6409 and related FCC regulations codified in 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.40001 et seq. This Chapter is not intended to, nor shall it be interpreted or applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit any personal wireless service provider's ability to provide personal wireless services; (2) prohibit or effectively prohibit any entity's ability to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service, subject to any competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory rules, regulations or other legal requirements for rights-of-way management; (3) unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; (4) deny any request for authorization to place, construct or modify personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such wireless facilities comply with the FCC's regulations concerning such emissions; (5) prohibit any collocation or modification that the city may not deny under federal or California state law; (6) impose any unfair, unreasonable, discriminatory or anticompetitive fees that exceed the reasonable cost to provide the services for which the fee is charged; or (7) otherwise authorize the city to preempt any applicable federal or California state law. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.83.020 - Definitions. 
The abbreviations, phrases, terms and words used in this chapter will have the meanings assigned to them in this Section 17.83.020 or, as may be appropriate, in Section 17.04.020 (Definitions), as may be amended from time to time, unless context indicates otherwise. Undefined phrases, terms or words in this section will have the meanings assigned to them in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as may be amended from time to time, and, if not defined therein, will have their ordinary meanings. In the event that any definition assigned to any phrase, term or word in this section conflicts with any federal or state-mandated definition, the federal or state-mandated definition will control. 
A.  "Approval authority" means the commission, board or official responsible for review of permit applications and vested with the authority to approve or deny such applications. The approval authority for a section 6409 approval is the Economic Development Director or, on appeal, the City Manager. The foregoing notwithstanding, the approval authority for a section 6409 approval relating to wireless facilities within the public rights-of-way is the Public Works Director, or, on appeal, the City Manager. 
B.  "Base station" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(1), as may be amended, which defines that term as a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(9) or any equipment associated with a tower. The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks). The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001, supports or houses equipment described in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(1)(i)-(ii) that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001, does not support or house equipment described in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b)(1)(i)-(ii). 
C.  "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of El Monte, or the City Manager's designee. 
D.  "Collocation" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC's definition effectively means "to add" and does not necessarily refer to more than one wireless facility installed at a single site. 
E.  "CPCN" means a "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" granted by the CPUC or its duly appointed successor agency pursuant to California Public Utilities Code §§ 1001 et seq., as may be amended. 
F.  "CPUC" means the California Public Utilities Commission established in the California Constitution, Article XII, § 5, or its duly appointed successor agency. 
G.  "Economic Development Director" or "Director" means the Economic Development Director of the City of El Monte, or the Economic Development Director's designee. When used in the context of applications related to wireless facilities on private property, the Director refers to the Economic Development Director. 
H.  "Eligible facilities request" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(3), as may be amended, which defines that term as any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: (i) collocation of new transmission equipment; (ii) removal of transmission equipment; or (iii) replacement of transmission equipment. 
I.  "Eligible support structure" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which defines that term as any tower or base station as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b), provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the State or local government under 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001. 
J.  "Existing" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended, which provides that a constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of the FCC's Section 6409 regulations if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition. 
K.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or its duly appointed successor agency. 
L.  "FCC Shot Clock" means the reasonable time frame within which the city generally must act on a given wireless application, as defined by the FCC and as may be amended from time-to-time. 
M.  "Planning Division" means the Planning Division of the Economic Development Department of the City of El Monte or its duly appointed successor agency. 
N.  "Public Works Department" means the Public Works Department of the City of El Monte or its duly appointed successor agency. 
O.  "Public Works Director" or "Director" means the Public Works and Utilities Director of the City of El Monte, or the Public Works Director's designee. When used in the context of applications related to wireless facilities in the public right-of-way, the Director refers to the Public Works Director. 
P.  "RF" means radio frequency or electromagnetic waves generally between 30 kHz and 300 GHz in the electromagnetic spectrum range. 
Q.  "Section 6409" means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), as may be amended. 
R.  "Site" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(6), as may be amended, which provides that for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
S.  "Substantial change" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(7), as may be amended, which defines that term differently based on the particular wireless facility type (tower or base station) and location (in or outside the public right-of-way). For clarity, this definition organizes the FCC's criteria and thresholds for a substantial change according to the wireless facility type and location. 
a.  For towers outside the public rights-of-way, a substantial change occurs when: 
i.  The proposed collocation or modification increases the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet (whichever is greater); or 
ii.  The proposed collocation or modification involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower by more than twenty (20) feet or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater); or 
iii.  The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of more than the standard number of equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4); or 
iv.  The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower, including any access or utility easements currently related to the site. 
b.  For towers in the public rights-of-way and for all base stations, a substantial change occurs when: 
i.  The proposed collocation or modification increases the height of the structure by more than ten (10) percent or more than ten (10) feet (whichever is greater); or 
ii.  The proposed collocation or modification involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; or 
iii.  The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure; or 
iv.  The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new ground-mounted equipment cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; or 
v.  The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
c.  In addition, for all towers and base stations wherever located, a substantial change occurs when: 
i.  The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the existing concealment elements of the support structure; or 
ii.  The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval, provided however that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b)(7)(i)-(iv). 
T.  "Tower" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(9), as may be amended, which defines that term as any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. Examples include, but are not limited to, monopoles (i.e., a bare, unconcealed pole solely intended to support wireless transmission equipment), mono-trees and lattice towers. 
U.  "Transmission equipment" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(8), as may be amended, which defines that term as equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
V.  "Wireless" means any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.83.030 - Applicability. 
This Section 17.83.030 applies to all requests for approval to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station submitted pursuant to Section 6409. However, the applicant may voluntarily elect to seek a conditional use permit or administrative wireless permit under Chapter 17.82 (New and Substantially Changed Wireless Facilities). 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.83.040 - Approvals required. 
A.  Section 6409 Approval. Any request to collocate, replace or remove transmission equipment at an existing wireless tower or base station submitted with a written request for approval under Section 6409 shall require an administrative approval in such form determined by the Director consistent with all valid and enforceable terms and conditions of the underlying use permit or other prior regulatory authorization for the tower or base station (each amendment a "section 6409 approval"). Each section 6409 approval shall be subject to the approval authority's approval, conditional approval or denial without prejudice pursuant to the standards and procedures contained in this chapter. 
B.  Other Permits and Regulatory Approvals. No collocation or modification approved pursuant to this chapter may occur unless the applicant also obtains all other permits and regulatory approvals as may be required by any other federal, state or local government agencies, which includes without limitation any permits and/or regulatory approvals issued by other departments or divisions within the city. Furthermore, any section 6409 approval granted under this chapter shall remain subject to any and all lawful conditions and/or legal requirements associated with such other permits or regulatory approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.83.050 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application Required. The approval authority shall not approve any request for a collocation or modification submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409 except upon a duly filed application consistent with this Section 17.83.050 and any other written rules the city or the Director may establish from time to time in any publicly-stated format. 
B.  Application Content. All applications for a section 6409 approval must include all the content, information and materials required by the Director. The City Council authorizes the Director to develop, publish and from time-to-time update or amend permit application requirements, forms, checklists, guidelines, informational handouts and other related materials that the Director finds necessary, appropriate or useful for processing requests for section 6409 approvals. However, the Director may not require documentation proving the need or presenting the business case for the proposed modification. The City Council further authorizes the Director to establish other reasonable rules and regulations, which may include without limitation regular hours for appointments with applicants, as the Director deems necessary or appropriate to organize, document and manage the application intake process. All such rules and regulations must be in written form and publicly stated to provide applicants with prior notice. 
C.  Procedures for a Duly Filed Application. Any application for a section 6409 approval will not be considered duly filed unless submitted in accordance with the procedures in this Section 17.83.050.C. 
1.  Pre-Submittal Conference. Before application submittal, the applicant must schedule and attend a pre-submittal conference with the Director for all proposed collocations or modifications to any concealed or camouflaged wireless tower or base station. Pre-submittal conferences for all other proposed collocations or modifications are strongly encouraged but not required. The pre-submittal conference is intended to streamline the review process through informal discussion that includes, without limitation, the appropriate project classification and review process, including whether the project qualifies for approval pursuant to Section 6409 or not; any latent issues in connection with the existing wireless tower or base station, including compliance with generally applicable rules for public health and safety; potential concealment issues or concerns (if applicable); coordination with other city departments responsible for application review; and application completeness issues. To mitigate unnecessary delays due to application incompleteness, applicants are encouraged (but not required) to bring any draft applications or other materials so that city staff may provide informal feedback and guidance about whether such applications or other materials may be incomplete or unacceptable. The Planning Division or Public Works Department, as the case may be, shall use reasonable efforts to provide the applicant with an appointment within five (5) working days after receiving a written request and any applicable fee or deposit to reimburse the city for its reasonable costs to provide the services rendered in the pre-submittal conference. 
2.  Submittal Appointment. All applications must be submitted to the city at a pre-scheduled appointment with the Director. Applicants may submit up to ten (10) applications per appointment whenever feasible for city staff and not prejudicial to other applicants. The Director shall use reasonable efforts to provide the applicant with an appointment within five (5) working days after the Director receives a written request and, if applicable, confirms that the applicant complied with the pre-submittal conference requirement. Any application received without an appointment, whether delivered in-person, by mail or through any other means, will not be considered duly filed unless the applicant received a written exemption from the Director at a pre-submittal conference. 
D.  Applications Deemed Withdrawn. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, any application governed under this chapter will be automatically deemed withdrawn by the applicant when the applicant fails to tender a substantive response to the Planning Division or Public Works Department, as the case may be, within ninety (90) calendar days after the Director deems the application incomplete in a written notice to the applicant. The Director may, in the Director's discretion, grant a written extension for up to an additional thirty (30) calendar days when the applicant submits a written request prior to the 90th day that shows good cause to grant the extension. Delays due to circumstances outside the applicant's reasonable control will be considered good cause to grant the extension. 
E.  Peer and Independent Consultant Review. 
1.  Authorization. The City Council authorizes the Director to, in the Director's discretion, select and retain an independent consultant with specialized training, experience and/or expertise in telecommunications issues satisfactory to the Director in connection any permit application. 
2.  Scope. The Director may request an independent consultant review on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with wireless facilities deployment or permit applications for wireless facilities, which include without limitation: (a) permit application completeness and/or accuracy; (b) pre-construction planned compliance with applicable regulations for human exposure to RF emissions; (c) post-construction actual compliance with applicable regulations for human exposure to RF emissions; (d) the applicability, reliability and/or sufficiency of any information, analyses or methodologies used by the applicant to reach any conclusions about any issue with the city's discretion to review; and (e) any other issue identified by the Director that requires expert or specialized knowledge. The Director may request that the independent consultant prepare written reports, testify at public meetings, hearings and/or appeals and attend meetings with city staff and/or the applicant. 
3.  Consultant Fees; Deposit. Subject to applicable law, in the event that the Director elects to retain an independent consultant in connection with any permit application, the applicant shall be responsible for the reasonable costs in connection with the services provided, which may include without limitation any costs incurred by the independent consultant to attend and participate in any meetings or hearings. Before the independent consultant may perform any services, the applicant shall tender to the city a deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost for the services to be provided, as determined by the Director until the city adopts the initial required deposit by fee schedule. The Director may request additional deposits as reasonably necessary to ensure sufficient funds are available to cover the reasonable costs in connection with the independent consultant's services. In the event that the deposit exceeds the total costs for consultant's services, the Director shall promptly return any unused funds to the applicant after the wireless facility has been installed and passes a final inspection by the Building Official or his or her designee. In the event that the reasonable costs for the independent consultant's services exceed the deposit, the Director shall invoice the applicant for the balance. The city shall not issue any construction or grading permit to any applicant with any unpaid deposit requests or invoices. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.83.060 - Decisions; appeals. 
A.  Administrative Review. The approval authority shall administratively review a complete and duly filed application for a section 6409 approval, and may act on such application without prior notice or a public hearing. 
B.  Decision Notices. Within five (5) days after the approval authority acts on an application for a section 6409 approval or before the FCC Shot Clock expires (whichever occurs first), the approval authority shall send a written notice to the applicant. In the event that the approval authority denies the application, the written notice to the applicant must contain (1) the reasons for the decision; (2) a statement that denial will be without prejudice; and (3) instructions for how and when to file an appeal. 
C.  Required Findings for Approval. The approval authority may approve or conditionally approve an application any application for a section 6409 approval when the approval authority finds that the proposed project: 
1.  Involves collocation, removal or replacement of transmission equipment on an existing wireless tower or base station; and 
2.  Does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing wireless tower or base station. 
D.  Criteria for Denial without Prejudice. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, and consistent with all applicable federal laws and regulations, the approval authority may deny without prejudice any application for a section 6409 approval when the approval authority finds that the proposed project: 
1.  Does not meet the findings required in Section 17.83.060.C. (Required Findings for Approval); 
2.  Involves the replacement of the entire support structure; or 
3.  Violates any legally enforceable law, regulation, rule, standard or permit condition reasonably related to public health or safety. 
E.  Conditional Approvals. Subject to any applicable limitations in federal or state law, nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the approval authority's authority to conditionally approve an application for a section 6409 approval to protect and promote the public health and safety. 
F.  Appeals. Any applicant may appeal the approval authority's written decision to deny without prejudice an application for section 6409 approval. The written appeal together with any applicable appeal fee must be tendered to the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the approval authority's written decision, and must state in plain terms the grounds for reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The City Manager shall be the appellate authority for all appeals from the approval authority's written decision to deny without prejudice an application for section 6409 approval. The City Manager shall review the application de novo; provided, however, that the City Manager's decision shall be limited to only whether the application should be approved or denied in accordance with the provisions in this chapter and any other applicable laws. The City Manager shall issue a written decision that contains the reasons for the decision, and such decision shall be final and not subject to any further administrative appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
17.83.070 - Standard conditions of approval. 
In addition to all other conditions adopted by the approval authority, all section 6409 approvals, whether approved by the approval authority or deemed approved by the operation of law, shall be automatically subject to the conditions in this Section 17.83.070. The approval authority (or the City Manager in the City Manager's capacity as the appellate authority) shall have discretion to modify or amend these conditions on a case-by-case basis as may be necessary or appropriate under the circumstances to protect public health and safety or allow for the proper operation of the approved facility consistent with the goals of this chapter. 
A.  Permit Term. The city's grant or grant by operation of law of a section 6409 approval constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or other prior regulatory authorization for the subject tower or base station, and will be regarded as a modification to the underlying approval for the subject tower or base station. The city's grant or grant by operation of law of a section 6409 approval will not extend the permit term, if any, for any underlying permit or other underlying prior regulatory authorization. Accordingly, the term for a section 6409 approval shall be coterminous with the underlying permit or other prior regulatory authorization for the subject tower or base station. 
B.  Compliance Obligations Due to Invalidation. In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates all or any portion of Section 6409 or any FCC rule that interprets Section 6409 such that federal law would not mandate approval for any section 6409 approval(s), such approval(s) shall automatically expire one year from the effective date of the judicial order, unless the decision would not authorize accelerated termination of previously approved section 6409 approvals or the Director grants an extension upon written request from the permittee that shows good cause for the extension, which includes without limitation extreme financial hardship. Notwithstanding anything in the previous sentence to the contrary, the Director may not grant a permanent exemption or indefinite extension. A permittee shall not be required to remove its improvements approved under the invalidated section 6409 approval when it has obtained the applicable permit(s) or submitted an application for such permit(s) before the one-year period ends. 
C.  City's Standing Reserved. The city's grant or grant by operation of law of a section 6409 approval does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section 6409, any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409 or any section 6409 approval. 
D.  Compliance with Approved Plans. Before the permittee submits any applications to the Building Division, the permittee must incorporate this section 6409 approval, all conditions associated with this section 6409 approval and the approved photo simulations into the project plans (the "approved plans"). The permittee must construct, install and operate the wireless facility in substantial compliance with the approved plans, as determined by the Director. Any material alterations, modifications or other changes to the approved plans, whether requested by the permittee or required by other departments or public agencies with jurisdiction over the wireless facility, must be submitted in a written request subject to the Director's prior review and approval. The Director may revoke the section 6409 approval if the Director finds that the requested alteration, modification or other change causes a substantial change as that term is defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b)(7), as may be amended. 
E.  Build-Out Period. This section 6409 approval will automatically expire one year from the approval or deemed-granted date unless the permittee obtains all other permits and approvals required to install, construct and/or operate the approved wireless facility, which includes without limitation any permits or approvals required by any federal, state or local public agencies with jurisdiction over the subject property, the wireless facility or its use. The Director may grant one written extension up to one year when the permittee shows good cause to extend the limitations period in a written request for an extension submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the automatic expiration date in this condition. 
F.  Maintenance Obligations; Vandalism. The permittee shall keep the site, which includes without limitation any and all improvements, equipment, structures, access routes, fences and landscape features, in a neat, clean and safe condition in accordance with the approved plans and all conditions in this section 6409 approval. The permittee shall keep the site area free from all litter and debris at all times. The permittee, at no cost to the city, shall remove and remediate any graffiti or other vandalism at the site within forty-eight (48) hours after the permittee receives notice or otherwise becomes aware that such graffiti or other vandalism occurred. 
G.  Compliance with Laws. The permittee shall maintain compliance at all times with all federal, state and local statutes, regulations, orders or other rules that carry the force of law ("Laws") applicable to the permittee, the subject property, the wireless facility or any use or activities in connection with the use authorized in this section 6409 approval, which includes without limitation any laws applicable to human exposure to RF emissions. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that this obligation is intended to be broadly construed and that no other specific requirements in these conditions are intended to reduce, relieve or otherwise lessen the permittee's obligations to maintain compliance with all laws. In the event that the city fails to timely notice, prompt or enforce compliance with any applicable provision in the El Monte Municipal Code, any permit, any permit condition or any applicable law or regulation, the applicant or permittee will not be relieved from its obligation to comply in all respects with all applicable provisions in the El Monte Municipal Code, any permit, any permit condition or any applicable law or regulation. 
H.  Adverse Impacts on Other Properties. The permittee shall use all reasonable efforts to avoid any and all undue or unnecessary adverse impacts on nearby properties that may arise from the permittee's or its authorized personnel's construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal and/or other activities at the site. Undue or unnecessary adverse impacts shall not be interpreted to mean aesthetic impacts that may result from the city's issuance of this section 6409 approval consistent with applicable law. The permittee shall not perform or cause others to perform any construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal or other work that involves heavy equipment or machines except during normal construction hours authorized by the El Monte Municipal Code. The restricted work hours in this condition will not prohibit any work required to prevent an actual, immediate harm to property or persons, or any work during an emergency declared by the city. The Director or the Director's designee may issue a stop work order for any activities that violates this condition. 
I.  Inspections; Emergencies. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city's officers, officials, staff or other designee may enter onto the site and inspect the improvements and equipment upon reasonable prior notice to the permittee; provided, however, that the city's officers, officials, staff or other designee may, but will not be obligated to, enter onto the site area without prior notice to support, repair, disable or remove any improvements or equipment in emergencies or when such improvements or equipment threatens actual, imminent harm to property or persons. The permittee will be permitted to supervise the city's officers, officials, staff or other designee while any such inspection or emergency access occurs. 
J.  Permittee's Contact Information. The permittee shall furnish the Director with accurate and up-to-date contact information to reach a live person responsible for the wireless facility, which includes without limitation a direct telephone number, facsimile number, mailing address and email address. The permittee shall keep such contact information up-to-date at all times and immediately provide the Director with updated contact information in the event that the contact information changes. 
K.  Indemnification. The permittee and, if applicable, the property owner upon which the wireless facility is installed, shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, City Council and City boards, commissions, agents, officers, officials, employees and volunteers from any and all (1) damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands, law suits, writs and other actions or proceedings ("claims") brought against the city or its agents, officers, officials, employees or volunteers to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city's approval of this section 6409 approval, and (2) other claims of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, that arise from or in connection with the permittee's or its agents', directors', officers', employees', contractors', subcontractors', licensees', or customers' acts or omissions in connection with this section 6409 approval or the wireless facility. In the event the city becomes aware of any claims, the city will use best efforts to promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the city shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the city's defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall promptly reimburse city for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course of the defense. The permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that the permittee's indemnification obligations under this condition are a material consideration that motivates the city to approve this section 6409 approval, and that such indemnification obligations will survive the expiration or revocation of this section 6409 approval. 
L.  Performance Bond. Before the applicable city department issues any construction or encroachment permit, as applicable, in connection with this section 6409 approval, the permittee shall post a performance bond from a surety and in a form acceptable to the Director in an amount reasonably necessary to cover the cost to remove the improvements and restore all affected areas based on a written estimate from a qualified contractor with experience in wireless facilities removal. The written estimate must include the cost to remove all equipment and other improvements, which includes without limitation all antennas, radios, batteries, generators, utilities, cabinets, mounts, brackets, hardware, cables, wires, conduits, structures, shelters, towers, poles, footings and foundations, whether above ground or below ground, constructed or installed in connection with the wireless facility, plus the cost to completely restore any areas affected by the removal work to a standard compliant with applicable laws. In establishing or adjusting the bond amount required under this condition, and in accordance with California Government Code § 65964(a), the Director shall take into consideration any information provided by the permittee regarding the cost to remove the wireless facility to a standard compliant with applicable laws. In addition, the Director may modify this condition to the extent reasonably necessary to comply with any reasonable requirements imposed by the permittee's surety. 
M.  Recall to Approval Authority; Permit Revocation. This permit shall be subject to El Monte Municipal Code Section 17.24.100 (Revocation). 
N.  Record Retention. The permittee must maintain complete and accurate copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in connection with the wireless facility, which includes without limitation this approval, the approved plans and photo simulations incorporated into this approval, all conditions associated with this approval and any ministerial permits or approvals issued in connection with this approval. In the event that the permittee does not maintain such records as required in this condition, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an inspection of the missing records will be construed against the permittee. The permittee may keep electronic records; provided, however, that hard copies or electronic records kept in the city's regular files will control over any conflicts between such city-controlled copies or records and the permittee's electronic copies, and complete originals will control over all other copies in any form. 
O.  Undergrounded Utilities. In the event that other electric or communications utilities in the public right-of-way underground their facilities where the permittee's wireless facility is located, and the permittee's wireless facility is located in the public right-of-way, the permittee must underground its equipment except the antennas and antenna supports. Such undergrounding shall occur at the permittee's sole cost and expense except as reimbursed pursuant to law. 
P.  Electric Meter Removal. In the event that the electric utility provider adopts or changes its rules obviating the need for a separate or ground-mounted electric meter and enclosure in the public right-of-way, the permittee on its own initiative and at its sole cost and expense shall apply to the city for the required encroachment and/or other ministerial permit(s) to remove the separate or ground-mounted electric meter and enclosure and restore the affected area to its original condition. 
Q.  Rearrangement and Relocation. The permittee acknowledges that the City, in its sole discretion and at any time, may: (1) change any street grade, width or location; (2) add, remove or otherwise change any improvements in, on, under or along any street owned by the city or any other public agency, which includes without limitation any sewers, storm drains, conduits, pipes, vaults, boxes, cabinets, poles and utility systems for gas, water, electric or telecommunications; and/or (3) perform any other work deemed necessary, useful or desirable by the City (collectively, "City Work"). The city reserves the rights to do any and all City Work without any admission on its part that the city would not have such rights without the express reservation in this permit. In the event that the Public Works Director determines that any City Work will require the permittee's wireless facility located in the public right-of-way to be rearranged and/or relocated, the permittee shall, at its sole cost and expense, do or cause to be done all things necessary to accomplish such rearrangement and/or relocation. If the permittee fails or refuses to either permanently or temporarily rearrange and/or relocate the permittee's wireless facility within a reasonable time after the Public Works Director's notice, the city may (but will not be obligated to) cause the rearrangement or relocation to be performed at the permittee's sole cost and expense. The city may exercise its rights to rearrange or relocate the permittee's wireless facility without prior notice to permittee when the Public Works Director determines that the City Work is immediately necessary to protect public health or safety. The permittee shall reimburse the city for all costs and expenses in connection with such work within ten (10) days after a written demand for reimbursement and reasonable documentation to support such costs. In addition, the permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold the city, its agents, officers, officials, employees and volunteers harmless from and against any claims in connection with rearranging or relocating the permittee's facility, or turning on or off any water, oil, gas, electricity or other utility service in connection with the permittee's facility. 
R.  Abandoned Wireless Facilities. The wireless facility authorized under this permit shall be deemed abandoned if not operated for any continuous six-month period. Within ninety (90) days after a wireless facility is abandoned or deemed abandoned, the permittee and/or property owner shall completely remove the wireless facility and all related improvements, and shall restore all affected areas to a condition compliant with all applicable laws, which includes without limitation the El Monte Municipal Code. In the event that neither the permittee nor the property owner complies with the removal and restoration obligations under this condition within said 90-day period, the city shall have the right (but not the obligation) to perform such removal and restoration with or without notice, and the permittee and property owner shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with such removal and/or restoration activities. 
(Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 8-7-2018)  
Chapter 17.84 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.84.010 - Findings and declaration of intent. 
(a)  The California Legislature in Section 65864 of the Government Code has found that the lack of certainty in the approval of development projects can result in a waste of resources, escalate the cost of other development to the consumer, and discourage investment in and commitment to comprehensive planning which would make maximum efficient utilization of resources at the least economic cost to the public. 
(b)  The City Council finds and determines that the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare will be furthered by the adoption of this chapter in order to provide a mechanism for the enactment of development agreements in order to implement various policies of the comprehensive update to the general plan and to provide flexibility for the implementation of certain development project approvals for the development of particular projects and to provide a mechanism for allowing expenditures to respond selectively to development proposals during the course of the preparation of the City General Plan Update, including assurances of adequate public facilities at the time of development, proper timing and sequencing of development, effective capital improvement programming to accomplish the foregoing purposes and aims and the realization of the benefits to be derived therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.020 - Purpose of development agreement. 
Development agreements enacted pursuant to this chapter are to ensure to the qualified applicant for a development project that upon approval of the development project to which it corresponds that, the qualified applicant may proceed with the development project in accordance with certain existing policies, rules and regulations, and subject to specified conditions of approval, in order to implement the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter. Development agreements will also ensure that all conditions of approval, including the construction of off-site improvements made necessary by such land developments, will proceed in an orderly and economical fashion to the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.030 - Authority for adoption. 
This chapter pertaining to development agreements for the implementation of development projects, is adopted under the authority of Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.040 - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the following respective meanings: 
(1)  "Developer" means a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of a development agreement. 
(2)  "Development agreement" means a development agreement enacted by legislation between the city and a qualified applicant pursuant to Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. 
(3)  "Planning Services Manager" means the Planning Services Manager or the Planning Services Manager's duly authorized designee. 
(4)  "Qualified applicant" is a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of a proposed development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.050 - Forms and information. 
(a)  The Planning Services Manager shall prescribe the form of each application, notice, and documents provided for or required under this chapter for the preparation and implementation of development agreements consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The Planning Services Manager may require an applicant for a development agreement to submit such information and supporting data as the Planning Services Manager, City Council, and other agencies to which the applicant is referred under this chapter consider necessary to properly process the application. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.060 - Fees. 
The City Council shall, from time to time by separate resolution or resolutions, fix schedules of fees and charges to be imposed for the filing, processing, and recording of each application and document provided for or required under this chapter, which fees and charges as then currently prescribed shall accompany each application made under this chapter. 
These fees and charges shall be in addition to, and not in substitution of, any other required fees and charges relative to development of the subject property and shall be for the purpose of defraying the costs associated with city review and action on an application. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.070 - Qualification as an applicant. 
Except as provided in Section 17.82.080(a), only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant includes an authorized agent of a qualified applicant. The Planning Services Manager may require an applicant to submit proof of his/her interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the qualified applicant. Such proof may include a title report, policy or guarantees issued by a title insurance company licensed to do business in the State of California evidencing the requisite interest of the applicant in the real property. If the application is made by the holder of an equitable interest, the application shall be accompanied by a title guarantee issued by a title insurance company report and by a notarized statement of consent to proceed with the proposed development agreement executed by the holder of the legal interest. Before processing the application, the Planning Services Manager shall obtain the opinion of the City Attorney as to the sufficiency of the qualified applicant's interest in the real property to enter into the development agreement as a qualified applicant hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.080 - Procedure for development agreement. 
(a)  Initiation by Application. An application for a development agreement may be made to the Planning Services Manager in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
(1)  Application may be made by any qualified applicant. 
(2)  Application may be made by the City Council. If an application is made for a development agreement by the City Council, the city shall obtain and attach a notarized statement of consent to proceed with the proposed agreement executed by the owner of the subject property. 
(b)  Contents of the Application. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the City Planning Services Manager and shall be accompanied by a proposed ordinance and development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.090 - Proposed form of development agreement. 
Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the qualified applicant or as authorized in Section 17.82.080. Any such development agreement prepared by a qualified applicant shall contain the provisions required under Section 17.82.010, Section 17.82.340, and Section 17.82.360 of this chapter shall also include the following: 
(1)  The parties to the development agreement; 
(2)  The nature of the qualified applicant's legal or equitable interest in the real property constituting such person as a qualified applicant hereunder; 
(3)  A description of the development project sufficient to permit the development agreement to be reviewed under the applicable criteria of this chapter. Such description may include, but is not limited to, references to site and building plans, elevations sufficient to determine heights and areas, relationships to adjacent properties and operational data. Where appropriate, such description may distinguish between elements of the development project which are proposed to be fixed under the development agreement, those which may vary and the standards and criteria pursuant to which the same may be reviewed; 
(4)  An identification of the approvals and permits for the development project enacted to the date of or contemplated by the development agreement; 
(5)  The proposed duration of the development agreement; 
(6)  The proposed site improvement and building improvement design standards which the applicant shall use and apply for guidance of city consideration of the applicant's development project; 
(7)  The proposed phasing of the construction, and any public improvements to be required; 
(8)  A program and criteria for regular periodic review under this chapter; 
(9)  Proposed provisions providing security for the performance of the qualified applicant under the development agreement; 
(10)  Any other relevant provisions which may be deemed necessary by the Planning Services Manager pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.100 - Review of application. 
(a)  Upon submission of an application for a development agreement, the Planning Services Manager shall stamp on the application the date it is received. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of application the Planning Services Manager shall review the application and accompanying documentation for legal sufficiency, compliance with technical requirements and may reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If the Planning Services Manager finds that the application is complete for processing the Planning Services Manager shall accept it for filing. The Planning Services Manager shall cause a written notice of acceptance or rejection to be mailed or delivered to qualified applicant. If rejected, the notice must also give the reason for the rejection. If such notice is neither mailed nor delivered within thirty (30) days following receipt of application for the development agreement, the application shall be deemed filed on the thirtieth day following its receipt by the Planning Services Manager. 
(b)  After the application is accepted for filing or deemed filed, the Planning Services Manager shall then review the application and determine any additional requirements necessary to complete the form of development agreement. After receiving the required information, the Planning Services Manager shall prepare a staff report and recommendation and shall state whether or not the development agreement as proposed, or in an amended form (specifying the nature of the amendments), would implement, be consistent with and in compliance with, the adopted general plan. Any proposed specific plan, relevant city policies and guidelines for development, and the provisions of this chapter. The Planning Services Manager shall, as part of the review of the application, circulate copies of the proposed development agreement to those city departments and other agencies having jurisdiction over the development project to be undertaken pursuant to the development agreement for review and comment by such city departments and agencies. The City Attorney shall also review the proposed development agreement for legal form and sufficiency and shall approve and/or prepare a proposed ordinance authorizing the city to enter into the development agreement for action by the City Council upon hearing thereof as specified by this chapter. The staff report and recommendation of the Planning Services Manager shall include any appropriate recommendations received, and the proposed form of ordinance prepared and/or approved by the City Attorney. 
(c)  Upon the completion of such review, the Planning Services Manager shall set the matter for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.110 - Contents of development agreement. 
(a)  A development agreement shall specify its duration, the permitted uses of the property thereunder, the density and/or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings and improvements, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. A development agreement may include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions; provided, that such conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the property for the uses and to the density or intensity, height, and size of development set forth in the development agreement and phasing if and to the extent the development agreement so provides. Without limitation as to types of conditions, terms, and restrictions, the development agreement may provide for the phasing of construction of development projects and any improvements with respect thereto, and the development agreement may also provide that the construction shall be commenced and completed within specified times and that the development project, public improvements, or any phase thereof be commenced and completed within specified times. 
(b)  A development agreement shall include all conditions imposed by the city, and may also include conditions imposed by other agencies, and all obligations agreed to by the city and other parties to the development agreement with respect to the development project thereunder including those conditions authorized by law and/or required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, or the National Environmental Protection Act, and the city's regulations with respect thereto in order to eliminate or mitigate environmental and traffic impacts caused by or aggravated as a result of the development project proposed under the development agreement. 
(c)  A development agreement shall contain an indemnity and insurance clause in form and substance acceptable to the City Attorney, requiring the qualified applicant to protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city against claims arising out of the development process; provided, that such a provision does not violate applicable law or constitute a joint venture, partnership or other participation in the business affairs of qualified applicant by the city. 
(d)  A development agreement shall include appropriate provisions acceptable to the City Attorney providing security for the performance under the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.120 - Public hearing (planning commission). 
On the date set for hearing or on the date or dates to which the hearing is continued, a development agreement shall be considered at a public hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.130 - Review—Standard (planning commission). 
The Planning Commission may recommend adoption of a development agreement as a method of implementing or providing standards and criteria for any approval of the Planning Commission or permits or approvals issued or made by any other city agency, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Rezoning and/or conditions imposed upon approval of rezoning; 
(2)  Issuance of a conditional use permit; 
(3)  Conditions imposed upon approval of a permit after discretionary review; 
(4)  Conditions imposed in connection with the adoption of any general plan amendment or specific plan; 
(5)  Site-specific conditions imposed in any other district; 
(6)  Approval of and/or conditions imposed upon approval of a subdivision or parcel map or maps; 
(7)  The separate review and approval by the City Attorney of conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) affecting the subject property where the development project affects, or is proposed to affect, more than one legal parcel, which CC&Rs shall include enforcement provisions acceptable to the city including without limitation the grant of power to the City by the applicant to enforce the property maintenance standards set forth in such CC&Rs as if the city was a property owner party to such CC&Rs. Such CC&Rs shall be recorded against the lands included in the development project prior to issuance by the city of any certificate of occupancy. 
(8)  The formation of any assessment district, benefit district, maintenance district or special benefit district or any other procedure, for the installation of required or necessary on-site or off-site improvements or infrastructure; and/or 
(9)  Mitigation measures imposed upon a development project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act or the National Environmental Protection Act. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.140 - Recommendation by planning commission. 
The Planning Commission shall make a report and recommendation in writing to the City Council as follows: 
(a)  That the development agreement be adopted as proposed; 
(b)  That the development agreement be adopted with modifications, as proposed by the Planning Commission; or 
(c)  That the development agreement be denied. 
Any action taken by the Planning Commission shall include written findings specifying the facts and information relied upon by the commission in rendering its decision and recommendation. 
The Planning Commission shall make such report of its findings and recommendations to the City Council within thirty-five (35) days after the completion of said hearing. Failure of the Planning Commission to so report within said period shall be deemed to be a recommendation of denial by the Planning Commission of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.150 - Setting hearing date by City Council. 
Upon the filing of its report and recommendations on a development agreement by the Planning Commission or upon the expiration of said thirty-five (35) days provided for in Section 17.82.140, the City Council shall, at its next regular meeting held at least three (3) days thereafter on which the subject is agendized thereupon set the matter for public hearing before the City Council, and the City Clerk shall give required notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing in the same manner and in the same terms as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.160 - Ordinance public hearing (City Council). 
A development agreement is a legislative act and it shall be enacted or amended by ordinance only after a public hearing before the City Council. The ordinance shall be subject to referendum and refer to and incorporate by reference the text of the development agreement. The development agreement shall not be binding or enforceable prior to the effective date of the ordinance approving the development agreement and execution of the development agreement by all parties thereto. 
Because a development agreement is also a contract which requires the consent of each party in order to become binding, the council reserves the right to disapprove entering into any development agreement, regardless of the provisions hereof, and the ordinance shall be advisory only and shall not require the acceptance of any development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.170 - Conduct of hearing by the City Council. 
The City Council shall consider the proposed development agreement and the Planning Commission's recommendation together with any additional public testimony at the public hearing on the date set for said hearing or on the date or dates to which such hearing may be continued from time to time by the City Council. 
The City Council may refer the issue back to the Planning Commission for further hearing and recommendation whereupon Planning Commission shall file its report on reconsideration of the referral from the City Council within thirty (30) days thereafter. The City Council may also act on all or any such issue without reference back to the Planning Commission. The decision of the City Council shall be rendered within forty-five (45) days after the hearing before the City Council or within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the final report from the Planning Commission, whichever is later, unless extended by mutual agreement of the qualified applicant and City Council. Failure of the City Council to act within the forty-five (45) days or extension shall be deemed a rejection of the development agreement. The City Council may: 
(1)  Approve the development agreement as recommended by the Planning Commission; 
(2)  Approve the development agreement with or without modification; or 
(3)  Reject the development agreement, in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.180 - Consistency with general plan and specific plans (City Council). 
Before the City Council may approve a development agreement with or without modification, it must find that its provisions are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan and relevant city policies and guidelines for development. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.190 - Notice. 
The Planning Services Manager shall give notices of all required public hearings held before the Planning Commission under this chapter. The City Clerk shall give notice of all required public hearings held before the City Council under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.200 - Form and time of notice. 
(a)  The notice referred to in Section 17.82.190 shall contain: 
(1)  The date, time, and place of the hearing; 
(2)  The identity of the hearing body; 
(3)  A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the hearing; 
(4)  The location or locations where a copy of the proposed development agreement may be viewed or had; 
(5)  Other information required by specific provisions of this chapter or which the Planning Services Manager considers necessary or desirable. 
(b)  The time and manner of giving notice is by: 
(1)  Publication at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or if there is none, posting at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in at least three (3) public places in the city. 
(2)  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or the owner's duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant. 
(3)  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. 
(4)  Mailing of the notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection (b)(4) or subsection (b)(2) is greater than one thousand (1,000), the Planning Services Manager, or City Clerk, as applicable, may, in lieu of mailed or written notice, provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(c)  The Planning Commission or City Council, as the case may be, may direct that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by state law, but failure to comply with any excess notice procedure shall not invalidate a development agreement entered into by the city under this chapter. Pursuant to the excess notice requirements of this subsection (c), it is recommended that notice of each public hearing called under this chapter should be mailed to the chair of the citizens advisory committee at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  The notice requirements referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are declaratory of existing law. If and when state law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.210 - Coordination of development agreement application with other discretionary approvals. 
It is the intent of this chapter that the application for a development agreement will be made and considered simultaneously with the review of other necessary applications, including, but not limited to rezoning, planned commercial, or industrial development and conditional use permits. If combined with an application for rezoning, planned development or conditional use permit, the application for a development agreement shall be submitted with said application and shall be processed, to the maximum extent possible, jointly to avoid duplication of hearings and repetition of information. A development agreement is not a substitute for, nor an alternative to, any other required permit or approval, and the qualified applicant or developer must comply with all other required procedures for development approval. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.220 - Time for and initiation of review. 
(a)  Regular Periodic Review. The city shall review the performance of the developer under a development agreement periodically on a regular basis as determined in the development agreement or by this subsection at least once every twelve (12) months for the term of the development agreement. Ninety (90) days prior to the "established date or dates for regular periodic review" which shall be the anniversary of the effective date of the development agreement, or such other substitute date or dates, mutually agreed to by the qualified applicant or developer and city in writing for such regular periodic reviews, the developer shall submit to the Planning Services Manager evidence of the good faith compliance with the development agreement. If the Planning Services Manager determines that such evidence is insufficient for the Planning Services Manager's regular periodic review, or if the developer fails to submit any evidence, then prior to seventy-five (75) days of the established date or dates for regular periodic review the Planning Services Manager shall deliver or mail written notice to the developer of the developer's failure to submit any evidence or specifying the additional information reasonably required by the Planning Services Manager in order to review the developer's good faith compliance with the development agreement. The developer shall have thirty (30) days after mailing or delivery of such written notice by the Planning Services Manager in which to respond to the Planning Services Manager. If the developer fails to provide such information to the Planning Services Manager within the thirty (30) day period, the Planning Services Manager shall not find that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. 
(b)  Special Review. 
(1)  Initiation of Review. Reviews which are other than the regular periodic reviews provided for in subsection (a) of this section are defined as special reviews and may be had either by agreement between the developer and city or by initiation of the city by the affirmative vote of the City Council, but in any event shall not be held more frequently than three (3) times a year. 
(2)  Notice of Special Review. The Planning Services Manager shall begin the special review proceeding by mailing or delivering written notice to the developer that the city intends to undertake a special review for the good faith compliance of developer with the development agreement. He shall mail or deliver to the developer a thirty (30) day notice of intent to undertake such a special review within which thirty (30) days developer shall provide to the Planning Services Manager evidence of good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the Planning Services Manager determines that such evidence is insufficient for the Planning Services Manager's review, or if the developer fails to submit any evidence within the thirty-day period, then within forty-five (45) days of giving the notice of intent to undertake a special review, the Planning Services Manager shall deliver or mail written notice to the developer of the developer's failure to submit any evidence or additional information reasonably required by the Planning Services Manager in order to review the developer's good faith compliance with the development agreement. As with the regular periodic review, the developer shall have thirty (30) days after mailing or delivering of such written notice by the Planning Services Manager in which to respond to the Planning Services Manager. If the developer fails to provide such information to the Planning Services Manager within the thirty-day period, developer shall not be found by the Planning Services Manager to have complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.230 - Finding of compliance. 
With respect to either a regular periodic review or a special review, if the Planning Services Manager finds good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement for the period reviewed, the Planning Services Manager, upon request of developer, shall issue a certificate of compliance for such period reviewed, which shall be in recordable form and may be recorded by the developer in the official records of Los Angeles County. The issuance of a certificate of compliance by the Planning Services Manager shall conclude the review for the applicable period for which the finding was made and such determination shall be final in the absence of fraud. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.240 - Failure to find good faith compliance. 
If the Planning Services Manager does not find, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement, he shall so notify the City Council and the developer. The Planning Services Manager shall specify the reasons for the Planning Services Manager's determination, the information relied upon in making such decision and any findings made with respect thereto. At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council on which the matter is agendized, or to which it is continued, the City Council shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Compliance. Determine on the basis of evidence presented that there has been good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, in which event the Planning Services Manager, upon request of the developer, shall issue a certificate of compliance in accordance with Section 17.82.230. 
(2)  Failure to Find Good Faith Compliance. If the City Council is unable to determine on the basis of the evidence presented that there has been good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, the City Council shall do one or more of the following: 
(i)  Additional Time. Upon receipt of sufficient justification to City Council, grant the developer additional time in which to establish good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement at a subsequent duly called council meeting; or 
(ii)  Hearing. Set a date for a public hearing on the issue of compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement and the possible conditioning and/or termination or modification of the development agreement in accordance with California Government Code Section 65865.1, which public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 17.82.250. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.250 - Public hearing. 
The City Council shall, within ninety (90) days of the City Council's setting a date for a public hearing in Section 17.82.240(2)(ii), conduct a public hearing at which the developer shall have the opportunity to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement on the basis of substantial evidence presented to the City Council. The burden of proof of this issue is upon the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.260 - Findings upon public hearing. 
The City Council shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.270 - Procedure upon findings. 
(a)  Compliance. If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded and such determination is final in absence of fraud. 
(b)  Noncompliance. If the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the developer has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the development agreement during the period under review, the City Council may allow the development agreement to be continued by imposition of new terms and conditions intended to remedy such noncompliance or to be otherwise modified, by the mutual consent of the developer and the city or the City Council may unilaterally terminate the development agreement or take other action authorized by Government Code Section 65865.1. The City Council may impose such terms and conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the city. The decision of the City Council shall be final. The rights of the parties after termination shall be as set forth in Section 17.82.370. 
(c)  Ordinance. Any termination, modification or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to this section shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall recite the facts, findings, information relied on and/or the lack thereof, and the reasons which, in the opinion of the City Council, make the termination or modifications or imposition of new terms and conditions of the development agreement necessary. The enactment of such an ordinance by the City Council shall be final and conclusive as to its effect on the subject development agreement. Not later than ten (10) days following the adoption of the ordinance, one copy thereof shall be forwarded to the developer. The development agreement shall be terminated, or the amendments to the development agreement shall become effective, on the effective date of the ordinance or as otherwise provided in such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.280 - Certificate of compliance. 
If the City Council finds good faith compliance by the developer with the terms of the development agreement, the Planning Services Manager upon request of the developer and subject to the written concerns of the City Attorney shall issue a certificate of compliance, which shall be in recordable form and may be recorded by the developer in the official records of the County of Los Angeles. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.290 - Initiation of amendment or cancellation. 
A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest. Any such person may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.300 - Procedure. 
The procedure for amendment or cancellation in whole or in part of a development agreement by mutual consent shall be as follows: 
(a)  Upon receipt by Planning Services Manager of a proposal for an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, a public hearing thereon shall be set and conducted before the City Council within ninety (90) days of receipt of the proposal; 
(b)  As to prescribed notice of public hearing, where the City introduces the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the property owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least ten (10) days in advance of the giving of notice of intention to consider the amendment or cancellation required by Section 17.82.200 (b)(4); 
(c)  Any amendment, cancellation or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to this section shall be by ordinance. The ordinance shall recite the facts, findings, information relied on, and reasons which, in the opinion of the City Council, make the amendments or cancellation of the development agreement necessary. Not later than ten (10) days following the adoption of the ordinance, one copy thereof shall be forwarded to the developer. The development agreement shall become effective on the effective date of such ordinance unless otherwise indicated therein. 
(d)  Although approved by the City Council, an amendment to or cancellation of a development agreement shall not be binding or enforceable prior to the effective date of the ordinance approving the amendment or cancellation of the development agreement and the execution of such amendment or a written consent to such cancellation by all parties to the development agreement or by their successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.310 - Failure to receive notice. 
The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or this chapter to receive such notice shall not affect the authority of the city to enter into nor invalidate a development agreement entered into by the city or other action taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.320 - Rules governing conduct of hearing. 
All the public hearings under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures and the time limits specified for the conduct of such hearings in this chapter. A copy of any relevant proposed or existing development agreement shall be made available for public review at the City Clerk's office prior to the date of each hearing thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.330 - Irregularity in proceeding. 
Formal rules of evidence or procedure which must be followed in a court of law shall not be applied in the consideration of a proposed development agreement, its modification, cancellation, or termination under this chapter and the provisions of this chapter shall provide the procedure for such consideration. The qualified applicant or developer has the burden of presenting substantial evidence at each of the public hearings on the proposal and shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in support of the qualified applicant's or developer's position. No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement, its modification, cancellation, or termination shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court on the ground of the improper admission or rejection of evidence or by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission ("error") as to any matter pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court finds that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury resulted if error is shown. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.340 - Subsequently adopted state and federal laws. 
All development agreements shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of the laws of the State of California, the Constitution of the United States and any codes, statutes or executive mandates and any court decisions, state or federal, thereunder. In the event that any such law, code, statute, or decision made or enacted after a development agreement has been entered into prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement then such provisions of the development agreement shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such law, code, statute, mandate or decision, and every such development agreement shall so provide. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.350 - Architectural review. 
Unless otherwise provided in a development agreement, the implementation and execution of all phases of a development agreement shall be subject to architectural (design) reviews pursuant to the applicable provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.360 - Governing rules, regulations, development policies and effect of development agreement. 
Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, or imposed for reasons of health or safety during the term of the development agreement, rules, regulations and official policies of the city governing permitted uses of the land, governing density and governing design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, shall be those rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property or to the city in general, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property at the time of execution of the development agreement, nor shall a development agreement prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies. Each development agreement shall provide, and it is provided in this section, that this section and the provisions thereof do not apply to taxes, imposts, assessments, fees, charges or other exactions imposed by or payable to city unless specifically and to the extent otherwise expressly agreed to by city in the development agreement, and that all of such shall be in amounts fixed at the time they are payable. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.370 - Rights of the parties after cancellation or termination. 
In the event that a development agreement is canceled, or otherwise terminated, unless otherwise agreed in writing by city, all rights of the developer, property owner or successors in interest under the development agreement shall terminate and any and all benefits, including money or land, received by the city shall be retained by the city. Notwithstanding the above provision, any termination of the development agreement shall not prevent the developer from completing a building or other improvements authorized to be constructed pursuant to a valid operative building permit previously approved by the city and under construction at the time of termination, but the city may take any action permitted by law to prevent, stop, or correct any violation of law occurring during and after construction, and neither the developer nor any tenant shall occupy any portion of the project or any building not authorized by an occupancy permit. As used herein, "construction" shall mean work on site under a valid building permit and "completing" shall mean completion of construction for beneficial occupancy for developer's use, or if a portion of the project is intended for use by a lessee or tenant, then for such portion "completion" shall mean completion of construction except for interior improvements such as partitions, duct and electrical run outs, floor coverings, wall coverings, lighting, furniture, trade fixtures, finished ceilings, and other improvements typically constructed by or for tenants of similar buildings. All such uses shall, to the extent applicable, be deemed nonconforming uses and shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of El Monte Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.380 - Construction. 
This chapter and any subsequent development agreement shall be read together. With respect to any development agreement enacted under this chapter, any provision of such a development agreement which is in conflict with this chapter shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.390 - Recordation of development agreement, ordinances and notices. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days following complete execution of a development agreement and following effective date of enacting ordinance, the City Clerk shall record with the County Recorder, a fully executed copy of the development agreement and ordinance approving development agreement, which shall describe the land subject thereto. The development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the development agreement shall inure to the parties and all successors in interest to the parties to the development agreement. 
(b)  If the parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the development agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65868 or this chapter, or if the City Council terminates or modifies the development agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65865.1 or this chapter for failure of the developer to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the City Clerk shall, after such action takes effect, have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder of Los Angeles County. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.400 - Enforcement of development agreements. 
Except as provided herein below, a development agreement shall be enforceable by any party thereto notwithstanding any change in any applicable general or specific plan, zoning, subdivision, or building regulation adopted by the city which alters or amends the rules, regulations, or policies specified in Section 17.82.360 or in the development agreement itself. 
An exception to the certainty intended by execution of a development agreement as expressed in Section 17.82.020 shall be when a change to the development agreement is imposed or required not by city initiated action, but rather by city response to (i) federal or state court or administrative agency determination or (ii) federal or state legislative or administrative agency regulation requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.410 - Severability clause. 
Should any provision of this chapter or of a subsequent development agreement be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be either invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this chapter and development agreement shall remain in full force and effect unimpaired by the holding, except as may otherwise be provided in a development agreement. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted and enacted this chapter and each provision thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the provisions, or the applications thereof to any person or place, be declared invalid or unconstitutional. For the purpose of this section, a "provision" is a section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of any thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.420 - Judicial review—Time limitation. 
(a)  Any judicial review of the initial approval by the city of a development agreement shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1085 of the Code of Civil Procedure; and judicial review of any City action taken pursuant to this chapter, other than the initial approval of a development agreement, shall be writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(b)  Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of the city taken pursuant to this chapter shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
17.84.430 - Condemnation. 
All and every part of the development agreements are subject to condemnation proceedings and entering into such agreements are not intended to restrict the exercise of eminent domain by the city or any other public agency." 
(Ord. No. 2735, § 1, 2-17-2009)  
Chapter 17.85 - DENSITY BONUS PROVISIONS 
 
17.85.010 - Intent and purpose. 
This chapter provides incentives for housing developments of five (5) or more residential units for the base density (prior to any density bonus) that is affordable to the types of households and qualifying residents identified in Section 17.85.020, below. The incentives include the ability to construct up to thirty-five (35) percent more residential dwelling units than the maximum residential density permitted by the applicable general plan designation, and other incentives provided by this chapter. In offering these incentives, this chapter is intended to implement the requirements of state law (Government Code Sections 65302, 65913, and 65915—65918 et seq.). In enacting this chapter, the city also intends to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the city's general plan housing element to encourage the production of affordable housing in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 49, 6-21-2016)  
17.85.020 - Types of bonuses and incentives allowed. 
A.  Very Low and Lower Income Housing and Senior Citizen Housing. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one density bonus of twenty (20) percent over the maximum residential density (except in the case of senior citizen housing, as provided below), provided that the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordance with one of the following criteria: 
1.  Very Low Income Households. Five (5) percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to very low income households; or 
2.  Lower Income Households. Ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to lower income households; or 
3.  Senior Citizen Housing Development. For senior citizen housing developments, the density bonus shall be twenty (20) percent of the number of senior housing units provided. 
B.  Moderate Income Housing. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one density bonus of five (5) percent over the maximum residential density if the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordance with all of the following criteria: 
1.  At least ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable ownership costs to moderate income households; and 
2.  The housing development is a common interest project as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code; and 
3.  All of the dwelling units in the housing development are offered for sale to the public. 
C.  Higher Density Bonus for Greater Contribution of Affordable Units. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development that is eligible for a density bonus based upon the contribution of affordable units, may receive a higher amount of density bonus if the percentage of very low, lower, and moderate income housing units exceeds the base percentage established in subsection A or B of this section, as follows: 
1.  Very Low Income Units. For each one percent increase above five (5) percent in affordable units for very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half (2.5) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, as follows: 
Table 1: Very Low Income Units 
Percentage of Very 
Low Income Units 	Percentage of 
Density Bonus 
5 	20 
6 	22.5 
7 	25 
8 	27.5 
9 	30 
10 	32.5 
11 	35 
 
2.  Lower Income Units. For each one percent increase above ten (10) percent in the affordable units for lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half (1.5) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, as shown in Table 2: 
Table 2: Lower Income Units 
Percentage of Lower 
Income Units 	Percentage of 
Density Bonus 
10 	20 
11 	21.5 
12 	23 
13 	24.5 
14 	26 
15 	27.5 
16 	29 
17 	30.5 
18 	32 
19 	33.5 
20 	35 
 
3.  Moderate Income Units. For each one percent increase above ten (10) percent in affordable units offered for sale to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to maximum thirty-five (35) percent, as shown in Table 3: 
Table 3: Moderate Income Units 
Percentage of Moderate Income Units 	Percentage of 
Density Bonus 
10 	5 
11 	6 
12 	7 
13 	8 
14 	9 
15 	10 
16 	11 
17 	12 
18 	13 
19 	14 
20 	15 
21 	16 
22 	17 
23 	18 
24 	19 
25 	20 
26 	21 
27 	22 
28 	23 
29 	24 
30 	25 
31 	26 
32 	27 
33 	28 
34 	29 
35 	30 
36 	31 
37 	32 
38 	33 
39 	34 
40 	35 
 
D.  Continued Affordability. Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall remain affordable as follows: 
1.  Very low income and low income household rental units shall remain affordable to the designated income group in perpetuity. 
2.  Very low income and low income household ownership/for-sale units shall remain affordable to the designated income group for a minimum of thirty (30) years, or for a longer period of time if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program applicable to the dwelling units. 
3.  Moderate income household rental units shall remain affordable in perpetuity. 
4.  Moderate income household ownership/for-sale units shall remain affordable for a minimum of thirty (30) years, or for a longer period of time if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program applicable to the dwelling units. 
E.  Specification of Basis for Density Bonus. Each applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this section, shall elect whether the bonus will be awarded on the basis of subsection A.1, A.2, A.3 or B of this section. Each housing development is entitled to only one density bonus, which may be selected based on the percentage of either very low income affordable housing units, lower income affordable housing units or moderate income affordable housing units, or the development's status as a senior citizen housing development. Density bonuses from more than one of these categories may not be combined. 
F.  Density Bonus of up to Fifty (50) Percent for Senior and Large Multi-Family Rental Units. Affordable rental housing for seniors and affordable multi-family rental housing in which a minimum thirty (30) percent of the units are three (3) bedrooms or more may be granted a density bonus of up to fifty (50) percent above the maximum density, according to the following formula: for each additional percentage point of very low income units above eleven (11) percent, a bonus of two and one-half (2.5) percent may be granted, for each additional percentage point of low-income units above twenty (20) percent, a bonus of one and one-half (1.5) percent may be granted, and for each percentage point of moderate-income units above forty (40) percent, a bonus of one percent may be granted. 
1.  The location, size, and design of the proposed use shall not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to the city of El Monte general plan, adjacent uses, residents, buildings, structures, or natural resources, with consideration given to: 
a.  The type and density of the housing development would not have a harmful adverse effect on surrounding neighborhood character. 
b.  The site is physically suitable for the density of development proposed. 
c.  There is demonstrated capacity and service of sewer, water, schools (as may be required), fire, police protection and utilities available to the housing development. 
d.  The housing development and surrounding areas have adequate access to accommodate the generation of traffic. 
e.  The site has reasonable proximity and access to special support services (e.g., retail and convenience uses, public transit, emergency medical facilities, etc.) as may be required by the type and density of development proposed. 
G.  Recapture of financial interest/affordable units may be offered for subsequent sale to an above-moderate income purchaser; provided that the sale results in a recapture by the city, or its designee, of a financial interest in the unit equal to: 
1.  The difference between the initial affordable income level (very low, low, or moderate) sales price and the appraised value at the time of the initial sale; and 
2.  A proportionate share of any appreciation. 
H.  Forfeiture of Funds. Any individual who rents a unit in violation of this chapter shall be required to forfeit all rents above the applicable affordable rate; any individual who sells a unit in violation of this chapter shall be required to forfeit all profits from the sale exceeding the difference between the sales price and the applicable affordable sales prices. Recovered funds shall be deposited in the city's housing fund. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2928, §§ 29, 30, 5-15-2018)  
17.85.030 - Additional density bonus for donations of land. 
A.  Land Suitability. Upon written request, when an applicant for a tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval qualified for a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.85.020 of this article also donates developable land to the city in accordance with this section, the applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus. Applicants donating developable land to the city shall be eligible for an additional fifteen (15) percent density bonus at the site of the housing development if the donated land is suitable for the construction of very low income units equaling at least ten (10) percent of the market rate units being constructed for the project. The density bonus provided pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any density bonus granted pursuant to Section 17.85.020 of this article, up to a maximum combined density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent. 
B.  Qualification Criteria. To qualify for the additional density bonus described in subsection A of this section, the donation of developable land must meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development must otherwise be subject to a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.85.020 of this article; and 
2.  The land must be transferred no later than the date of the approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or housing development application; and 
3.  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred must be sufficient to permit construction of dwelling units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten (10) percent of the total number of market rate dwelling units in the proposed development (i.e., the proposed development before the addition of any density bonus); and 
4.  The donated land is at least one acre in size or is large enough to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan land use designation, has the appropriate zoning and development standards for affordable housing and, at the time of project approval is, or at the time of construction will be, served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure; and 
5.  No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, the donated land must have all of the applicable permits and approvals (other than building permits) necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the donated land, except that the city may subject the proposed housing development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by California Government Code Section 65583.2(i) if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer; and 
6.  The donated land is subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the very low income units consistent with subsection 17.85.020D of this article, which deed restriction shall be recorded upon the donated property at the time of its transfer; and 
7.  The land will be transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city reserves the right to require the applicant to identify a developer and to require that the land be transferred to that developer; and 
8.  The land is within the boundary of the proposed housing development or within one-fourth (¼) mile of the boundary of the proposed housing development; and 
9.  No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, a proposed source of funding for the construction of the very low income units shall be identified. 
C.  Additional Density Bonus Based on Greater Suitability of Land for Very Low Income Housing. For each one percent increase above the minimum ten (10) percent in the number of very low income housing units that can be accommodated on the donated land, the maximum density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, as follows: 
Table 4: Land Donation 
Percentage of Very 
Low Income Units 
that can be 
Accommodated on 
Donated Land 	Percentage of 
Additional Density 
Bonus 
10 	15 
11 	16 
12 	17 
13 	18 
14 	19 
15 	20 
16 	21 
17 	22 
18 	23 
19 	24 
20 	25 
21 	26 
22 	27 
23 	28 
24 	29 
25 	30 
26 	31 
27 	32 
28 	33 
29 	34 
30 	35 
 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.040 - Condominium conversions. 
A.  An applicant for a conversion of existing rental apartments to condominiums is eligible for either a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value, at the option of the city, if the applicant agrees to provide: 1) at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, or 2) at least fifteen (15) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower income households as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, and 3) the applicant agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the city pursuant to this section. 
B.  Condominium conversions qualified under subsection A of this section, may receive one of the following, at the city's option: 
1.  A flat density bonus of twenty-five (25) percent to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion, excepting that a condominium conversion is ineligible for this bonus if the apartments to be converted originally received a density bonus or incentives pursuant to any other provisions of this article or pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915. An applicant may choose to implement a lower density bonus. 
2.  Incentives of equivalent financial value in the form of a reduction or waiver of requirements or fees which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. "Other incentives of equivalent financial value" shall not be construed to require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation to the condominium conversion project or its applicant. 
C.  The city reserves the right to place such reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value pursuant to this section as it finds appropriate, including, but not limited to, conditions which assure continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate income or lower income households. 
D.  Condominium conversions are eligible only for the granting of a density bonus or incentive of equivalent value pursuant to this section, which bonus or incentive may not be granted in addition to, or combined with, any other incentives, concessions, density bonuses or waivers and reductions of development standards pursuant to other sections of this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert rental apartments into condominiums. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.050 - Childcare facilities. 
A.  A housing development that is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.85.020 of this article, and also includes a childcare facility qualified under this section is eligible for either of the following, at the option of the city, if requested in writing by the applicant: 
1.  An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the childcare facility; or 
2.  An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility. 
B.  A childcare facility will only qualify the housing development for an additional density bonus or incentive or concession if it is: 1) located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development, and 2) the housing development is otherwise eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.85.020 of this article. As a condition of approving the additional density bonus for the housing development, the childcare facility must meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The childcare facility may be used only for childcare for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable as stated in deed restrictions and pursuant to Section 17.85.020D of this article; and 
2.  Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the percentage of children of very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are proposed to be affordable to very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households pursuant to Section 17.85.020 of this article. 
C.  Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession or incentive for a childcare facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate childcare facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.060 - General provisions governing density bonus calculations. 
A.  For the purposes of any provisions in this article, an applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which the housing development is eligible. 
B.  When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next larger whole number. This calculation shall start with the base density of the zone in which the housing development is located as described in Section 17.06.030—Residential density. 
C.  For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the dwelling units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the affordable units are located. 
D.  For the purposes of this article, the "total units" or "total dwelling units" in a housing development does not include those units added by any density bonus. 
E.  Regardless of the number or extent of affordable units, senior housing, land dedication, childcare facilities or other qualifications for a density bonus provided in any single housing development, no housing development may be entitled to a total density bonus of more than thirty-five (35) percent. 
Table 5: Density Bonus Summary 
Types of Affordable 
Units Providing 
Eligibility for a 
Density Bonus 	Minimum Percent 	Bonus 
Granted 	Additional 
Bonus for 
Each 1 percent 
Increase in 
Affordable 
Units 	Percent of 
Affordable 
Units 
Required for 
Maximum 
35 percent Bonus 
Affordable housing type: 
Very low income 	5 percent 	20 percent 	2.5 percent 	11 percent 
Lower income 	10 percent 	20 percent 	1.5 percent 	20 percent 
Moderate income 	10 percent 	5 percent 	1 percent 	40 percent 
Senior citizen housing 	Qualified development 	20 percent of 
the units 	- 	- 
Land donation for very low income housing 	Land donated can accommodate 10 percent of market rate units, plus housing development qualified for density bonus as an affordable or senior 
project. 	15 percent 	1 percent 	30 percent of market rate units (assuming housing development provides 5 percent very low income units) 
Condominium conversions: 
Lower income 	15 percent 	25 percent 1 	- 	- 
Low/moderate income 	33 percent 	25 percent 1 	- 	- 
Childcare facility 	Housing development qualifies for density bonus as an affordable or senior project 	Square feet in childcare 
facility 1 		
 
Note: 
1.  Maximum of twenty-five (25) percent bonus for condominium conversions, or an incentive of equal value, at the city's option. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2883, § 50, 6-21-2016)  
17.85.070 - Incentives and concessions for affordable housing. 
A.  Definition of a Qualified Incentive or Concession. A qualifying project shall be entitled to at least one but no more than three (3) of the following incentives identified by state law: 
1.  A reduction in the parcel development standards (e.g. coverage, setback, zero lot line and/or reduced parcel sizes, architectural design requirements and/or parking requirements). Development standard means any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. In no case may the city apply a development standard that will have the effect of precluding the construction of affordable units. A waiver or modification to development standards may be requested by the applicant, and shall be approved unless such waiver or modification creates an adverse impact as described in subsection C.2, below. 
2.  Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing project, and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing project and existing or planned development in the area where the proposed development will be located. 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the city that will result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions. 
B.  Number of Incentives or Concessions. The number of incentives shall be based on the percentage of affordable units in the project: 
1.  One incentive or concession shall be entitled for projects where at least five (5) percent of the total units are for very low income households, ten (10) percent of the total units are for lower income households, or ten (10) percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households. 
2.  Two (2) incentives or concessions shall be entitled for projects where at least ten (10) percent of the total units are for very low income households, twenty (20) percent of the total units are for lower income households, or at least twenty (20) percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households. 
3.  Three (3) incentives or concessions shall be entitled for projects where at least fifteen (15) percent of the total units are for very low income households, thirty (30) percent of the total units are for lower income households, or thirty (30) percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households. 
Table 6: Incentives and Concessions Summary 
Affordable Units or Category 	Percent of Affordable Units 
Affordable Housing Types: 
Very Low Income 	5% 	10% 	15% 
Lower Income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Moderate Income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Maximum incentive(s)/concession(s) 1, 2, 3 	1 	2 	3 
 
Notes: 
1.  An incentive or concession may be requested only if an application is also made for a density bonus. 
2.  Incentives or concessions may be selected from only one category (very low, lower, or moderate). 
3.  No incentives or concessions are available for land donation. 
_____
C.  Findings to Deny Incentive or Concession. The city shall grant the incentive or concession requested by the applicant unless the city makes a written finding based upon substantial evidence of any of the following: 
1.  The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or for affordable rents for the restricted units; or 
2.  The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate-income households. A specific adverse impact means a significant, unavoidable impact, as provided in written standards, policies, or conditions; or 
3.  The incentive or concession would be contrary to state or federal law. 
D.  Exceptions. This section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. Nor does any provision of this section require the city to grant an incentive or concession found to have a specific adverse impact. 
E.  Amendment, Zone Change. The granting of a concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2928, § 31, 5-15-2018)  
17.85.080 - Waivers and modifications of development standards. 
A.  Applicants granted a density bonus pursuant to Section 17.85.020 of this article may, by written proposal, seek a waiver, modification or reduction of development standards that would otherwise have the effect of physically precluding the construction of the housing development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted pursuant to this article. The applicant may also request a meeting with the city to discuss such request for waiver and modifications. 
B.  In order to obtain a waiver or modification of development standards, the applicant shall show that the development standards will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of Section 17.85.020 of this article, at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this article. 
C.  A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to Section 17.85.070 of this article. 
D.  The city may deny a request for any waiver, modification or reduction of development standards if the wavier, modification or reduction would have a specific adverse impact. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.090 - Parking incentives. 
Upon the written request of the applicant for a housing development meeting the criteria for a density bonus under Section 17.85.020 of this article, the city shall not require a vehicular parking ratio that exceeds the following: 
A.  Zero to one bedroom units: One on-site parking space. 
B.  Two (2) to three (3) bedroom units: Two (2) on-site parking spaces. 
C.  Four (4) and more bedroom units: Two and one-half (2½) parking spaces. 
Guest parking and handicapped parking shall be included within the maximum number of spaces that may be required. If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a housing development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on street parking. For purposes of this article, the parking ratios set forth in this section shall be deemed a concession or incentive available to the applicant under Section 17.85.070 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.100 - Standards for density bonus housing developments. 
A.  Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the housing development and compatible with the design of market rate units in terms of appearance, materials, and finished quality. The applicant may reduce the interior amenities and square footage of inclusionary units, provided all units conform to all other requirements of this municipal code. 
B.  For developments with multiple market rate units containing differing numbers of bedrooms, affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be representative of the market rate unit mix. 
C.  All building permits for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be issued concurrently with, or prior to, issuance of building permits for the market rate units, and the affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with, or prior to, construction of the market rate units. Occupancy permits and final inspections for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be approved concurrently with, or prior to, approval of occupancy permits and final inspections for the market rate units. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.110 - Application requirements. 
A.  An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this section shall be submitted with the first approval of the housing development and processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development. 
B.  For affordable units qualifying the housing development for a density bonus, the application shall include the following information: 
1.  A site plan identifying the base project without the density bonus, number and location of all inclusionary units, affordable units qualifying for the project for a density bonus, and proposed density bonus units; and 
2.  Proposed category(ies) qualifying the housing development for a density bonus; and 
3.  Level of affordability of all affordable and inclusionary units and proposals for ensuring affordability, if applicable; and 
4.  A description of any requested incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards. 
5.  If a density bonus or concession is requested for a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 17.85.030 of this article can be made. 
6.  If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, the application shall demonstrate that the project meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.85.040 of this article. 
7.  If a density bonus or concession is requested for a childcare facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the childcare facility and provide evidence that the findings included in Section 17.85.050 of this article can be made. 
C.  Upon submission of the application to the city, the Economic Development Director or designee shall determine if the application is complete and conforms to the provisions of this article. No application for a first approval for a housing development requesting a density bonus, incentives, concessions, or waivers may be deemed complete unless an affordable housing plan is submitted conforming to the provisions of this article. 
D.  A request for a minor modification of an approved application may be granted by the City Manager or designee if the modification is substantially in compliance with the original application and the conditions of approval. Other modifications to the affordable housing plan shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.120 - Application review. 
A.  An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this article shall be reviewed as part of the first approval of the housing development by the approval body with authority to approve the housing development, unless additional review by the planning commission or City Council is required. An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this article, may submit a preliminary application prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a housing development. 
B.  Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the preliminary application the city shall provide to an applicant, a letter which identifies project issues of concern (the maximum financial assistance that the Economic Development Director can support when making a recommendation to the City Council), and the procedures for compliance with this article. The Economic Development Director shall inform the applicant that the requested additional incentives shall be recommended for consideration with the proposed housing development, or that alternative or modified additional incentives pursuant to Section 17.85.070 of this article shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested incentives. If alternative or modified incentives are recommended by the Economic Development Director, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified incentives can be expected to have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested incentives. 
C.  Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or modification, the approval body shall make the following findings: 
1.  The housing development is: a) eligible for a density bonus, and/or b) any concessions, incentives, waivers, modifications, or reduced parking standards requested conform to all requirements of this article, and c) supported by a financing mechanism for all implementation and monitoring costs. 
2.  If the density bonus is based all or in part on dedication of land, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.85.030 of this article. 
3.  If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, that the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.85.040 of this article. 
4.  If the density bonus, incentive, or concession is based all or in part on the inclusion of a childcare facility, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.85.050 of this article. 
5.  If a waiver or modification is requested, the applicant has shown that the waiver, modification or reduction of development standards meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 17.85.080 of this article. 
D.  If the findings stated in subsection C of this section can be made, and a request for an incentive or concession is otherwise consistent with this article, the approval body may deny a concession or incentive based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in Section 17.85.070 of this article for the denial or disqualification of a concession or incentive. 
E.  If the required findings stated in subsection C of this section can be made, and a request for a waiver or modification is otherwise consistent with this article, the approval body may deny the requested waiver or modification based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in Section 17.85.080 of this article for the denial or disqualification of a waiver or modification. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to grant an incentive or concession or to waive or reduce development standards if that incentive, concession, waiver, or reduction has a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. 
G.  Any decision by the Planning Commission regarding a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard may be appealed. An appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk to have the case reviewed by the City Council. Such filing must take place within ten (10) days following adoption of the City Planning Commission resolution. In accordance with state law, neither the granting of a concession or incentive, nor the granting of a density bonus, shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
17.85.130 - Developer affordable housing agreement. 
A.  Applications requesting a density bonus shall agree to enter into a density bonus housing agreement with the city. The terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the Economic Development Director, who shall formulate a recommendation to the planning commission for final approval. A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits for all housing developments pursuant to this article and shall be recorded as a restriction on any parcels on which the affordable units or density bonus units will be constructed. 
B.  The density bonus housing agreement shall be recorded prior to final or parcel map approval, or, where the housing development does not include a map, prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure in the housing development. The density bonus housing agreement shall run with the land and bind future owners and successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 2834, § 6(Exh. B), 1-14-2014)  
Chapter 17.86 - COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN GUIDELINES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2807, § 10, adopted Oct. 2, 2012, repealed ch. 17.86 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 17.86, §§ 17.86.10—17.86.050, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2805, § 9, adopted July 31, 2012. 
 
17.86.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are established to: 
A.  Encourage appropriate development that is compatible and harmonious with the design and use of surrounding properties and with the City in general; 
B.  Foster the use of sound design principles which result in creative, imaginative solutions and establish structures of quality design throughout the City and which avoid monotony and mediocrity of development; 
C.  Promote and maintain the public health, safety, and general throughout the City; and 
D.  Implement general plan policies which encourage the preservation and enhancement of the unique character and assets of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 10, 10-2-2012)  
17.86.020 - Applicability. 
The City's comprehensive design guidelines shall be applied whenever City approval is required for the following: 
A.  Any new residential, commercial, office, industrial building, or any other building or structure that requires issuance of a building permit and/or requires Planning Division review; 
B.  The expansion of an existing structure; 
C.  Conversion of a building from one use to any other use; 
D.  Any change in building occupancy; and 
E.  Any facade renovation or exterior improvement that is visible from the street. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 10, 10-2-2012)  
17.86.030 - Procedures. 
Applications for comprehensive design review shall be made on the appropriate form to the Planning Division. The Economic Development Director or his designee shall determine the minimum filing procedures, content and form of materials which must be submitted before the City can review an application based on the comprehensive design guidelines. The filing procedures and applications shall be published and made available to the public. No petition shall be received unless it complies with all City filing requirements. The City Planning Commission or City Council, on appeal, may at its discretion request additional information before rendering a decision. 
The applicant shall bear the burden of providing sufficient documents and exhibits that allow the City to render a decision upon the application under consideration. It is the responsibility of the applicant to certify the information contained therein. 
The application shall also be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  Site plan drawn to scale (one inch = ten (10) feet); 
2.  Property lines/easements; 
3.  Existing structures on the site; 
4.  Proposed building with dimensions; 
5.  Location, number of parking spaces, dimensions; 
6.  Pedestrian, vehicular and service ingress and egress, driveway widths; 
7.  Setbacks; 
8.  Street dedications and improvements; 
9.  Location, height and design of all fences or walls; 
10.  Open space use and landscaped areas. 
11.  All elevations of each building and composite elevation from street, if multiple buildings are proposed drawn to scale (one-fourth-inch = one foot); 
12.  Floor plans drawn to scale (one-fourth-inch = one foot): 
13.  Color renderings, if necessary; 
14.  Exterior lighting, including building mounted, pole mounted; 
15.  All signs including free standing signs and directional signs; 
16.  Utility lines, meters, boxes; 
17.  Refuse areas and recycling storage and pickup locations; 
18.  Flues, chimneys; 
19.  Awnings, if any; 
20.  Mechanical equipment; 
21.  Loading docks; 
22.  Downspouts; and 
23.  Landscaping. Plans showing proposed landscaped areas and general descriptions of landscaping to be installed together with a layout of the irrigation system and the manner by which the landscaping will be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 10, 10-2-2012)  
17.86.040 - Comprehensive design guidelines. 
The City's comprehensive design guidelines as referenced herein shall be adopted, and from time to time modified and amended by resolution of the City Council. The approved guidelines shall be a public record of the City and the most current iteration of the City's compliance design guidelines shall be available for inspection by members of the public at the Office of the City Clerk and at the Office of the Planning Division. A copy of the most up to date version of the City's comprehensive design guidelines shall also be posted on the City's website. 
(Ord. No. 2807, § 10, 10-2-2012)  
Chapter 17.88 - FREEWAY OVERLAY ZONE (BILLBOARDS) 
 
17.88.010 - Purpose and definitions. 
A.  Billboards are recognized as a legitimate form of commercial advertising in the city. However, the size, number, location and illumination of billboards can have significant influence on the city's visual character, and can, without appropriate control, create or contribute to visual blight conditions. The purpose of this Chapter 17.88 is to establish an overlay zone where new billboards may be constructed and existing billboards may be relocated and constructed subject to reasonable controls, while recognizing that community appearance is an important factor in ensuring the general community welfare. 
B.  1.  "Agreement" means a development agreement, by and between the applicant and the city, in accordance with the Development Agreement Law (Gov. Code, § 65864 et seq.) and El Monte Municipal Code Chapter 17.84 (Development Agreements). Such development agreement, as necessary, may also constitute a "relocation agreement," pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 5412, and may include compensation to be paid to the city or the provision of other public benefits to be provided as a result of the installation and operation of any billboard or modification of an existing billboard within the freeway overlay zone. 
2.  "Relocation," as used in this Section 17.88.010, includes the removal of billboard(s) and construction of a new billboard or billboards to substitute for the billboard(s) removed. 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 12, 7-18-2017)  
17.88.020 - Establishment of freeway overlay zone. 
A new freeway overlay zone for the establishment of new and relocated billboards is hereby established as shown on the approved freeway overlay zone map approved by the City Council on June 20, 2017 and attached to Ordinance No. 2914 as Exhibit "A." 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 12, 7-18-2017)  
17.88.030 - General requirements. 
A.  The requirements of this Chapter 17.88 shall apply to any project involving the installation or construction of a new billboard, or billboards, or relocated billboard, or billboards, or the expansion, modification, or digitization of an existing billboard, or billboards, within the freeway overlay zone, or the addition of additional face(s) to an existing billboard within the freeway overlay zone. Billboards shall be permitted in the freeway overlay zone only after an agreement has been negotiated and executed between the billboard operator and city and any requisite permits have been issued in accordance with the terms of this Chapter 17.88. An existing billboard or digital billboard in existence on the effective date of this ordinance pursuant to a prior agreement (including any amendments or extensions thereof) or other lawful permit may be relocated and rebuilt only within the freeway overlay zone. all billboards constructed within the freeway overlay zone shall comply with this Chapter 17.88 and all applicable requirements of the California Business and Professions Code and the California Outdoor Advertising Act. 
B.  In accordance with California Business and Professions Code Section 5440, new billboards not associated with relocation as described in subdivision C shall be allowed only in those portions of the freeway overlay zone not designated as "landscaped freeways" pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 5216. 
C.  In accordance with California Business and Professions Code Section 5443.5, relocated billboards shall be allowed only in the freeway overlay zone and shall not be permitted in any location which would result in violation of any applicable federal, state, or local law. Billboards to be relocated in the freeway overlay zone may originate in areas outside the freeway overlay zone or outside the city's boundaries, provided the agreement required by this Chapter 17.88 documents their location and removal, and the benefits associated with such relocation. An owner or entity proposing an agreement for relocation shall establish that the relocated billboard meets one or more of the following eligibility requirements: 
1.  The billboard proposed for complete demolition and relocation is the subject of any eminent domain action or threat of eminent domain action by a legally created public entity possessing eminent domain/condemnation authority and provides public benefits for such relocation; or 
2.  The applicant chooses to completely demolish and relocate an existing billboard, including a legal nonconforming billboard, to a more suitable location within the freeway overlay zone so as not to conflict with the proposed development or redevelopment of the property and provides public benefits for such relocation as negotiated in the agreement; or 
3.  The applicant chooses to completely demolish and relocate an existing billboard, including a legal nonconforming billboard, to a more suitable location within the freeway overlay zone that lessens the overall negative aesthetic impacts on the city and its residents and provides public benefits for such relocation; or 
4.  The applicant has previously removed and completely demolished one or more billboards and maintains credits for such removal by the California Department of Transportation pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 5443.5; or 
5.  The applicant proposes to enhance, improve and modify an existing billboard already established within the freeway overlay zone for the purpose of modernizing and improving the aesthetic appearance of such billboard. 
D.  In the event of any conflict between any provision contained in this Chapter 17.88 and any other provisions contained elsewhere in this Code, the provisions of this Chapter 17.88 shall govern. 
E.  No billboard shall be approved and no existing billboard shall be modified without the applicant first providing proof of legal or equitable interest in the site proposed for relocation or modification, including, but not limited to a lease, easement or other entitlement, demonstrating the right to install and operate the billboard on the subject property. Information to be provided shall include the written consent of the property owner if not readily ascertainable from the foregoing documents. 
F.  No billboard shall be approved or modified, and no billboard may be maintained, unless a designated maintenance service is available "24/7," by telephone, to be contacted and to respond in the event a billboard becomes damaged or dilapidated. 
G.  All billboard agreements shall include requirements that applicants obtain all additional federal and/or state permits for installation. Nothing contained in this Chapter 17.88 shall require the city to negotiate and/or approve an Agreement on terms that are unacceptable to the City Council. 
H.  Physical Requirements. 
1.  The minimum distance between two (2) or more billboards placed within the freeway overlay zone or between billboards and the freeway right-of-way shall be the same as the minimum distance and separation criteria established by the California Department of Transportation. All distances shall be measured from the vertical centerline of each billboard face. 
2.  All utilities utilized for each billboard shall be underground. 
3.  No billboard shall have more than one face (display surface) oriented in the same vertical plane. 
4.  All billboards shall plainly display, and be visible from no less than one hundred (100) feet, the name of the person or company owning or maintaining such billboard, and the billboard's identification number. 
5.  Billboards projecting over a driveway or driving aisle shall have a minimum clearance of sixteen (16) feet between the lowest point of the sign and the driveway grade. Billboards shall comply with any California Department of Transportation requirements for placement and operation. No part of any billboard shall cross onto an adjacent property. 
6.  Billboards projecting over a pedestrian walkway shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) feet between the lowest point of the sign and the walkway grade. 
7.  All billboards not projecting over drive areas or pedestrian walkways shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) feet between the lowest point of the billboard and ground level. 
8.  All billboard structures shall be free of any visible bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cable, and/or similar supporting elements. All exposed portions of new billboards, including backs, sides, structural support members and support poles, shall be screened to the satisfaction of the Economic Development Director. 
9.  All billboards shall be placed at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from any residential zone. The measurement shall be from the closest edge of the billboard to the closest edge of the single family residential zone or closest property line on which a single family residential use is located. 
10.  No billboard, inclusive of supporting structures, shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height, measured from the finished grade of the freeway travel lane closest to the sign to the uppermost point of the sign, except as may be approved for good cause as demonstrated by the applicant and determined in the sole discretion of the city. 
I.  Operational Requirements. 
1.  No billboard shall display any statement or words of an "obscene, indecent, or immoral character," as that phrase is used in Business and Professions Code Section 5402 and judicial decisions interpreting the same. 
2.  Each digital billboard shall be connected to the National Emergency Network and provide emergency information, including child abduction alerts (e.g., "Amber Alerts"), in accordance with local and regional first responder protocols. 
3.  Digital billboard operating criteria: 
a.  Each static message shall not include flashing lights or the varying of light intensity. 
b.  Minimum display time. Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of four (4) seconds. 
c.  Digital billboards shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light, as measured using a foot candle meter in accordance with the pre-set distances set forth below. 
d.  Pre-set distances to measure the foot candles impact vary with the expected viewing distances of each size sign and shall comply with the following ratios of face size dimensions to points of measurement distances: 
• 12' × 25'; 150' 
• 10'6" × 36'; 200' 
• 14' × 48'; 250' 
• 20' × 60' or 25' × 48'; 350' 
e.  Each digital billboard must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness as ambient light conditions change. 
4.  Each digital billboard shall be designed and required to freeze the display in one static position, display a full black screen, or turn off, in the event of a malfunction. 
5.  Walls or screens at the base of the billboard shall not create a hazard to public safety or provide an attractive nuisance and shall be continually maintained free from graffiti. 
6.  Billboards shall not be operated in such a fashion as to constitute a hazard to safe and efficient operation of vehicles on streets or freeways and shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations. Digital billboards when operated in accordance with the operating criteria in subsection above and static billboards operated pursuant to local, state, and federal law shall be deemed to be in compliance with this subsection and all requirement of the California Department of Transportation. 
7.  No billboard shall simulate or imitate any directional, warning, danger or information sign, or any display likely to be mistaken for any permitted sign intended or likely to be construed as giving warning to traffic, by, for example, the use of the words "stop" or "slow down." 
8.  No billboard shall involve any red or blinking or intermittent light likely to be mistaken for warning or danger signals nor shall its illumination impair the vision of travelers on the adjacent freeway and for roadways. Digital billboards when operated in accordance with the operating criteria in subsection 4, above, shall be deemed to be in compliance with this subsection 8. 
9.  No digital billboard shall be operated or maintained so as to constitute an "improper display," as defined or described in Business and Professions Code Section 5403. 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 12, 7-18-2017)  
17.88.040 - Application requirements; review procedures. 
A.  Application requirements. A person or entity wishing to completely demolish and relocate an existing nonconforming billboard or modify an existing billboard within the freeway overlay zone shall submit a request in writing for approval of an agreement, in accordance with Section 17.84.080(b), that includes the following: 
1.  The name, address phone number and other contact information of the person or entity proposing the agreement; 
2.  Identification of the location proposed for a new or relocated or modified billboard and the billboard(s) being permanently removed, where applicable; 
3.  Information that establishes that the person or entity proposing the Agreement has legal or equitable interest in the billboard being removed or modified and the site proposed for relocation or placement; 
4.  Conceptual design drawings for the billboards that includes technical specifications to determine the billboard's compliance with this Chapter 17.88; 
5.  An explanation of the compensation to be paid or public benefits to be provided to the city; 
6.  The application must include photos of all existing signage or architectural renderings and elevations of proposed billboards as well as a scaled plot plan and elevations showing the locations of all existing structures and improvements on the property, and the proposed billboard; 
7.  The applicant must pay a filing fee in accordance with Section 17.84.060. 
B.  Review Process. All proposed agreements shall be reviewed in accordance with the protocol set forth in Chapter 17.84, however, the City Council, in addition to the General Plan and Specific Plan (as applicable) consistency findings set forth in Section 17.84.180, shall make the following findings for approval of an agreement: 
1.  The proposed installation site is compatible with the uses and structures on the site and in the surrounding area; 
2.  The proposed billboard would not create a traffic or safety problem, including problems associated with onsite access circulation or visibility; 
3.  The proposed billboard would not interfere with onsite parking or landscaping required by city ordinance or permit; 
4.  The proposed billboard would not otherwise result in a threat to the general health, safety, and welfare of city residents; and 
5.  The proposed billboard, in addition to its aesthetic treatment, provides public benefits that would not otherwise accrue to the public in the absence of its installation. 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 12, 7-18-2017)  
17.88.050 - Violations. 
Violations in this Chapter 17.88 shall be subject to all civil, criminal, and administrative remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2914, § 12, 7-18-2017)  
Title 18 - FRANCHISES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 18.04 - GENERAL UTILITIES 
Sections: 
 
18.04.010 - Rules and regulations. 
Every franchise hereafter granted by the city to erect or lay telegraph or telephone wires, to lay pipes, pipe lines or conduits for the purpose of carrying gas, gasoline, oil, water or steam, to erect poles or wires for transmitting electricity for light, heat or power, or to exercise any similar privilege, along or upon any street in the city and to operate and maintain the same, shall be granted upon and subject to the following rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and conditions, in addition to the rules, regulations, terms and conditions set out in the ordinance granting each such franchise: 
A.  Conditions. All franchises for the laying, constructing, operating and maintaining of oil, gas, gasoline, steam or water pipe line systems; and for the constructing, operating and maintaining of conduits or pole lines for the transmission of electricity for power and light, shall be granted subject to all the terms and conditions prescribed in this chapter. 
B.  Acceptance. The franchise will be granted and shall be held and enjoyed upon the terms and conditions herein contained, and contained in the ordinance granting the same, and the grantee must, within thirty (30) days after the passage of the ordinance granting the franchise, file with the Clerk of the Council a written acceptance of the terms and conditions set out herein and in said ordinance. 
C.  Grantee Defined. The term "grantee" whenever used herein and in such ordinance shall be held to include the person to whom the franchise is awarded and granted by the Council, and his successors and assigns. 
D.  Excavation Permit. The grantee shall not commence the work of constructing, erecting or excavating for the purpose of laying any pipes, conduits or other appliances along any street, until it shall have first obtained a permit from the Council so to do, by making application for that purpose in accordance with the provisions of this code regulating excavations and requiring permits for the doing of such work. 
E.  Materials. All poles, pole lines, wires, pipes or pipe lines, traps, manholes, attachments and appliances constructed, or maintained under the provisions of the franchise shall be constructed and maintained in accordance and conformity with all of the provisions of this code and the rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted or prescribed by the Council and shall be of first-class material and subject to the approval of the Council. 
F.  Travel. The work of laying or repairing all pipes, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, attachments and appliances shall be conducted with the least possible hindrance to the use of the streets for purposes of travel, and as soon as the laying, constructing, erecting or repairing of any pipe, pipe line, conduit, trap, manhole, attachment or appliance is completed, all portions of the street which have been excavated or otherwise injured thereby shall be placed in as good condition as the same was before the laying, constructing, erecting or repairing of any pipe, pipe line, conduit, trap, manhole, attachment or appliance, to the satisfaction of the Council, and any damage or injury suffered by any person by reason of any excavation, or obstruction being improperly guarded during said work, or the failure of grantee to make the fill properly, shall be borne by the grantee of the franchise. 
G.  Change of Grade. The City reserves the right to change the grade of any street over which the franchise is granted, and the grantee, at his or her own expense, shall within thirty (30) days after written notice and request so to do, change the location of all poles, pole lines, wires, pipes, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, appliances and attachments laid, constructed, or erected thereunder, so as to conform to such change of grade. 
H.  Street Width. The city reserves the right to change the width of any street over which the franchise is granted and the grantee, shall at his or her own expense, within thirty (30) days after written notice and request so to do, change the location of all poles, pole lines, wires, pipes, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, appliances and attachments laid, constructed, or erected under the franchise, to a corresponding position relative to the newly established property line, to be approved by the Council. 
I.  Street Location. The city reserves the right to alter or change the location of any street over which the franchise is granted, and the grantee shall, at his or her own expense, within thirty (30) days after written notice and request so to do, change the location of all poles, pole lines, wires, pipes, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, appliances and attachments laid, constructed or erected under the franchise, to a position in the street as relocated, to be approved by the Council. 
J.  Location. The city reserves the right to lay, construct and maintain subsurface improvements of any type or description within the street over which the franchise is granted. If the necessary location of such sub-surface improvements conflicts with the poles, pole lines, wire, pipe, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, appliances and attachments laid, constructed or erected under the franchise, whether previously laid or not, the grantee of such franchise, shall at his own expense, within thirty (30) days after written notice and request so to do, change the location of all poles, pole lines, wires, pipes, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, appliances and attachments so conflicting with such subsurface improvements, to a location in said highway to be approved by the Council. 
K.  Street Improvements. The city reserves the right to improve the surface of any street over which the franchise is granted, and the grantee shall at his own expense, within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice of the intention of the grantor to improve any street within the territory covered by the franchise, and the request so to do by said grantor, commence and diligently prosecute to completion the work of laying, constructing the pipes, pipe lines, conduits, together with all traps, manholes, attachments and appurtenances necessary thereto, to be located beneath the ground, as shall be necessary or convenient to serve all factories, dwelling houses, buildings or other structures and the improvements thereof located on property adjacent to or which are to be served from said pipes, pipe lines, or conduits located in, under or upon said street which is about to be improved, and after the completion of said street improvements by the grantor, the right of grantee to lay or construct pipes, pipe lines, traps, manholes, attachments or other appurtenances, in, under or through said improved street or portion of such street under any franchise granted under the terms and conditions hereof, shall cease and terminate, providing that the grantee shall still have the right to lay or construct pipes, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, attachments and appurtenances, in, under or through said improved street where the laying or construction of which will not directly, indirectly or consequentially disturb the service of said improved street, but not otherwise, and provided further, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the grantee from operating, maintaining and repairing such pipes, pipe lines, conduits, traps, manholes, attachments and appurtenances as shall have been laid or constructed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the franchise under which they were laid or constructed. 
L.  Damage. If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of breaks or leaks in any pipes or other appliances laid or constructed under the franchise, the grantee shall, at its own expense, repair any such damage and put such street in as good condition as it was in before such break or leak, to the satisfaction of the Council. If grantee shall fail to comply with any instructions of the Council with respect to the location or relocation of any of said poles, pole lines, wires, pipes, pipe lines, traps, manholes, appliances or attachments, or the repair of any damage to street within ten days after the service of written notice upon the grantee requiring compliance therewith, then the Council may immediately do whatever work is necessary to carry out said instructions at the cost and expense of the grantee, which cost, by the acceptance of the franchise, the grantee agrees to pay upon demand. 
M.  Reports. On the first day of July and January of each year after the date of the granting of said franchise, unless all pipes and conduits authorized by such franchise shall have been constructed, the grantee shall render a statement to the city showing in detail the permits issued for the construction of pipes and the total length of pipe lines for the construction of which under the terms of the franchise permits have been taken out during the preceding six (6) months, and if the total length of pipe lines actually laid during said six (6) months is less than that permitted under the permits issued, such statement shall in addition to the above, show in detail the total length of pipe lines actually laid under said permits, and in either event the grantee shall accompany said report with the payment due the city as specified in each franchise. Any other semiannual payment stipulated in any franchise for the privilege of using the public streets in addition to the percentage of the gross receipts, shall be paid at the same time and with such reports. The grantee shall also, within thirty (30) days after the granting of the franchise, file with the Council a detailed statement showing the location and length in lineal feet of all pipe lines constructed by it on any public street described in the franchise and for which no franchise has been obtained, if any such there be, and shall accompany such statement with the payment due the city as specified in said franchise. 
N.  Maps. The grantee shall also file with the Council on or about the fifteenth day of January of each year, during the life of the franchise, a map or sets of maps each drawn to a scale of not less than six hundred (600) feet to one inch, showing in detail the exact location and size of all mains, laterals and service pipes installed beneath the surface of the streets therein described, belonging to, used by, or under the control of such grantee, or the successors or assigns. Whenever any pipe, conduit, tunnel, or other structure located under the surface of said highway is abandoned, the grantee shall, within thirty (30) days after such abandonment, file with the Council a statement in writing, giving in detail the location of the pipe, conduit, tunnel or other structure so abandoned. The map or set of maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall show in detail the location of all such pipes, conduits, tunnels or other structures which shall have been laid, constructed or abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps. Each map shall be accompanied by an affidavit endorsed thereon, subscribed and sworn to by the grantee, verifying its correctness. 
O.  Assignment. The grantee shall not sell, transfer or assign or lease the franchise or privileges granted thereby, except with the consent of the Council; and such sale, transfer, assignment or lease shall be made only by a duly executed instrument in writing filed in the office of the Council; and nothing in the franchise contained shall be construed to grant to said grantee any right to sell, transfer or assign or lease said franchise, or any of the rights or privileges thereby granted, except in the manner aforesaid. 
P.  Franchise Value. The grantee of the franchise, by accepting the conditions thereof, stipulates and agrees that in any proceedings for the purpose of regulating the rates of the grantee no greater value shall be placed upon the franchise than the actual cash paid therefor by the grantee, and any violation of this provision shall ipso facto work a forfeiture thereof and render the franchise null and void, provided that in calculating the value of the franchise the original purchase price paid at the time the franchise is sold and the total amount of mileage then paid at the rate hereinafter mentioned for the particular franchise granted shall be considered the purchase price. 
Q.  Payments. That the grantee shall, during the life of the franchise, pay to the city in lawful money of the United States, the two (2) percent of the gross annual receipts of such grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise, as required by law. No percentage shall be paid for the first five years succeeding the date of the franchise, unless such exemption from payment is waived by grantee, but thereafter such percentage shall be payable annually as provided in this chapter. 
R.  Filing of Statement. It shall be the duty of the grantee of the franchise to file with the City Clerk at the expiration of six (6) years from the date of the granting of the franchise, or at the option of the grantee of the franchise at any time after the expiration of five (5) years and before the expiration of six (6) years after the granting of the franchise, and at the expiration of each and every year after the first statement shall have been filed, a statement verified by the oath of the grantee, or by the oath of the manager or presiding officer of the grantee, showing in detail the total gross receipts and gross earnings collected or received by the grantee during the preceding twelve (12) months (provided that in the event the grantee has exercised the option above referred to the first statement shall cover the period which has elapsed between the expiration of the fifth year after the granting of said franchise and the date of filing of said first statement) from the furnishing, transportation and distribution of water, oil, gas, gasoline or other hydrocarbon substances, through any part of the system for the construction and operation of which the franchise is granted, and within ten (10) days from the time of filing of said statement it shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the City Treasurer in lawful money of the United States two (2) percent of the gross receipts arising from the use, operation and possession of said franchise during the term covered by said statement, and if the amount paid is incorrect in the judgment of the Council they may order the payment of such additional sum as they may find due thereunder, and if not paid the same may be collected by suit. 
1.  Forfeiture for Violation. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file said verified statement or to pay said percentage of said gross annual receipts at the time or in the manner herein provided, shall ipso facto work the forfeiture of the franchise and all rights thereunder to the city. 
S.  Construction. Such franchise shall be granted upon each and every condition contained herein, and in the ordinance granting the same and shall ever be strictly construed against the grantee. Nothing shall pass thereby unless it be granted in plain and unambiguous terms. Each of said conditions is a material and essential condition to the granting of the franchise. Any neglect, failure or refusal to comply with any of the conditions of the franchise shall thereupon immediately and ipso facto effect a forfeiture thereof, and the Council may thereupon declare the franchise forfeited and may exclude the grantee from the further use of said streets and said territory thereunder. The grantee shall thereupon and immediately surrender all right in and to the same, and the franchise shall be deemed and shall remain null and void and of no effect. 
T.  Eminent Domain. The grantor or any municipal corporation now existing or hereafter formed shall have the right at any time after five (5) years from the taking effect of the ordinance granting the franchise, to acquire the works, property and rights of the grantee, or any portion thereof, constructed, acquired or operated under the franchise upon making reasonable compensation therefor. 
U.  Bond. The franchise shall be granted upon the further condition that the grantee shall at all times during the life of the franchise keep on file with the Council a bond running to said city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with at least two (2) good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the Council, conditioned that said bidder shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each and every term and condition of the franchise, and that in case of any breach of condition of said bond the whole amount of the penal sum therein named shall be taken and deemed to be liquidated damages, and shall be recovered from the principal and sureties upon said bond. If said bond be not so filed, the award of the franchise will be set aside, and any money paid therefor will be forfeited. In the event that said bond after it has been so filed shall, at any time during the life of the franchise, become insufficient, the grantee of the franchise, by accepting the terms and conditions thereof, agrees to renew said bond with good and sufficient sureties within ten (10) days after written notice so to do from the Council. 
V.  Water Pipe Lines. All franchises for the laying, constructing, operating and maintaining of water pipe lines shall be granted subject to the following terms and conditions in addition to those provided under the preceding section of this chapter. 
W.  Depth. Every pipe line laid or maintained under the franchise shall be laid not less than two (2) feet underground, and unless the Council shall otherwise direct, shall be laid along the sides of the streets and shall be within fifteen (15) feet from the property line in all streets sixty (60) feet or less in width and within five (5) feet of the curb line in all other streets. 
X.  Connections. The grantee shall have the right, during said period, subject to the terms hereof, to make connections with all property adjoining said streets or any of them, and to furnish and distribute water through said pipes and pipe lines to all the territory adjacent to said pipelines for domestic, irrigation and all other proper and necessary uses, and to collect rents, tolls and charges for the water so furnished said territory. 
Y.  Electricity. Any franchise for the laying, constructing, erecting and maintaining of pole lines or wires, or poles or wires for the transmission of electricity for light, heat or power shall be granted subject to the following general terms and conditions in addition to those provided in the sections of this chapter establishing rules and regulations. 
Z.  Franchise Rights. The grantee shall have the right during the period for which the franchise is granted to erect, lay, construct, maintain and operate, poles, towers, cross arms, conduits, cables, wires and other applications for the purpose of transmitting and distributing electric energy to be used for lighting, heating and power purposes; provided that no part of said system or the appliances or the attachments thereof shall be so located as to interfere with the use of the street for traveling. 
AA.  Equipment—Quality and Location. All poles, towers, cross arms, conduits, cables, wires and other appliances shall be of modern type and of the best quality, and all work done in the construction thereof shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, and that no wire extending along any street shall be placed at a distance of less than twenty (20) feet from the surface of said street; and no wire extending across any street shall be placed at a distance less than twenty-five (25) feet above the surface thereof; that all wires shall be properly insulated and protected by guard wires wherever the Council of said city shall deem it necessary; that all poles to be erected and maintained under the franchise shall be straight and of good material, at least ten (10) inches in diameter and twenty (20) feet in height, and as much higher as may be necessary to maintain the wires at the height above specified, and shall be erected, located and maintained in conformity with any instructions that may be given by the Council in regard thereto not in conflict with paramount authority; that all poles shall be erected at distances of not less than one hundred (100) feet apart, except where it may be necessary to place them closer together at cross roads or turns or angles in any street or on account of any great roughness in the surface of the street; that no poles shall be placed more than one foot from the line of the property abutting upon any road; that every conduit shall be placed at least two (2) feet below the surface of the street and that no conduit, pole, wire, anchor or stay shall be so located, constructed or maintained as to be an obstruction to any highway, street, alley, lane or other public place. 
(Prior code §§ 7600—7626)  
Chapter 18.08 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES* 
Sections: 
 
18.08.010 - Purpose—Findings. 
The city of El Monte, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the city's territorial limits. 
The City Council finds that the development of cable systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable systems, the City Council further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the City Council or such persons as the City Council may designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable service to the public. Any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include these findings. It is the further intent of this chapter to establish regulatory provisions that permit the City Council to regulate all cable system franchises granted by the City Council after the effective date of this chapter, to the extent permitted by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Communications Act of 1934, the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable FCC regulations and applicable California law. 
(Ord. 2509 § 1, 2000)  
18.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter and any franchise agreements, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with their context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined herein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
The headings contained in this chapter and any franchise agreement are to facilitate reference only, do not form a part of this chapter or a franchise agreement, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation hereof. 
"Affiliated person" means each person who or which falls into one or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in grantee; (ii) each person in which grantee has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, general partner, member of a limited liability company (where grantee is a pertinent limited liability company), and joint venturer or joint venture partner of grantee, as well as each limited partner holding an interest of five (5) percent or more of grantee; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with grantee; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city, any limited partner or member of a limited liability company holding an interest of less than five (5) percent of grantee, or any creditor of grantee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with grantee. 
"Basic cable service" means any programming service tier which includes retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
"Cable Act" means the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as amended and modified by legislation such as the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be subsequently amended or modified. 
"Cable operator" means any person or group of persons who: 
1.  Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or 
2.  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
"Cable service" means: 
1.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming; or (ii) other programming service; and 
2.  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
"Cable system" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only to retransmit television signal of one or more television broadcast stations; 
2.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
3.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for the purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 541(c))) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
4.  An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 573); or 
5.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
"Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the FCC. 
"City" or "grantor" means the city of El Monte. 
"City Council" means the City Council of the city of El Monte. 
"Complaint" means any verbal or written allegation or assertion of dissatisfaction with a cable service or other related services or operations of the grantee, including but not limited to issues of signal quality and customer billing, made by a person to either grantee or the city, which requires (i) dispatch of a technician or a service call or (ii) the referral of the verbal or written allegation or assertion of dissatisfaction to a supervisor or to management of grantee. 
"Control," "controlling," "controlled" or "controlling interest" means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, or debt instruments, or negative control, as the case may be, of the system, the franchise or franchisee. A presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or group of persons acting in concert (other than underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) of twenty (20) percent or more of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person") or being a party to a management contract. "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons. 
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor or such other administrative agency or agencies to which the FCC's duties may be transferred. 
"Franchise" means an authorization issued by the City Council providing for the construction and/or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any other license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city. 
"Franchise agreement" means an agreement entered into by the City Council and grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. A franchise agreement shall include any appendices, exhibits, and attachments to the franchise agreement, to the extent expressly incorporated therein, and all amendments to or renewals of the franchise agreement. Any franchise agreement shall incorporate the provisions of this chapter and any amendments thereto. 
"Franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation for grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
2.  Payments which are required by the franchise to be made by the cable operator during the term of such franchise for, or in support of the use of, public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
3.  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
4.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
5.  Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code. 
"Grantee" means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and so identified in a franchise agreement or any franchise renewal or franchise extension approved by the City Council, and any lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
"Grantor" means the city of El Monte. 
"Gross annual cable service revenues" means and includes all amounts which are received annually, directly or indirectly, by a grantee from or in connection with the operation of the cable system, or any part of the cable system, located within the territorial boundaries of the city, including but not limited to: 
1.  a.  Any revenue received from subscribers for cable service, including but not limited to revenue for basic service, tier service, additional outlets, audio service, commercial service, premium service, pay-per-view service and related per-event services, or for the distribution of any cable service over the cable system; 
b.  Any revenue received from subscribers for installation, change in service and reconnection charges and similar fees; 
c.  Any revenue received from subscribers for converters, remote controls or other equipment leased or rented to subscribers in connection with the delivery of cable services to such subscribers; 
d.  Any revenue received from subscribers for service charges and late fees attributable to delinquent accounts; 
e.  Any revenue received from service-related activities, as defined in this section, including but not limited to revenue received from leased access programmers and other users, and revenue derived from or equivalent to the fair market value of trades and barters; 
f.  Any revenue, payment or consideration collected by grantee from subscribers for direct payment to a third party as a cost of doing business (including, but not limited to, franchise fees if permitted by law, copyright fees, program license fees and subscriber payments for PEG access, but excluding payments for leased access programming where grantee serves as a collection agent and passes through leased access fees directly to leased access programmers without deducting grantee's billing fees), and such revenue, payment or consideration shall be included in, and not deducted from, the total gross revenue figure on which franchise fees are to be paid; 
g.  Any revenue of any other person which is derived directly or indirectly from or in connection with the operation of a cable system within the city, including but not limited to revenue or compensation paid directly by such cable system subscribers or users, advertisers on such cable system or others (i) to the suppliers of programming on such cable system, (ii) to home shopping services in connection with the sales of products or services derived from programming over such a cable system, or (iii) to leased access programmers for programming transmitted over such a cable system; provided, however, that grantee shall not be required to collect, and shall not be liable for, franchise fees based on such revenues from such other persons to the extent that such revenues are not collected by grantee, or, if they are collected by grantee, such revenues are retransmitted directly to such other persons without the deduction of any billing or other fees by grantee; and 
h.  Any revenue received by grantee from the delivery of other services over grantee's cable system, including without limitation telephony, data transmission, interactive services and other broadband information services, to the extent that the inclusion of such revenue is not prohibited by law. 
2.  There shall be deducted from gross annual cable service revenues: 
a.  Bad debts written off by grantee in the normal course of its business, provided, however, that bad debt recoveries shall be included in gross revenue; and 
b.  Refunds made to subscribers or other third parties. 
3.  Gross annual cable service revenues shall not include: 
a.  Any tax of general applicability imposed upon a grantee or upon grantee's subscribers by the city, state, federal or any other governmental entity and required to be collected by grantee and passed through to the taxing entity (including, but not limited to, user taxes, service taxes and communications taxes), provided such taxes are identified as a separate line item on subscriber statements; and 
b.  Any foregone revenue which grantee chooses not to receive in exchange for its provision of free or reduced cost cable or other communications services to employees of grantee or employees of another cable operator living within the territorial limits of the city, or public institutions or other institutions designated in a franchise agreement approved by the city; provided, however, that such foregone revenue which grantee chooses not to receive in exchange for trades, barters, services or other items of value shall be included in gross revenues. 
4.  In computing gross annual cable service revenues from sources other than grantee's subscribers, including but not limited to revenue derived from the sale of advertising, lists of the names and addresses of grantee's subscribers, home shopping services, programming guide sales, or the lease of channel capacity over its cable system, which revenue is attributable both to the operation of grantee's cable system inside the city and in areas outside the city, the aggregate revenue received by grantee from such other sources shall first be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of grantee's subscribers in the city as of the last day of such period and the denominator of which shall be the number of subscribers within all areas served by grantee as of the last day of such period, and then assessed for franchise fees. 
5.  Gross annual cable service revenues shall also include any revenue of any other person which is derived with the purpose or effect of excluding such revenue from the computation of the franchise fee otherwise due and payable to the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and a grantee's franchise agreement. 
"Installation" means the connection of the cable system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of cable service. 
"Normal operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental or nongovernmental entity. 
"Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities" means the total of the following: 
1.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
2.  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
"Public right-of-way" means a street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, public service easement or drive which the city owns, controls, uses, or is permitted to use, including, to the extent applicable, the surface of and the space above and below such a street, road, highway, etc. 
"Section" means any section, subsection or provision of this chapter, unless otherwise noted or not consistent with the pertinent context. 
"Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the territorial limits of the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement. 
"Service related activity" means any activity or function for which grantee receives revenue from any user or person other than a subscriber and which is directly associated with the operation of a cable system serving the city, or the production or distribution of any cable service or other communications services over such a cable system, including, but not limited to, revenues from advertising sales, home shopping commissions, the sales of products or services, program guide payments, payments from the lessors or purchasers of leased access channel capacity, payments for studio and other facilities or equipment rentals, billing services, audience promotions or the installation, lease, rental or sale of equipment. 
"Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Subscriber" or "customer" means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system. 
"Subscriber terminal" means the cable system terminal to which a subscriber's equipment is connected. Separate terminals may be provided for delivery of signals of various classes. 
(Ord. 2509 § 2, 2000)  
18.08.030 - Franchise terms and conditions. 
A.  Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the City Council under the provisions of this chapter shall include the following rights and obligations: 
1.  The right of a grantee to provide cable service, and such other related services as may be permitted by law, to subscribers within the designated service area; 
2.  The right of a grantee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across public rights-of-way or other public places within the designated service area; 
3.  The right of a grantee to maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law; 
4.  All obligations of a grantee arising from the franchise or this chapter, whether explicit or implicit. 
B.  Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable system in the city within any public right-of-way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Term of a Franchise. 
1.  A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in a franchise agreement. 
2.  A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law, as well as Section 18.08.040 of this chapter. 
D.  Franchise Territory. Any franchise shall be valid within all territorial limits of the city, and within any area annexed to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
E.  Charter Construction Consistent With Federal and State Law. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
F.  Geographical Coverage. 
1.  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to have the capability to provide cable service to every residential dwelling unit and commercial establishment in the service area, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
2.  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty (30) day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
G.  Nonexclusive Franchise. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. Grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law, provided that if grantor grants one or more additional franchises, then the material provisions of any additional franchise agreement shall be reasonably comparable to the terms and conditions contained in any existing franchise agreement, so that all grantees are accorded reasonably competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory treatment. 
H.  Multiple Franchises. 
1.  Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
a.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the existing cables, conduits, lines, and pipes of existing operators of electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage, and cable television systems, as well as other systems; 
b.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service; 
c.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way, and damage to the public rights-of-way. 
2.  Where electric and telephone utilities are to be placed underground in any new residential housing developments, grantor and the developer of such new residential housing shall give each grantee serving the franchise area within which the new residential housing development is located at least five (5) days prior written notice of the date on which open trenching will be available for grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and vaults (or such other prior written notice required by the City Engineer). On request of grantor or a developer, grantee shall provide specifications needed for trenching. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two (2) cable systems and dedicate the use of such conduit to the city. 
3.  Grantor may require that any nonincumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor's opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables, lines, conduit, or other cable system infrastructure. 
(Ord. 2509 § 3, 2000)  
18.08.040 - Applications for initial and renewed franchises. 
A.  Application Fees for Initial and Renewed Franchises. Any person desiring an initial or renewed cable system franchise shall file an application with the city. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, an applicant shall pay a nonrefundable initial application fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with such a franchise application. This application fee is designed to address all validly documented costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including—without limitation—costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such validly documented costs exceed the application fee, the applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs, in accordance with subsection E of this section. 
B.  Application for an Initial Franchise—Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, unless excused by grantor: 
1.  A description of the proposed franchise and the service area; 
2.  A resume or prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable system field; 
3.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if the applicant is a partnership; the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five (5) percent or greater interest and the magnitude of this interest, if the applicant is a corporation; and the holder(s) of any controlling interest as well as the holder(s) of any equity interest of greater than five (5) percent and the magnitude of such an equity interest, if the applicant is a limited liability company; 
4.  A list of officers, directors and/or managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
5.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant; 
6.  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; 
7.  A proposed construction and service schedule; 
8.  Any additional information that the city deems relevant. An applicant shall provide such additional information within sixty (60) days of receiving a request for such information from the city. The city shall deem such an application incomplete until and unless the applicant submits the required missing information by this sixty (60)-day deadline. In the event that the applicant does not satisfy the informational requirements within this sixty (60)-day period, the City Council may deny the application. 
C.  Initial Franchise Application Process. 
1.  Upon receipt of any complete application for an initial franchise, the City Manager shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the City Council. 
2.  A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the City Council. Within sixty (60) days after the close of the hearing, the City Council shall make a decision, based upon the evidence received at the hearing, as to whether or not the initial franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, the conditions attached to the grant of the franchise. The City Council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
D.  Franchise Renewal Application and Process. 
1.  If grantee intends to initiate a formal franchise renewal process under Section 626(a)-(g) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(g)), grantee must notify grantor at least thirty (30) months and no more than thirty-six (36) months before the franchise expiration date. When grantor receives a formal franchise renewal notice from grantee, or at any time at grantor's own initiative, grantor shall take the following actions: 
a.  Review and evaluate the future cable-related community needs and interests and grantee's past performance with respect to the franchise it has received from the city. The review and evaluation shall include an opportunity for public comment, in a manner and forum determined by the City Council. 
b.  On completion of grantor's initial review and evaluation, notify grantee that it may file the initial renewal application fee and a franchise renewal application, including the renewal proposal referenced in Section 626(b) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546(b)). The notice shall specify the information to be included in the renewal application and the deadline for filing the application. The application filing deadline shall not be earlier than thirty (30) days after the date of this notice. If grantee does not submit a reasonably complete renewal application by the specified date, the franchise may not be renewed under Sections 4.4(a)-4.4(e) of this chapter or Sections 626(a)-(g) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(g)). 
c.  Hold one or more public hearings on the renewal application after a complete application is received or provide some other procedure for public comment on the application. 
d.  After the public hearing or comment period, the City Manager shall recommend to the City Council that it either: 
i.  Renew the franchise, subject to the negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory to grantor and grantee; or 
ii.  Issue a preliminary decision that the franchise should not be renewed. 
e.  The City Council's formal response to the City Manager's recommendation described in subsection (D)(1)(d) of this section shall be taken within four (4) months of the date of the city's receipt of a complete franchise renewal application described in subsection (D)(1)(b) of this section. 
2.  In preliminarily considering a renewal application, grantor shall consider whether: 
a.  The cable operator has substantially complied with the material provisions of the existing franchise agreement, including all applicable law; 
b.  The quality of the cable operator's service, including signal quality, response to subscriber complaints, and billing practices has been reasonable in light of community needs (but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the cable system); 
c.  The cable operator has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment described in the franchise renewal application; and 
d.  The cable operator's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting the needs and interests. 
3.  If the City Council preliminarily decides that a franchise should not be renewed; at the request of grantee or on its own initiative, grantor shall commence an administrative proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546(c)). 
a.  The City Council shall begin a public hearing within sixty (60) days of the City Council's issuance of its preliminary decision. Prior to this hearing, the City Council shall provide the franchise renewal applicant written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing by causing such notice to be delivered to the applicant by personal service or by mailing a copy of the notice thereof, postage prepaid. 
b.  i.  The City Council need not conduct this hearing according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence about which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, including hearsay evidence, provided that such evidence alone shall be insufficient to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. The City Council may prevent the introduction of irrelevant evidence. 
ii.  At this hearing, the City Council shall hear oral evidence taken only on oath or affirmation. The City Council may take official notice of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records of departments and ordinances of the city, provided that the parties are informed of the matters to be noticed, the matters are noted in the record, and the parties are given a reasonable opportunity to refute the officially noticed matters. 
iii.  Each party to this hearing shall be entitled to the following procedural rights: 
(A)  To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(B)  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
(C)  To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(D)  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 
(E)  To rebut the evidence; and 
(F)  To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to provide such representation. 
iv.  This hearing may continue from time to time. 
v.  Grantor shall ensure that a record of this hearing shall be made and duly preserved, provided that the franchise renewal applicant reimburse the city for the total cost of preparing such a record before a copy of the record is made available to the applicant. 
c.  Within sixty (60) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall issue a recommended decision consistent with the Cable Act. Parties to the hearing and the public shall have thirty (30) days after the recommended decision is issued to provide written comments to the City Council. The City Council shall grant or deny an application within sixty (60) calendar days after the deadline for receipt of these written comments. 
4.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing on any negotiated renewed franchise agreement prior to final City Council action on the franchise. 
5.  Notwithstanding subsections (D)(1) through (4) of this section, grantee—no later than twenty-four (24) months before the franchise expiration date—may submit an application for renewal of a franchise, pursuant to Section 626(h) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 546(h)). The initial filing fee described in subsection A of this section, shall accompany this application. Grantor shall hold one or more public hearings or provide some other procedure for public comment on the proposal. After the public hearing or comment period, the City Manager shall recommend that the City Council grant or deny the franchise renewal and the terms and conditions of any recommended renewal. 
6.  If grantor denies the renewal of a franchise, grantor may, on the recommendation of the City Manager and with the approval of the City Council, acquire ownership of the cable system or transfer ownership of the cable system to another person. Any acquisition or transfer under this subsection shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. 
7.  If grantor does not renew a franchise and grantor does not buy the cable system, grantor may require that grantee remove its cable system facilities and equipment and/or continue providing cable service, in accordance with Section 18.08.140(C) of this chapter. 
E.  Timely Satisfaction of a Final Franchise Application Fee, Surety, Bond and Insurance Requirements After the Granting of a Franchise. 
1.  To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, every grant of an initial or renewed franchise is subject to a final franchise application fee in an amount not to exceed grantor's costs in considering the application, less the amount of the initial filing fee described in subsection A of this section. Within thirty (30) days of the date the grant of the franchise is approved or denied by the City Council, the city shall notify the applicant of the amount of the final franchise application fee and the basis thereof. If the final franchise application fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date the city notifies the applicant of this amount, any franchise granted shall become null and void. Neither the initial filing fee described in subsection A of this section nor the final franchise application fee shall constitute a franchise fee nor be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor. 
2.  Before a grant of a franchise may be effective, the applicant must demonstrate to the city that the applicant has satisfied all surety, bond, insurance, and similar provisions contained in this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 2509 § 4, 2000)  
18.08.050 - Transfers and assignments of a franchise or control over a franchise require the city's written consent. 
A.  The City's Prior Written Consent Is Required Before the Sale, Assignment, or Transfer of a Franchise. A franchise and any rights or obligations of the grantee under the franchise shall not be sold, assigned, transferred, leased or sublet, either in whole or in part, in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein (other than a mortgage or other security interest, as provided in subsection L of this section), pass to or vest in any person without prior written consent of the City Council, which shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
B.  Ownership or Control of Grantee Also Shall Not Be Transferred Without the Prior Written Consent of the City Council. Ownership or control of grantee also shall not be transferred without the prior written consent of the City Council. 
C.  Grantee's Application and Initial Application Fee. 
1.  Grantee shall promptly notify the city of any action or proposed action requiring consent of the City Council pursuant to this section. 
2.  Grantee shall submit to the City Council an original application and four (4) copies, unless otherwise directed, which application shall fully describe the terms and conditions of the action or proposed action subject to this section and clearly state the basis on which the application should be approved. Application shall also contain all documentation and information required by subsections D and E of this section, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable initial application fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000). This application fee shall not constitute a franchise fee or be charged against franchise fees owed the city. 
3.  At any time during this review process, the city reserves the right to require that grantee or any other person involved in the action or proposed action under review provide to the city information or documentation in addition to that required under subsections D and E of this section. Grantee or such other person shall provide all reasonably requested assistance to the city in connection with any such inquiry and, as appropriate, shall secure the cooperation and assistance of all other persons involved in such action. 
4.  The City Council shall render a final decision on an application requiring the city's consent under this section within one hundred twenty (120) days after the city's receipt of a fully complete application (including all initial information required by the city under this chapter and the grantee's franchise agreement), provided that: (i) if the city brings any deficiencies in the original application to the attention of the applicant(s) within thirty (30) days of the city's receipt of the original application, the running of this one hundred twenty (120)-day period shall not begin until the city's receipt of all information requested by the city; or (ii) if the city brings such deficiencies to the applicant's/applicants' attention after this thirty (30)-day period, and the applicant(s) does/do not deliver to the city the requested information within ten (10) days of being notified of these informational deficiencies, the running of this one hundred twenty (120)-day period shall not begin until the city's receipt of all information requested by the city. In the event that the city requests additional information after this thirty (30)-day period, the applicant(s) shall be required to deliver this information to the city within ten (10) days of being notified by the city; provided that this ten (10)-day deadline is met, the deadline for a final decision by the city shall be one hundred twenty (120) days after the city's receipt of an application—even if originally incomplete. Additionally, the City Council and an applicant may mutually agree to an extension of this deadline for a final decision. 
An application for the city's consent to the types of transactions described in this section shall be deemed approved if the City Council fails to render a final decision on the application by the deadline required in this paragraph or a mutually agreed deadline. However, the City Council may deny such an application, due to, among other grounds: (i) a grantee's failure to submit the information required by this section; (ii) grantee's inability or refusal to correct existing deficiencies in grantee's performance of its franchise agreement obligations brought to its attention by the city, prior to the City Council granting its approval of the application; or (iii) the inability or refusal of a proposed successor in interest to the franchise to provide prior written assurances satisfactory to the city concerning the timely and full correction of any existing deficiencies in a grantee's performance of its franchise obligations. 
D.  Contents of an Initial Application. 
1.  In an initial application, a proposed assignee or transferee must demonstrate that it possesses the legal, financial and technical qualifications necessary to perform all the terms, conditions and obligations under the grantee's franchise agreement for the remaining term thereof, and such reasonable additional obligations required of the proposed assignee or transferee by the City Council for the specific and limited purpose of assuring the performance by the proposed assignee or transferee of all the terms, conditions and obligations of the franchise agreement. Consequently, in an initial application, a proposed assignee or transferee must provide the following information: 
a.  Legal Qualifications. The application shall identify the proposed assignee or transferee and, if the proposed assignee or transferee is not a natural person, each of its officers, directors or shareholders owning or beneficially holding five (5) percent or more of its outstanding voting shares, general partners and limited partners holding an equity interest in the proposed assignee or transferee of five (5) percent or more, and the respective percentage share of each such identified officer, director, shareholder or general or limited partner. The proposed assignee or transferee shall disclose any pending litigation or finding made or final action taken during the past five (5) years by, any court, administrative body or arbitrator, concerning the proposed assignee, transferee or officers, directors, or other persons having a legal or equitable interest in five (5) percent or more of the voting stock of such transferee or assignee in a civil, criminal, administrative or FCC proceeding brought under the provisions of any law or regulation related to the following: any felony; revocation, suspension or involuntary transfer of any authorization (including a cable franchise) to provide video programming or other communications services; antitrust or unfair competition; fraudulent statements to a governmental unit; material breach of a cable franchise agreement, including but not limited to a material failure to provide PEG access channels, facilities or equipment. 
b.  Financial Qualifications. The proposed assignee or transferee must demonstrate that it has sufficient net liquid assets on hand or available specifically committed to consummate the transaction and operate the grantee's cable system for a continuing period of six (6) months. The franchise transfer of assignment application shall include recent financial statements (including audited financial statements if requested by the city), of the proposed assignee or transferee prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, including balance sheets, income and expense statements, capital expenditure statements and accompanying notes for the past five (5) years. Such statements, if not otherwise publicly available, may be designated as confidential and shall be maintained as such by the city to the extent permissible under state and local law. 
c.  Technical Qualifications. The application shall set forth a narrative account of the proposed assignee's or transferee's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding cable systems. The narrative account shall include, but not be limited to, a, list of the cable systems currently and formerly owned or operated by assignee or transferee within the past three (3) years, summary information concerning appropriate management personnel who will be involved in the management and operation of the proposed assignee's or transferee's cable system, a list of any adjudications of material violations of the technical rules of the FCC or of federal, state or local governments, including but not limited to violations of rules or regulations regarding signal quality, safety and constriction during the past five (5) years. 
d.  Customer Service. The applicant must submit to the city: (i) a reasonably detailed narrative or a representative manual (if such a manual exists) describing assignee or transferee's customer service procedures; (ii) copies of at least two (2) representative annual customer notices provided by other cable systems owned or operated by assignee or transferee; (iii) a summary of assignee or transferee's proposed billing procedures; (iv) a sample customer service bill; and (v) a copy of a representative or sample customer service agreement or work order which assignee or transferee has used in other cable systems owned or operated by assignee or transferee or which assignee or transferee proposes to use in grantee's cable system. 
2.  The proposed assignee or transferee must agree to comply with all provisions of the grantee's franchise agreement and applicable provisions of this chapter, as well as such reasonable additional terms and conditions as the City Council may require for the specific and limited purpose of assuring the proposed assignee's or transferee's compliance with such provisions. 
E.  Grantee Shall Promptly Notify the City of Any Actual or Prospective Change in Control of a Franchise: Grantee and the Proposed Assignee or Transferee Shall Assist the City in the City's Review of Any Actual or Contemplated Change in Control of a Franchise. 
1.  Grantee's Responsibility. Grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or prospective change in the control of a franchise. Grantee shall assist the city in its inquiry into an assignee's or transferee's capabilities concerning the qualifications addressed in subsection D of this section. 
2.  Proposed Assignee's or Transferee's Responsibility. In seeking the City Council's consent to any change in ownership or control, assignee or transferee shall have the responsibility to establish, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that an assignee or transferee has all the legal, financial and technical qualifications necessary to perform all of the terms, conditions and obligations of the grantee under its franchise agreement for the remaining term thereof. The city may request, and assignee or transferee shall provide, all reasonable financial data relative to the transfer, including but not limited to the materials specified in subsection D of this section. In addition, assignee or transferee shall provide to the city the terms and conditions of the sale, credit agreements, partnership agreements and any other information reasonably related to the assignee's or transferee's acquisition of the grantee's franchise which is needed to demonstrate the qualifications of the assignee or transferee. 
F.  Transfer of Franchise Control Occurs with a Change of the Person Exercising Management Authority Over Grantee or with the Obtainment of a Twenty Percent or Greater Change in Voting or Equity Interest by a Person Who Previously Did Not Have an Interest of this Magnitude. 
1.  The word "control," as used in this section is not limited to major stockholders but includes de facto control (as more specifically set forth in this subsection or significant influence with respect to the operation of the grantee's cable system. For purposes of this section, "significant influence" occurs where a person other than grantee or a person controlling, controlled by or under common control with grantee exercises working or effective control of decisions affecting the operation of the cable system. 
2.  A presumption that transfer of control has occurred, including transfer of control in fact (i.e., transfer of de facto control), shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, or group of persons, of twenty (20) percent of the voting interest or the equity interest of a publicly held grantee or of the person exercising management authority over such a publicly held grantee, or of twenty (20) percent of the voting interest or the equity interest of a privately held grantee or of the person exercising management authority over such a privately held grantee, where the person or group of persons previously did not such a twenty (20) percent interest. 
G.  A Franchise Transfer Without the City Council's Prior Consent Shall Be a Material Breach, and May Result in the Imposition of Liquidated Damages. 
1.  Any assignment of a franchise or transfer of ownership or control of grantee without the prior consent of the City Council shall be null and void unless later ratified by the City Council and: (i) shall be deemed a material breach of a franchise agreement and (ii) among and/or in addition to other remedies available to the city, shall be subject to a liquidated damages assessment of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per week from the date of the unauthorized transaction until the City Council approves the franchise assignment or transfer in ownership or control, or if not approved, until the prior ownership, control or other status quo ante is restored to a condition satisfactory to the City Council. 
H.  The City Council May Revoke a Franchise if an Unauthorized Franchise Transfer or Change in Control Occurs. If the City Council fails to approve or denies its consent to an assignment of a franchise or transfer of ownership or control of grantee requiring the city's approval and such action has nevertheless been effected, the City Council may revoke said franchise and terminate any applicable franchise agreement unless control of the grantee or the cable system is promptly restored to its status prior to such unauthorized action or to a status acceptable to the City Council. 
I.  Consent of the City Council to a Franchise Transfer or Change in Control Shall Not Constitute a Waiver of the City's Rights. The consent or approval of the City Council to any assignment of a franchise or transfer of control of a franchise or of its ownership shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city unless the City Council specifically releases or waives such rights. In no event shall such a consent or approval result in an estoppel, release, or waiver of any power vested in the city or the waiver of the right to exercise such vested power. 
J.  A Successor-In-Interest to a Franchise Must Become a Signatory to the Applicable Franchise Agreement or an Amended Franchise Agreement Satisfactory to the City. In no event shall an assignment of franchise be approved without the successor-in-interest becoming a signatory to the existing franchise agreement or an amended franchise agreement satisfactory to the City Council. 
K.  A Grantee Shall Not Enter into Any Management Contract Resulting in a Change in Control Without the Prior Consent of the City Council. Grantee shall not enter into any management contract or other arrangement for the management of the cable system, to the extent that such contract or other arrangement would result in a significant change of de facto control over the operations of a grantee or the cable system (as defined herein), without the prior consent of the City Council. 
L.  Provided Certain Conditions Are Met, Certain Circumstances or Transactions Pertaining to Franchise Transfers or Changes in Control Shall Not Require the City's Prior Consent. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, any financial institution having a pledge of grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the cable system shall have the right and obligation to notify grantor that the financial institution or a designee satisfactory to grantor shall take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. However, said financial institution shall also agree in writing to continue cable service and comply with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the cable system. Furthermore: 
1.  The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage, hypothecation, or assignment of any right, title or interest in the cable system, or use of the cable system as collateral in order to secure indebtedness, shall not require the consent of the City Council; and 
2.  The consent of the City Council shall not be required for an intracorporate or intracompany transfer from one wholly-owned subsidiary of a franchisee to another wholly-owned subsidiary of the same franchisee. However, in the event that a parent of a franchisee desires to transfer a franchise to another subsidiary, the City Council may require a written guarantee from the parent stating that the parent will be ultimately responsible for the performance of all franchise agreement obligations. 
M.  Reimbursement Due Grantor for Its Review of Any Franchise Assignment or Franchise Change in Control: Transaction Not Effective with Respect to the Franchise Until Successor-In-Interest Has Satisfied All Applicable Surety, Bond, Insurance, and Similar Franchise Agreement Provisions. 
1.  Prior to the effective date of a franchise transfer, assignment, or change in control, grantee shall reimburse grantor for grantors processing and review expenses related to the transaction, including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses, to the extent the sum of these expenses exceeds the initial application fee described in subsection C of this section. Neither such reimbursement nor the initial application fee described in subsection C of this section shall constitute a franchise fee or be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor. 
2.  Before a franchise transfer or change in control may be effective, the successor-in-interest must demonstrate to the city that the successor-in-interest has satisfied all surety, bond, insurance, and similar provisions contained in the applicable franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 2509 § 5, 2000)  
18.08.060 - Minimum customer protection and service standards. 
A.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, grantee shall maintain the following necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following customer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions: 
a.  Grantee shall obtain and maintain sufficient telephone lines and staffing so as not to delay unreasonably the answering of any telephone call, and shall adjust grantee's staffing, as necessary, with respect to special events which may reasonably be expected to increase call volume. Trained customer service representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours, defined as not less than nine (9) hours per business day, Monday through Friday, and some evening hours, at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours. Grantee shall connect a telephone caller within thirty (30) seconds after the caller dials and "ringing" begins. This standard shall be deemed satisfied when a connection is made either to an automated attendant capable of responding to the subscriber's inquiry, such as an automatic response unit, or to a customer service representative capable of responding to the subscriber's inquiry. Under normal operating conditions, the caller will receive a busy signal less than three (3) percent of the time. If the call needs to be transferred, if the caller needs to be placed on hold, or if the caller wishes to be transferred, such transfer or hold time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. Each of the standards set forth in this paragraph shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis, under normal operating conditions, as noted in subsection (A)(2) of this section. 
b.  Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative no later than the next business day. During periods when an answering service or machine is used, grantee shall provide on-call personnel who shall contact the answering service or machine, at a minimum, every four hours to check on requests for service or complaints. 
c.  A reasonably accessible local business and service and/or payment office, open during normal business hours, where grantee provides adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints. grantee may petition grantor to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are not justified by subscriber demand, and grantor may not unreasonably deny the petition. 
d.  An emergency cable system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing any major cable system malfunction on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis. 
e.  An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven (7) days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. 
i.  "Standard installation" charges shall apply to those installations which consist of an aerial or underground drop of no more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in length, running from the nearest feeder cable of the cable system to a subscriber terminal, using exposed wiring inside the subscriber's premises. Installations which exceed this maximum length, or in the case of an underground drop—which involves unforeseen or extraordinary conditions—will be subject to additional charges, as determined grantee, provided that such additional charges shall be fair, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory. 
ii.  All installations shall include the proper grounding of grantee's equipment, the correct adjustment of any television set or other customer equipment connected to the cable system, either directly or indirectly, in order to receive service, and the provision of required customer information and literature instructing customers in the use of grantee's services. 
f.  Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four (4) hour time period during normal business hours, all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the subscriber location. Grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the customer. Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, grantee shall contact customer and the appointment shall be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
2.  Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section shall be met not less than ninety (90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subsections (A)(1)(d) through (f) of this section shall be met not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
3.  Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply with these standards. 
B.  Service Standards. 
1.  Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest periods of time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six a.m. local time. 
2.  Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
a.  For a Cable System Outage. Within two (2) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by number identify a cable system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least ten (10) percent of the subscribers of the cable system. 
b.  For an Isolated Outage. Within twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels that affects five (5) or more subscribers, except as provided in subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section. An outage affecting fewer than five (5) subscribers shall result in a service call no later than the next business day. 
c.  For Inferior Signal Quality. Within two (2) business days of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
3.  Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of arrival. 
4.  Grantee shall not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or connected equipment owned by the subscriber requires repair or replacement and grantee has not been responsible for the need for this repair or replacement. 
5.  Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem resulting in a request for service within two (2) business days of beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems within five (5) business days unless technically infeasible. 
C.  Billing and Information Standards. 
1.  Subscriber bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
2.  In case of a billing dispute, grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days. 
3.  Grantee shall automatically provide credits or refunds to such subscribers whose service has been interrupted for twenty-four (24) consecutive hours or more, and upon request to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for two (2) or more hours. 
Credits or refunds shall automatically be provided by grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscriber(s) affected by interruption(s) of service for more than two (2) hours due to actions or outages under the control of grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs, maintenance or franchise-required construction for which grantee has provided advance written notice of to subscribers. In cases where advance written notice is provided to subscribers, the time period detailed in said notice shall not exceed four (4) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period. In cases where said notice has been given to subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in said notice, grantee shall provide pro rata credits or refunds to subscribers. 
In the event grantee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected cable services to a subscriber, grantee shall provide for restoration of cable service without charge to the subscriber as soon as possible, but no later than within two (2) days of grantee's discovery of the impropriety or inadvertence of said disconnection. Grantee shall provide a pro rata credit or a pro rata refund reflecting the period of time without cable service to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected from such service. 
All credits or refunds for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than thirty (30) days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
4.  Grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas (i) at the time of the installation of service, (ii) at least annually to all subscribers, and (iii) at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered; 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
c.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
d.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; and 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the cable system; and 
f.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of grantor's office(s) designated for dealing with cable service issues. 
5.  Grantee shall provide written notification to subscribers of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions, as soon as possible and in accordance with state and federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such a change if the change is within the control of grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection (C)(4) of this section. 
6.  Where the changes described in subsection (C)(5) of this section, are within grantee's control; grantee shall deliver to the City Manager draft copies of all subscriber notices described in subsection (C)(5) of this section, for the city's review and comment, prior to the finalization of these notices and at least fifteen (15) days prior to distribution of such notices to subscribers. 
7.  Notices of changes in rates, programming services or channel positions or other customer information that are not within grantee's control shall be submitted to the city for review and comment as soon as practicable, allowing the city as much lead-time as possible prior to finalization of the notices. This submission of notices to the city must always take place prior to the distribution of such notices to subscribers. 
D.  Verification of Compliance with Customer Service Standards. 
1.  Upon ten (10) days prior written notice, grantee shall respond to a request for information made by grantor regarding grantee's compliance with any or all of the standards required in subsections A, B and C of this section. Grantee shall provide sufficient documentation to permit grantor to verify grantee's compliance. 
2.  A repeated and verifiable pattern of non-compliance with the customer protection standards of subsections A, B and C of this section, after grantee's receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
3.  In order to determine whether sufficient telephone lines are provided, grantor may require that a busy study, traffic study or other study be conducted, at grantee's expense, if any, by the local telephone company. Should grantee have its own telephone equipment which can report on telephone line(s) usage, grantee may submit such a report generated by its own system. Grantor, pursuant to subsection (A)(3) of this section, may require grantee to acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering standards of this section. 
4.  Grantee shall take necessary steps to ensure that adequate telephone lines and/or staffing are available to permit grantee to satisfy its obligations under this chapter and the franchise agreement. Consideration shall be given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing period shall be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and/or staffing. 
E.  Subscriber Complaints and Disputes. 
1.  Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor. The written procedures shall include a requirement that grantee resolve, if reasonably possible, any written complaint from a subscriber concerning billing within thirty (30) days of grantee's receipt of said complaint. 
2.  Upon prior written request, grantor shall have the right to review grantee's response to any subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee's compliance with franchise requirements. Grantee shall not be required to release any "individually identifiable" or "personally identifiable" information to grantor, except as provided by state or federal law, or unless, and to the extent, allowed by a subscriber or complainant affected by such a disclosure. 
3.  Subject to applicable law, it shall be the right of any subscriber to continue receiving cable service provided that he or she meets his or her financial and other obligations to grantee. In the event that grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the cable system, or grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive cable service so long as the franchise remains in force. 
4.  In the event of a change of ownership or control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee shall cooperate with grantor, the new grantee or the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system. 
5.  Grantee response to subscriber complaints, as well as complaints made by subscribers to grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, shall be initiated within one business day of receipt by grantor. The resolution of subscriber complaints shall be effected by grantee not later than three (3) business days after receipt of the complaint. Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber, a supervisor shall respond to the subscriber's complaint at the earliest possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day. For complaints received by grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, grantee shall periodically inform grantor in writing of grantee's progress in responding to, and resolving, said complaints. 
F.  Other Customer Service Requirements. 
1.  In the event grantee fails to operate the cable system for seven (7) consecutive days for reasons not excused under Section 18.08.130 of this chapter, without prior approval or subsequent excuse of grantor, grantor may, at its sole option, operate the cable system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to grantor or a permanent replacement operator is selected. If grantor should fulfill this obligation for grantee, then during such period as grantor fulfills such obligation, grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the cable system, and grantee shall reimburse grantor for all costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by grantor that are the result of grantee's failure to perform. 
2.  All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers' premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. All vehicles of grantee or its major subcontractors shall clearly indicate on the outside of the vehicles their affiliation with grantee. 
3.  Additional service standards and standards governing customer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance, which shall become incorporated into the franchise agreement. The city may deem a pattern of noncompliance with the customer service standards included in this chapter or any applicable franchise agreement a material breach of the franchise agreement. However, prior to imposing any sanction, the city shall afford grantee due process as described in this chapter, including prior written notification, a reasonable opportunity to cure, and a public hearing. 
(Ord. 2509 § 6, 2000)  
18.08.070 - Franchise fee and other financial requirements. 
A.  Franchise Fee. 
1.  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, grantee shall pay to grantor franchise fees equal to the greater of: (i) five (5) percent of grantee's gross annual cable service revenues, as defined in Section 18.08.020 of this chapter; or (ii) the maximum franchise fees allowed by law if changes in applicable law increase the maximum franchise fee percentage applicable to these gross annual cable service revenues. 
2.  On an annual basis, within one hundred twenty (120) days of the close of each calendar year, grantee shall provide to grantor a written statement reflecting the total amounts of gross annual cable service revenues and all franchise fee payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by these franchise fee payments. Grantee shall ensure that this gross revenues/franchise fee statement is either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of grantee, under penalty of perjury. Upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent financial audit of grantee's gross annual cable service revenues and franchise fee records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP) as well as generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS). If such an audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two (2) percent or more, grantee shall reimburse grantor for its costs resulting from such an audit. 
3.  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by grantor shall be construed as a release, an accord and satisfaction, or a waiver of any claim grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as franchise fees under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of grantee. 
4.  In the event that any franchise fee payment or payment of any adjustment to any franchise fee is not made on or before the due date(s) specified in the franchise agreement or this chapter; unless otherwise excused by grantor, grantee shall pay: 
a.  An interest charge, computed from such due date(s), at an annual rate equal to the highest of the most recently published prime lending rate of any of the five (5) largest member banks of the New York Clearing House Association, plus one percent beginning on the due date(s) and continuing for any period for which a payment was late; and 
b.  If a payment is late by thirty (30) days or more, a sum of money equal to five (5) percent of the amount due, in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by grantor as a result of grantee's delinquent payment. 
5.  Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. 
B.  A Five Percent Fee Also Applies to Any Non-Cable Operator or Non-Grantee Person Distributing a Service Over the Cable System. Consistent with Section 622(h) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 542(h)) and subparagraph (1)(g) of the "grantor" definition in Section 18.08.020, the city shall have the power to require any person, other than a cable operator, who originates or controls the distribution of any service over the cable system and receives fees for such service, which fees are not received by or transmitted through the cable operator, to pay the city a fee equal to five (5) percent or the maximum permitted by law of the gross revenues of such person derived from the distribution of such service over the cable system, less any amounts directly paid to the cable operator or grantee in compensation for the use of such cable system. 
C.  Security Fund. 
1.  Grantor may require grantee to provide a security fund, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security fund shall be designed to secure grantee's obligations under the terms of the franchise. 
2.  The security fund shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens, fees, and/or taxes grantee owes grantor and which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a breach or default pertaining to the franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
3.  If the security fund is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty (30) days after receiving written confirmation from the bank or other financial institution where such security fund is deposited of this drawing against the security fund. Failure to replenish the security fund shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 2509 § 7, 2000)  
18.08.080 - Cable system construction and technical standards. 
A.  Applicable Cable System Construction Technical Standards. 
1.  Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, electrical codes, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. Such applicable electrical codes and construction standards shall include the most current versions of the National Electrical Code (NEC), General Order No. 95 of the state of California's Public Utilities Commission, General Order No. 128 of the state of California's Public Utilities Commission, and the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC), to the extent the NESC does not conflict with the NEC or any rule, regulation, or order promulgated by the state of California's Public Utilities Commission. 
2.  Grantee shall provide to grantor, upon written request, a written report of the results of grantee's periodic proof of performance tests and signal leakage tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines. 
3.  Any time the signal provided on grantee's cable system does not meet FCC technical standards or the technical standards of grantee's franchise application and/or grantee's franchise agreement, grantor may order grantee to make a pro rata rebate, in money or services, to each subscriber based upon the percentage by which the signal falls below the most stringent technical standard and upon the length of time that such condition has existed. Grantor shall follow the procedure for addressing franchise agreement violations described in Section 18.08.120(B) of this chapter, before ordering such a rebate. 
B.  Noncompliance with Cable System Construction Technical Standards. Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards described or referenced in subsection A of this section, shall constitute a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
C.  Cable System Construction. 
1.  Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other responsible public agencies. Grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding requirements applicable to contractors working within the public rights-of-way. No provision of this chapter or any franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay grantor for the issuance of such a permit. Furthermore, permit fees shall not constitute franchise fees nor be charged against franchise fees owed to the city. 
2.  Sixty (60) days and thirty (30) days prior to beginning any construction, rebuild, or upgrade of any cable system within the service area, and every sixty (60) days while engaged in such activity, grantee shall submit construction reports to the City Manager containing the following information: (i) a general description of the construction, rebuild, or upgrade activities to be undertaken by grantee during the following sixty (60) days; (ii) the status of necessary permits; (iii) the number of miles constructed and the number of homes passed as of the date of the report and the number of miles to be constructed and the number of homes to be passed during the sixty (60) days following the report; (iv) any conditions known to grantee which may affect the construction schedule; and (v) any other pertinent information required by the City Manager. Unless otherwise specified by the City Manager, such construction reports shall be required until completion of these cable system construction, upgrade, or rebuild activities, at which point in time grantee shall submit to the City Manager a final report addressing the information described in clauses (i) through (v) of this subsection. 
3.  In those areas of the city where transmission lines or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
4.  In those areas of the city where grantee's cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost. Certain of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
5.  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as "structures"), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the public rights-of-way, shall be made under the direction of Public Works Director or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the state regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. 
6.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations. 
7.  In the event that any property or improvement of grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to grantee pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement, grantee shall promptly, at grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to grantor's satisfaction said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property or improvement shall (within two (2) years of grantee's restoration (or in the case of a street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the two (2) years) of the date the restoration was completed) become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by grantee, then grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from grantor and at grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to grantor's satisfaction said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by grantor. 
8.  Prior to commencing any work on the cable system in the public rights-of-way, grantee shall obtain any and all permits, licenses and authorizations lawfully required for such work. If emergency work on the cable system in the public right-of-way is required, grantee shall with all due diligence, seek to obtain any and all such required permits, licenses and authorizations within three (3) working days after commencing such emergency work. Prior to performing any work in the public right-of-way, grantee shall give appropriate notice to the "underground service alert" ("USA"), or any similar type service provider designated by grantor. 
9.  There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by grantee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. Grantee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
10.  If grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
11.  Grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any public right-of-way shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of grantor. 
12.  In accordance with applicable law, grantee or any utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by grantor to permit joint use of its poles and/or conduit located in the public rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. In the absence of an agreement regarding such joint use, each party shall be entitled to exercise any rights and defenses provided by applicable law. 
13.  Grantee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less than five (5) business days prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes. 
14.  Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with grantee's wires, cables and other equipment. Grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction, at the expense of grantee. 
15.  Grantee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by grantor with regard to the placement and screening of grantee's facilities and equipment located in the public rights-of-way. Such requirements may include, but not be limited to, the use of landscaping to screen pedestals and cabinets and the requirement that construction be flush with the natural grade of the surrounding area. 
D.  Multiple Franchises. 
1.  Subject to applicable law, in the event that more than one franchise is awarded, grantor reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to require that the drop cable(s) be utilized only by the cable operator selected by the resident to provide service. 
2.  Grantor reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchisee applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant's risk, with no recourse against grantor in the event the pending franchise application is not granted. Grantor may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant's cost. 
3.  If grantor authorizes or permits one or more additional cable systems to operate within the territorial limits of the city, grantor shall do so on condition that any additional cable system franchisee agree to indemnify and hold harmless and reimburse grantor and any existing grantee and any affected utility from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing facilities underground, and engaging in similar activities related to the construction of an additional cable system in the franchise area. Any existing grantee shall be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted by the city to any new grantee. 
(Ord. 2509 § 8, 2000)  
18.08.090 - Indemnification and insurance requirements. 
A.  Grantee Shall Agree to Indemnify Grantor. 
1.  Grantee shall indemnify, hold harmless, release and defend the city, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, employees, contractors, and volunteers as additional insureds from and against any and all actions, claims, demands, damages, liability, losses, expenses (including attorney's fees), and other defense costs or liabilities of any nature that may be asserted by any third-party, from any cause whatsoever arising from the activities of grantee, its contractors, subcontractors, employees and agents. Grantee shall be solely responsible and hold grantor harmless from all matters relative to payment of grantee's employees, including compliance with Social Security laws, withholding of taxes, etc. 
2.  This indemnification obligation is not limited in any way by a limitation on the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for grantee pursuant to workers' compensation laws, disability or other employee benefit acts, acceptance by grantor of insurance policies or certificates required by this chapter or a franchise agreement, or the terms, applicability or limitations of any insurance coverage obtained by grantee. 
3.  Grantor does not, and shall not, waive any rights against grantee which it may have by reason of this indemnification, because of the acceptance by grantor, or the deposit with grantor by grantee, of any of the insurance policies described in this section. 
4.  Grantee shall indemnify grantor for any damage resulting to it from failure of either grantee or any subcontractor to take out and maintain such required insurance. 
5.  This indemnification by grantee shall apply to all damages and claims for damages of any kind suffered by reason of any of the aforesaid operations referred to in this chapter, regardless of whether or not such insurance policies shall have been determined to be applicable to any of such damages or claims for damages. 
6.  Grantee shall not be required to indemnify grantor for the sole negligence or willful misconduct (hereinafter "such acts") on the part of grantor, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, employees, contractors, and volunteers. Grantor shall hold grantee harmless from any damage resulting from any such acts of grantor or its officers, officials, boards, commissions, agents, employees, or contractors in using any governmental or educational access channel, equipment, or facilities and for any such acts committed by grantor in connection with work performed by grantor and permitted by this agreement, on or adjacent to the cable system. 
B.  Insurance. 
1.  On or before commencement of franchise operations, grantee shall furnish to grantor one or more insurance policies demonstrating compliance with all insurance coverage requirements of this chapter and any applicable franchise agreement. Such insurance coverage, shall, at a minimum, satisfy claims for injuries to persons or damages to property which may arise from or in conjunction with the performance of the work hereunder by grantee, its agents, representatives, employees or contractors. Grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise, the insurance coverage required herein and in any franchise agreement. Each company providing insurance coverage shall satisfy the requirements hereof. 
2.  Each insurance policy described in this section or any applicable franchise agreement shall name the city, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, employees, contractors, and volunteers as additional insureds. 
3.  Each insurance policy shall contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification that relates to a diminution in the scope of coverage under this section, or reduction in the limits of coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the City Manager thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. 
4.  Insurance coverage shall include at least the following types of policies with the following minimum limits: 
a.  General Liability. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. If commercial general liability insurance or other form with a general aggregate limit is used, either the general aggregate limit shall apply separately to this franchise or the general aggregate limit shall be twice the required occurrence limit. 
i.  The general liability insurance shall include property insurance and fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations, in an amount adequate to enable grantee to expeditiously resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance. 
b.  Automobile Liability. Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage. 
c.  Worker's Compensation and Employer's Liability Complying with State Laws. The greater of either (i) each minimum policy limit required by state law or (ii) a minimum limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per each accident and a minimum limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for employee bodily injury and disease. 
i.  Furthermore, any insurer providing worker's compensation and employers liability coverage shall agree to waive all rights of subrogation against grantor, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees for losses arising from work performed by grantee for grantor. 
d.  Errors and Omissions Liability Endorsed to Include Contractual Liability. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence. 
e.  Slander/Libel/Defamation Liability Insurance. An aggregate annual amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
5.  All insurance coverage is to be provided with insurers with a current A.M. Best's rating of no less than A:VII if admitted in the state of California. A nonadmitted company submitted for grantor's consideration shall have an A.M. Best's rating of A:X or higher. 
6.  Each insurance policy required by the chapter or any applicable franchise shall contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following additional provisions: 
a.  Grantee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with respect to grantor, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, employees, contractors, and volunteers. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by grantor, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, employees, contractors, and volunteers shall be excess of grantee's insurance and shall not contribute with it. 
b.  Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by grantor. At the option of grantor, either the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self insured retentions as respects grantor, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, employees, contractors, and volunteers; or grantee shall provide evidence satisfactory to grantor guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration and defense expenses. 
c.  Grantee's insurance shall apply separately to each insured against whom a claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability. 
d.  Grantee shall furnish grantor with endorsements effecting the insurance coverage required by this chapter. The endorsements are to be signed by the person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The endorsements are to be on forms acceptable to grantor. All endorsements are to be received and approved by grantor in accordance with the schedule established in this section. 
e.  Grantee shall include all contractors as additional insureds under its policies or shall furnish to grantor separate insurance policies and endorsements provided by each contractor not listed as an additional insured in by grantee's insurance policies. All insurance coverage obtained by contractors in order to satisfy this subparagraph shall satisfy all insurance coverage and insurance coverage reporting requirements contained by this chapter or any applicable franchise agreement. 
7.  In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight (48) hours notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. 
8.  The city may review the insurance required herein during the term of the grantee's franchise. Based upon any material adverse changes in liability exposure or legal requirements, the city may, at any time during the term of a franchise, reasonably change the amounts and types of insurance coverage required by the franchise. Grantee shall effect any such required changes in insurance coverage within ninety (90) days of receiving applicable written notice from the city. 
(Ord. 2509 § 9, 2000)  
18.08.100 - Records and reports. 
A.  Records Required. 
1.  In addition to records and documents required by other provisions of this chapter and any franchise agreement, grantee shall, also, at all times maintain: 
a.  A written or computer-stored record of all subscriber complaints and service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced by subscribers for the preceding two (2) years. These records must be maintained in a manner which satisfies applicable federal and state privacy laws. 
b.  A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. 
c.  If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls, in a form reasonably acceptable to grantor, shall be submitted to grantor within thirty (30) days following any written request by grantor. 
d.  If requested by grantor; a complaint record which shall contain a semiannual breakdown (pertaining to the periods of time ending on June 30th and December 31st) indicating the total number of complaints received for the preceding reporting period, and which shall indicate the classifications of complaints as follows: construction, billing, customer relations/service and miscellaneous. 
e.  A full and complete record of rates for programming services, equipment, installations and other subscriber charges. This information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic service tier, tiers of service beyond the basic service tier, premium services, pay-per-view services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any charges for installation or service at the subscriber premises. 
2.  Grantor may impose requests for additional information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights or grantee's duties pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement, and are consistent with applicable federal and state privacy laws. 
3.  Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of grantor of all: 
a.  Franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service area; and 
b.  All records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement, and the release of such information is consistent with applicable federal and state privacy laws. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. 
B.  Annual Reports. 
1.  Within ninety (90) days after the end of each calendar year, grantee shall submit a written report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
a.  A summary of the previous year's cable system activities and developments, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the previous year; 
b.  A list of grantee's officers, directors and/or managing employees; 
c.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if the applicant is a partnership; the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five (5) percent or greater interest, if the applicant is a corporation; and the holder(s) of any controlling interest as well as the holder(s) of any equity interest of greater than five (5) percent and the magnitude of such an equity interest, if the applicant is a limited liability company; 
d.  An indication of any residential and commercial areas in grantee's service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service; 
e.  Information as to: 
i.  The number of homes passed, 
ii.  Total subscribers, and 
iii.  The overall number of subscribers and the number of subscribers who subscribe to the following services: (a) the lowest priced analog tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals; (b) each other analog video programming tiers, listed separately by name; (c) premium cable services; (d) digital programming services; (e) high-speed data or "cable modem" services; and (f) other categories of cable services grantee introduces to the service area and for which grantor requests information concerning subscriber levels; 
f.  A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. It is the intent of this section that grantor have a complete set of plans and records drawings. After the initial submission of a complete set of drawings, grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings which have changed; 
g.  Any other information relevant to this chapter, any applicable franchise agreement, and cable system franchise regulation. 
2.  Upon request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications and reports. 
3.  Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
4.  If grantee or a parent is publicly held, grantee shall submit to grantor a copy of each annual and other periodic reports pertaining to grantee and/or its parent, within forty-five (45) days of the publication of such a report. 
5.  Upon grantor's request, but no more than annually, grantee shall submit to grantor a privacy report indicating the degree of compliance with the provisions contained in Section 18.08.150(F)(3), (4) and (6) of this chapter and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected. 
6.  All reports required under this chapter, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in grantor's offices during normal business hours. 
7.  All reports and records required to be delivered to grantor under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement. 
8.  Grantee's failure to timely file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty (30) days after written request therefor, and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
9.  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made by grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor. 
C.  Opinion Survey. Upon written request of grantor, but not more than once every two (2) years, grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to grantee's quality of service provided in the service area. Prior to grantee's dissemination or conduct of such a survey, grantee shall: (i) provide to grantor a written draft list of the questions to be included in the survey and a description of the survey's format and methodology; and (ii) discuss with grantor any questions or concerns grantor has regarding these matters. Grantee may include this survey with an invoice for cable services. The results of such survey shall be provided to grantor on a timely basis. The cost of such survey shall be borne by grantee. 
(Ord. 2509 § 10, 2000)  
18.08.110 - Review of cable system performance. 
A.  Biennial Review. 
1.  Every two (2) years throughout the term of each franchise, upon receipt of a prior written directive issued by grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review cable system performance and quality of service. The various reports required by this chapter, the results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response to those complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, and any other relevant information shall serve as the basis for this review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these complaints and comments shall be considered during this review. 
2.  If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or grantee's franchise agreement, grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific details of each instance and/or type of alleged noncompliance. Grantor may then direct grantee to: 
a.  Correct the area(s) of noncompliance within a reasonable period specified by grantor; 
b.  Initiate remedial action within a reasonable period specified by grantor and diligently achieve full compliance by a reasonable deadline established by grantor; or 
c.  Demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are incorrect. 
3.  Failure of grantee to take the corrective actions described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, after due notice, shall be considered a material breach of the franchise agreement, and grantor may exercise any appropriate remedy allowed by this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
B.  Special Franchise Performance Review. Whenever repeated complaints or other evidence cast reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of grantee's cable service and grantee's compliance with the requirements of this chapter or grantee's franchise; grantor may require grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system, in order to protect the public against substandard cable service. Grantor may not compel grantee to provide such tests or reports unless and until grantor has provided grantee with at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of its intention to exercise its rights under this subsection and has provided grantee with an opportunity to be heard prior to its exercise of such rights. Grantee shall conduct such test or tests and deliver the report to grantor—at grantee's sole cost—no later than thirty (30) days after grantor notifies grantee in writing that grantee is exercising such right. Such report shall include the following information: (i) the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; (ii) the cable system component(s) tested and the equipment used and procedures employed in said testing; (iii) the results of such tests; and (iv) the method by which any complaints were resolved. Grantee shall also record any other pertinent information concerning such special tests. 
(Ord. 2509 § 11, 2000)  
18.08.120 - Franchise violations. 
A.  Procedures for Addressing Franchise Violations. If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any obligation required by this chapter or a franchise agreement, or if grantee otherwise violates a provision of this chapter or a franchise agreement; following reasonable written notice from grantor and a reasonable opportunity to cure such nonperformance or other violation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of the franchise, grantor may at its option and in sole discretion undertake any of the following: 
1.  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in the franchise agreement, if such violation is not cured within thirty (30) days after written notice to grantee of grantor's intention to cure and draw upon the security fund; 
2.  Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in this chapter or a franchise agreement for any such violations if such violation is not cured within thirty (30) days after grantee's receipt of written notice of grantor's intention to assess liquidated damages, or if grantee has not commenced a cure on a schedule reasonably acceptable to grantor within thirty (30) days after receipt of such written notice of grantor's intention to assess liquidated damages. Such liquidated damages may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by grantor of any other right or remedy grantor may have under this chapter, the franchise agreement, or applicable law, including without limitation, grantor's right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney's fees incurred by grantor due to grantee's failure to timely cure the applicable franchise breach. 
B.  Nonrevocation Procedures for Remedying Franchise Violations. 
1.  Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this chapter, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures. 
2.  Grantor shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in writing and demand that grantee provide grantor with written evidence of having taken action fully correcting the deficiency or evidence that no violation exists. Grantee's response shall be due: (i) not be less than fifteen (15) business days after grantee's receipt of this notification, in the case of grantee's failure to pay any sum or other amount due grantor under this chapter or grantee's franchise; and (ii) not less than thirty (30) business days after grantee's receipt of this notification concerning other alleged types of violations. 
Grantor shall provide grantee written notice of not less than thirty (30) days of a public hearing to be held before the City Council, if grantee fails to: 
a.  Correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed; or 
b.  Commence correction of the alleged violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or 
c.  Provide evidence that there is no violation. 
Said notice shall set forth in detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred. 
3.  Subsequent to the public hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
4.  The proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed against grantee, if the City Council finds that: 
a.  Grantee has corrected the alleged violation; or 
b.  Grantee has diligently commenced correction of such alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such alleged violation pursuant to a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the City Council; or 
c.  No material violation has occurred. 
5.  The City Council may impose one or more of the remedies provided in this chapter and the franchise agreement as the City Council, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances, if the City Council finds that a violation exists and that grantee: 
a.  Has not corrected the violation in a satisfactory manner; or 
b.  Has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation. 
C.  Grantor's Power to Revoke a Franchise. 
1.  Grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise under the following circumstances: 
a.  Grantee has failed to perform any of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and continues such failure to perform after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure; 
b.  Grantee has engaged in a breach of a franchise agreement or this chapter deemed "material" in the franchise agreement or this chapter; 
c.  Grantee has failed to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage and/or security fund required by this chapter or a franchise agreement; 
d.  Grantee has violated an order or ruling of any regulatory body (including the City Council) having jurisdiction over grantee's franchise; 
e.  Grantee has knowingly engaged in a course of conduct intentionally designed to practice a fraud or deceit upon the city, any subscriber, or any other person; 
f.  Except as provided in Section 18.08.140(D) of this chapter, grantee has become insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; 
g.  Grantee has failed to timely provide any information or documents required by any provision of this chapter or a franchise agreement, after receiving a written request for such information from the city; 
h.  Grantee has failed to satisfy the requirements regarding the cable system characteristics described in this chapter or in a franchise agreement or grantee has repeatedly failed to meet the cable system technical performance, electrical code, or construction code standards described in this chapter or in a franchise agreement; 
i.  Grantee has failed to timely provide cable service to any person as required by this chapter or a franchise agreement, after receiving a written request from the city to provide such cable service; 
j.  Grantee has failed to comply with the standards, terms, or schedule for cable system construction, as required by this chapter or a franchise agreement; 
k.  Grantee has substantially failed to maintain the mix, level, and quality of cable services within the broad categories of video programming and other cable services described in a franchise agreement; however, no provision in this chapter shall imply any regulatory authority or power of censorship by the city over the content of programming on channels controlled by grantee, commercial leased access channels, or public access programming; 
l.  Grantee has abandoned a cable system, in whole or in material part, without the prior written consent of the City Council; 
m.  Grantee has repeatedly failed to comply with the commercial leased access requirements of Section 612 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 532); 
n.  Grantee has substantially failed to supply or fund the PEG access facilities required by a franchise agreement; 
o.  Grantee has repeatedly imposed nonstandard installation or other charges for cable service which are discriminatory, or which are inconsistent with Section 18.08.060(A)(1) of this chapter. 
p.  Grantee has repeatedly failed to comply with the nondiscrimination or equal employment provisions incorporated in Section 18.08.150(F) of this chapter; 
q.  Grantee has repeatedly failed to comply with the customer service standards and requirements set forth in this chapter; 
r.  Grantee has repeatedly failed to comply with the privacy rights of subscribers provided herein, or with the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 551) or Section 637.5 of the state of California Penal Code; 
s.  Grantee has repeatedly failed to make any franchise fee payment required by a franchise agreement or by Section 18.08.080 of this chapter, or any other payment required by a franchise agreement or by this chapter; 
t.  Grantee has repeatedly failed to comply with any rules, regulations, orders or other directives of the city, issued pursuant to the city's police powers; 
u.  Grantee has undertaken a material action which requires the approval or consent of the City Council, including the transferring or changing of control of a franchise, without having first obtained the City Council's prior approval or consent; 
v.  Grantee has failed to cooperate fully and faithfully with any lawful investigation, audit or inquiry conducted by the city or any person lawfully acting on behalf of the city; 
w.  Grantee has issued a written misrepresentation, intentionally made by or on behalf of grantee in a proposal for a franchise, or in connection with the negotiation or renegotiation of a franchise, or any amendment or other modification to a franchise, or in connection with an application, request, or negotiation for a franchise transfer or change in control; 
x.  Grantee, any affiliated person, any director or executive officer of grantee or of an affiliated person, or any employee or agent of grantee or of any affiliated person acting under the express direction or with the actual consent of grantee, its directors or officers, has been convicted of a criminal offense, including, without limitation, bribery, fraud or obscenity, arising out of or in connection with a franchise granted by the city or the award of such a franchise, provided that the right to terminate the franchise in the event of said conviction shall arise only with respect to any of the foregoing types of convictions of grantee itself and, in the event of the conviction of any other persons specified in this subparagraph, only if grantee fails to disassociate itself, from or terminate the employment of, such other persons with respect to activities in the franchise area or any other activities affecting a cable system within the city's territorial limits, within thirty (30) days after the time in which appeals from such conviction may be taken, if not taken, or within thirty (30) days following the final determination of all appeals which are in fact taken; 
y.  Any city officer, official, board member, employee, or agent is convicted of the offense of bribery or fraud with respect to the franchise held by grantee and which arises out of or in connection with any intentional action by grantee, any affiliated person, any director or executive officer of grantee or of any affiliated person, or of any employee or agent of grantee or of any affiliated person acting under the express direction or actual consent of grantee or any of the foregoing, which act was undertaken for the benefit of grantee; 
z.  Grantee or any affiliated person, or any director or officer of grantee or any affiliated person, or any employee or agent of grantee or any affiliated person acting under the express direction or with the actual consent of grantee knowingly makes a material false entry or false statement in any document to be distributed to the city or upon which the city may rely. 
2.  After the city has satisfied the procedures set forth in subsection B of this section, the City Manager may request that the City Council revoke a franchise. 
a.  The City Council shall begin a public hearing, which may continue from time to time, within sixty (60) days of the City Manager's request. The City Council shall ensure that grantee is served with written notice of the City Council's intent to consider revoking grantee's franchise at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing on the issue. Prior to this hearing, the City Council shall provide grantee and the public written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice to grantee shall be delivered by personal service or by mailing a copy of the notice thereof, postage prepaid. 
b.  i.  The City Council need not conduct this public hearing according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence about which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, including hearsay evidence, provided that such evidence alone shall be insufficient to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. The City Council may prevent the introduction of irrelevant evidence. 
ii.  At this hearing, the City Council shall hear any person interested in the revocation. 
iii.  At this hearing, the City Council shall hear oral evidence taken only on oath or affirmation. The City Council may take official notice of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records of departments and ordinances of the city, provided that the parties are informed of the matters to be noticed, the matters are noted in the record, and the parties are given a reasonable opportunity to refute the officially noticed matters. 
iv.  Each party to this hearing shall be entitled to the following procedural rights: 
(A)  To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(B)  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
(C)  To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(D)  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 
(E)  To rebut the evidence; and 
(F)  To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to provide such representation. 
v.  Grantor shall ensure that a record of this hearing shall be made and duly preserved, provided that the grantee reimburse the city for the total cost of preparing such a record before a copy of the record is made available to grantee. 
c.  Within ninety (90) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall issue a written decision regarding any alleged breach of the franchise and the recommended franchise revocation. If grantor determines that grantee has committed a material breach, then grantor may: 
i.  Declare the franchise revoked and any security fund and bond forfeited, in whole or in part; or 
ii.  If the material breach is curable by grantee; at grantor's discretion, direct grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner and under the terms and conditions reasonably specified by grantor. 
The termination and forfeiture of grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(Ord. 2509 § 12, 2000)  
18.08.130 - Force majeure provisions. 
A.  In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, but only to the extent such cause or event prevents grantee from performing its franchise agreement obligations. Furthermore, the inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by Section 18.08.060(C)(3) of this chapter pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the causes or events not within the control of grantee are the following: acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires. 
C.  For purposes of this section, causes or events within the control of grantee shall include: (i) financial inability of grantee to perform or failure of grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility, where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee; or (ii) the failure of grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system, where grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(Ord. 2509 § 13, 2000)  
18.08.140 - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
A.  Cable System Facilities Abandonment or Removal. 
1.  If grantee discontinues the use of any of its property within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, such property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the cable system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the cable system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use. 
2.  Grantor may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any cable system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted by the city, grantee shall remove all abandoned facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore to grantor's satisfaction any affected public right-of-way. In removing its plant, structures and equipment; grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation for which grantee has been responsible and shall leave all public rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal, without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions hereof. 
3.  Upon grantor's approval of the abandonment of any franchise property; grantee, if required by grantor, shall submit to grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to grantor, transferring to grantor the ownership of the abandoned franchise property. 
4.  At the expiration of a franchise term, without renewal or extension of the franchise, or upon the revocation of a franchise, grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable system from all public rights-of-way within the service area, within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
B.  Restoration or Removal of the Cable System by Grantor: Reimbursement of Grantor's Costs. Upon reasonable written notice and upon the failure of grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction of grantor; grantor may cause the work to be commenced and/or completed. Grantor shall provide to grantee an itemized work order setting forth in detail the exact nature of the work completed and the supplies used in such work. Grantee shall pay to grantor its documented costs for such work no later than thirty (30) days after grantee's receipt of an itemized work order. 
C.  Extended Operation and Continuity of Services. Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, grantor may permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time. Grantor shall provide any such permission in writing, which shall constitute an extension of the franchise for the term specified in such written permission. Such a franchise extension, however, shall not revive any franchise renewal rights or any other rights grantee may have previously lost, except to the extent explicitly stated in writing by the City Council. 
During such a franchise extension, grantee shall continue to operate the cable system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide to all subscribers the regular cable service and any and all of the related services that may be provided at the time of franchise expiration or revocation. All subscribers shall be entitled to continue subscribing to and receiving all available services, to the extent that they have met their financial and other obligations to grantee. Grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the cable system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. 
D.  Receivership and Foreclosure. 
1.  At the option of grantor and subject to applicable law, the City Council may revoke a franchise one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of any receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless: 
a.  The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated within said one hundred twenty (120) days; or 
b.  Said receiver(s) or trustee(s), within said one hundred twenty (120) days, shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to grantor; or 
c.  Said receiver(s) or trustee(s), within said one hundred twenty (120) days, shall have executed an appropriate court-approved agreement, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise. 
2.  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, in whole or in part; grantor may serve notice of revocation upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and privileges of grantee hereunder shall be revoked thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: 
a.  Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder, in the manner provided by law; and 
b.  The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise, and the successful bidder shall have demonstrated to grantor's reasonable satisfaction the successful bidder's ability to meet these terms and conditions. 
(Ord. 2509 § 14, 2000)  
18.08.150 - Reservation of grantor and subscriber rights. 
A.  Reservation of Grantor Rights. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to grantor by this chapter, grantor reserves to itself every right and power vested in grantor by applicable law. 
B.  The City Reserves the Right to Adopt Additional Terms, Conditions and Regulations Pursuant to the City's Police Power, Taxation Powers, and Powers of Eminent Domain. The city reserves the right, and in accepting a franchise, grantee shall acknowledge and accept the city's right, to adopt, to incorporate into this chapter and to incorporate by reference into any franchise agreement, any additional rules, regulations, terms, conditions authorized or permitted by state or federal law as the City Council finds necessary in the lawful exercise of the city's constitutional powers, the city's police powers to protect the public health, safety or welfare, the city's powers of taxation, and the city's powers of eminent domain. Neither the granting of any franchise by the city nor any provision of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the lawful exercise of any governmental right or power, including those rights and powers vested in the city. 
C.  The City's Discretionary Powers. 
1.  Should there be any significant change to the Cable Act, to the federal regulations promulgated thereunder, or to any other federal or state law which expand the city's discretionary powers pertaining to cable television, and which expanded discretionary powers fall outside the purview of the city's police powers or powers of eminent domain and taxation, grantee shall meet at the request of the city and negotiate in good faith concerning any modifications to a franchise agreement which the city may request or be authorized to request or otherwise secure with respect to such a significant change. Significant changes include, by way of example and not by way of limitation, changes which allow or address the following subjects: 
a.  Municipal regulation of cable system programming; 
b.  Increased cable system technical proficiency; 
c.  Local requirements for local access channels and financial support of local access and/or origination programming; 
d.  Municipal acquisition of cable systems; 
e.  Permitted franchise fees and gross annual cable service revenues base; 
f.  Services for senior or the disabled subscribers; 
g.  Franchise renewal or transfer procedures; 
h.  "Lifeline" or special reduced rate service; and 
i.  The definition of "effective competition" with respect to grantee's cable system. 
D.  Procedures for City Council Adoption of Additional Ordinances, Regulations, Rules, Etc. Each proposed additional cable system ordinance or regulation adopted by the City Council pursuant to subsections B and C of this section, shall be considered in one or more public hearings before the City Council. Each such proposed ordinance or regulation shall be provided to grantee at least sixty (60) days preceding the first such public hearing. The City shall provide grantee with the opportunity to meet and confer concerning changes to or modifications of such proposed ordinances or regulations. Grantee shall comply with additional ordinances or regulations adopted by the City Council within sixty (60) days of the date of adoption of such ordinances or regulations, unless grantee shall promptly and in writing request of the city a more reasonable extension of time in which to comply, if applicable, under the conditions provided herein. The city shall promptly respond and shall grant such requests for additional time if reasonably necessary to effect compliance, provided that grantee actively and expeditiously attempts to attain compliance with such regulations. 
E.  Grantor's Waiver of Franchise Provisions. 
1.  Grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of a franchise agreement, except those required by federal or state law or regulation, if grantor determines that: (i) such a waiver is in the public interest; or (ii) the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on grantee or its subscribers. To be effective, such a waiver shall be evidenced by a resolution or ordinance approved by the City Council. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such a provision subsequent to the granting of the initial waiver nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise, unless expressly authorized by grantor's statement. 
2.  Grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement by any failure of grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
F.  Rights of Individuals. 
1.  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, general citizens, or residents of the city on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. However, nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall limit the right of grantee to deny service to any household or individual which has a negative credit or service history with grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to grantee's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted an employee or agent of grantee in the course of their employment or agency. 
2.  Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
3.  Neither grantee, nor any other person shall—without a subscriber's consent—tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the cable system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers, where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified. 
4.  In the conduct of providing cable services, in the pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, in the use of grantee's cable system or any related system, or while engaged in any related activity; grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the interference with privacy and other personal rights held by subscribers and other individuals, as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. Unless acting pursuant to a lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority, grantee shall not use the cable system's interactive two-way equipment or capability, if such equipment or capability exists, for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or any other individual. 
5.  No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber's premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install grantee's equipment upon the subscriber's property in a manner reasonably satisfactory to the subscriber shall be deemed granted. 
6.  In accordance with state and federal privacy laws, neither grantee, nor any of its agents, employees, or other representatives, shall sell, or otherwise make available to any party without consent of the subscriber: 
a.  Any list of the names and addresses of subscribers containing the names and addresses of subscribers who have requested in writing to be removed from such a list; and 
b.  Any list which identifies the programming viewing activity of individual subscribers, without the prior written consent of such subscribers. However, grantee may distribute to other entities reports of composite subscriber programming viewing activity. 
(Ord. 2509 § 15, 2000)  
18.08.160 - Notification of possessory interest responsibilities. 
By accepting a franchise and prior to such acceptance, grantee shall acknowledge that notice has been given to grantee that, pursuant to Section 107.6 of the state of California Revenue and Taxation Code, use or occupancy of any public property pursuant to the authorization set forth in this chapter and the franchise may create a possessory interest which may be subject to the payment of property taxes levied upon such a possessory interest. Grantee shall be solely liable for, and shall pay and discharge prior to delinquency, any and all possessory interest taxes or other taxes levied against grantee's right to possession, occupancy or use of any public property pursuant to any right of possession, occupancy or use created by such a franchise. Grantee shall not be barred from challenging such tax on any amounts assessed pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 2509 § 16, 2000)  
18.08.170 - Separability of chapter and franchise agreement provisions. 
If any provision of this chapter or a franchise agreement is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter or the franchise agreement, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the chapter or the franchise agreement provision which had previously been held invalid or modified no longer conflicts with such law, rule or regulation; said chapter or franchise agreement provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee thirty (30) days written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said chapter or franchise agreement provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. 
(Ord. 2509 § 17, 2000)  
Chapter 18.09 - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
 
18.09.010 - State video service franchise—Franchise fee. 
A.  Any holder of a video services franchise issued pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 codified under California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. ("DIVCA"), shall, pursuant to Section 5860(a) of the California Public Utilities Code ("CPUC"), calculate and remit to the city of El Monte a franchise fee of five (5) percent of gross revenues. 
B.  This section shall satisfy the requirements of Section 5840(q) of the CPUC. 
C.  For the purposes of any state video service franchise and this chapter, the term "gross revenues" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 5860(d) of the CPUC and shall exclude those revenues and amounts expressly excluded from that definition pursuant to Section 5860(e) of the CPUC. 
D.  Pursuant to Section 5840(o) of the CPUC, any video service provider operating under a cable television franchise granted by the city pursuant to Chapter 18.08 (Cable Television Franchises) of the El Monte Municipal Code may seek a state video franchise upon meeting any of the following conditions: 
1.  The expiration, prior to any renewal or extension, of its city franchise; 
2.  A mutually agreed upon date set by both the city and the city franchisee to terminate the franchise provided in writing by both parties to the California Public Utilities Commission; 
3.  When a city franchisee becomes a state franchise holder, provided that the city franchisee has first provided city with the notice required under Section 5840(m) of the CPUC and notifies the city that it will be providing video services within the city under the state video franchise. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 5930(b) of the CPUC, if a franchise issued pursuant to Chapter 18.08 of the El Monte Municipal Code is currently expired, the city may unilaterally extend the franchise until January 2, 2008. Also pursuant to Section 5930(b), if an incumbent franchise operating pursuant to a franchise issued pursuant to Chapter 18.08 of the El Monte Municipal Code applies for a state franchise, such state franchise shall not become operative prior to January 2, 2008. 
(Ord. 2716 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.09.020 - State video service franchise—Fee for public educational and government access. 
A.  As of December 31, 2006: 
1.  The city was imposing a fee of one dollar and sixty-nine cents ($1.69) per month per subscriber on the city-franchised cable operator to support public, educational and governmental ("PEG") channel facilities; and 
2.  The city was imposing on the city-franchised cable operator an additional fee of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per calendar year for support in coverage of city meetings. 
3.  The PEG capital support fees referenced under subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, above, are for PEG capital support and are in addition to, and not in lieu of, the franchise fee paid to the city by the cable operator. The PEG capital support fees reference under subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, above, are in excess of one percent of the cable operator's gross revenues. 
4.  Pursuant to Section 5870(k) of the CPUC, the obligations set forth under subsection (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, above, shall continue until January 1, 2009 at which time the provisions of subsection B of this section shall control. 
B.  Effective January 2, 2009, each franchise holder shall be required to pay a fee equal to three (3) percent of gross revenues to support PEG channel facilities. This fee shall be payable quarterly no later than June 1, September 1, December 1 and March 1 for the preceding calendar quarter for which the payment is due. The PEG fee established under this subsection shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the franchise fee paid to the city by the franchise holder pursuant to Section 18.09.010 of this chapter. 
C.  Notwithstanding subdivision (n) of Public Utilities Code Section 5870, upon the expiration of any state franchise, without any action of the City Council, subsection B. of this section shall be deemed to have been automatically reauthorized unless the state franchise holder has given the City Council and City Manager written sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of its state franchise that this section will expire pursuant to the terms of subdivision (n) of Public Utilities Code Section 5870. 
(Ord. 2716 § 1 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 2926, § 2, 3, 1-9-2018)  
18.09.030 - Customer service penalties and appeal procedures. 
A.  Any holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
B.  The city will provide any holder of a state video franchise written notice of any material breach of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the franchise holder at least thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach that is not remedied by the state video franchise holder within the remedy period shall subject the state video franchise holder to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each occurrence of a material breach; 
2.  For the second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach; and 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. 
C.  Any notice and any penalty may be issued or imposed by the City Manager or designee. Any notice shall be in writing. Notices shall be transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and receipt signature required. 
D.  A franchise holder may appeal any finding of material breach or imposition of penalties to the City Council. Any appeal must be made within ten (10) calendar days of receipt by the franchise holder of the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City Manager in order to be placed on a City Council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties was inconsistent with statutory requirements. 
E.  The city and any franchise holder may mutually agree to extend the time periods specified herein. Any such agreement shall be in writing and executed by the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, and an authorized representative of the franchise holder. 
F.  Any penalty imposed on a franchise holder shall be paid to the city. As provided for in Section 5900(g) of the CPUC, the city shall submit one-half of all penalties received from a franchise holder to the Digital Divide Account established in Section 280.5 of the CPUC. 
(Ord. 2716 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.09.040 - Procedures for appeal of denial of encroachment permits. 
A.  As provided for in Section 5885 of the CPUC, the city shall either approve or deny an application from a state franchise holder for an encroachment permit within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application. 
B.  An "encroachment permit" means any permit issued by the city relating to construction or operation of facilities relating to the provision of video service under a state video franchise. 
C.  An application for an encroachment permit shall be considered complete only when the applicant has satisfied and complied with all statutory requirements for such an application, including those requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq., Title 12 of the El Monte Municipal Code, including the requirement to pay any and all applicable encroachment permit fees, and other applicable provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
D.  Any city denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be in writing and shall contain a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial. 
E.  An applicant whose application for an encroachment permit has been denied may appeal the denial to the City Council. Any appeal must be made within ten (10) calendar days of receipt by the franchise holder of the denial, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City Manager in order to be placed on the City Council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the denial was inconsistent with statutory requirements. 
(Ord. 2716 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.09.050 - Audit authority. 
Consistent with Section 5860(i) of the CPUC, the Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services or designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a franchise holder to ensure compliance with the franchise fee requirements of the DIVCA provisions of the CPUC and this chapter. As specified under Section 5860(i) of the CPUC, such an audit may not be conducted more than once annually for any one franchise holder. 
(Ord. 2716 § 1 (part), 2008)  
18.09.060 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below: 
1.  The term "city-granted franchise" means a franchise awarded pursuant to Chapter 18.08 (Cable Television Franchises) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
2.  The phrase "the city-franchised cable operator" means the sole cable operator, to wit, Time Warner Cable, operating under a franchise pursuant to Chapter 18.08 (Cable Television Franchises) of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
3.  The terms "franchise holder" or "state franchise holder" shall have the same meaning as the meaning given to the term "holder" under Section 5830 of the CPUC. 
4.  The term "gross revenues" as used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 18.09.010(C) of this chapter. 
5.  The phrases "state franchise" or "state video franchise" shall have the same meaning as the meaning given to the term "state franchise" under Section 5830 of the CPUC. 
(Ord. 2716 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 18.12 - SOLID WASTE HANDLING FRANCHISES* 
Sections: 
 
18.12.010 - Authorization to perform solid waste handling services—Franchise required. 
A.  No person shall perform within the territorial boundaries of the city (1) solid waste handling services; or (2) services for the collection, transportation, storage, transfer or processing of recyclable materials where such services are rendered for compensation that results in a net payment to the person rendering the services; without the expressed written consent of the City Council as evidenced by the approval of a franchise granted in accordance with this chapter; and without a valid city business license or other applicable city business permit. 
B.  In keeping with former El Monte Municipal Code Section 5208 which was adopted by way of Ordinance Nos. 2469 and 2470 on November 18, 1997 and December 16, 1997, respectively; and the subsequent recodification of the same as former Section 8.20.090 (Time Frame to Obtain a Solid Waste Enterprise Franchise Authorization) of former Chapter 8.20 (Solid Waste and Recyclable Material), as of the enactment of prior El Monte Municipal Code Section 5208, any person, entity or solid waste enterprise conducting business under a pre-existing license or permit issued by the city in lawful accordance with then established or previously established provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code or other applicable jurisdictional entity, may not continue to provide such services in the city of El Monte absent the award of a franchise in accordance with this chapter. Any franchise awarded pursuant to the terms and conditions of the El Monte Municipal Code as it existed prior to the enactment of Ordinance Nos. 2469 and 2470 shall terminate upon the termination date specified or otherwise provided for under the terms of the agreement and shall not be abrogated by the approval of Ordinance Nos. 2469 and 2470. Any franchise granted or extended after March 15, 2001 shall terminate at a date established at the sole discretion of the City Council as set forth in a duly approved franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.020 - Award of franchise. 
A.  Scope of Franchise. The City Council may award one or more franchises for the performance of (1) solid waste handling services; and/or (2) services for the collection, transportation, storage, transfer and/or processing of recyclable materials where such services are rendered for compensation that results in a net payment to the person rendering the services. The City Council may award one more the foregoing franchises for any variety of premises located within the city, including but not limited to residential premises, commercial premises, multifamily premises; for any variety of activities conducted within the city, including but not limited to construction and demolition undertakings; and/or for any specific geographical area within the territorial boundaries of the city. The award of any such franchises shall be memorialized by City Council resolution and shall be formalized, detailed and evidenced by the approval and execution of a corresponding franchise agreement between the person awarded the franchise and the city. The award of any franchise shall be subject to, and consistent with, the terms, conditions and restrictions of the franchise agreement, this chapter and Chapter 8.20 of the El Monte Municipal Code. 
B.  Franchises Nonassignable. No person awarded a franchise pursuant to this chapter may assign, transfer, novate, subcontract or otherwise delegate any or all performance duties, obligations, rights and/or liabilities under the franchise to any other person without the prior written consent of the City Council. Any request to so assign, transfer, novate, subcontract or otherwise dispose of any or all performance duties, obligations, rights and/or obligations under the franchise shall require prior written notice as may be set forth under the franchise agreement or upon no less than ninety (90) days prior written not if no applicable time period is set forth in the franchise agreement. City reserves the right to withhold its consent to any transfer, assignment, novation, subcontracting or delegation in its sole discretion and its decision to withhold its consent include, but are not limited to, the determination that the person to whom the franchise or any portion thereof is to be assigned does not possess the experience; financial ability; personnel and/or equipment capacity; competence; and/or demonstrated reliability to undertake any or all of the performance duties or obligations set forth under the franchise. 
C.  City Business License Required. This section shall apply to all persons awarded a franchise pursuant to this chapter; and persons engaged in any of the exempted activities set forth under Section 18.12.040, below. All persons subject to this section shall be required to obtain a city of El Monte business license and shall conspicuously display any identification stickers or decals issued by the city on the rear of each collection vehicle used within the city of El Monte. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.030 - Mandatory franchise terms. 
Any franchise awarded pursuant to this chapter shall, at a minimum, be consistent with the following: 
A.  The franchise shall be awarded subject to terms and conditions that are authorized under, or are otherwise consistent with, the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq.) as the same presently exists or as it may be modified or amended from time to time; 
B.  The franchise shall be awarded subject to terms and conditions that are authorized by, or are otherwise consistent with, the laws, statutes, regulations or rules of any other federal, state or local public agency having jurisdiction over the collection, conveyance, carrying, transportation and/or disposal of solid waste and/or recyclable materials within or from the city of El Monte; 
C.  The person awarded the franchise shall be required to cooperate with the city with respect to any and all solid waste generation studies; the preparation of waste stream audits, and the submission of any and all information required by the city in order to comply with reporting requirements of AB 939 and other governing legislation; 
D.  The person awarded the franchise shall be required to implement any and all measures mandated by, or otherwise consistent with, the city's source reduction and recycling element ("SRRE") and the household hazardous waste element ("HHWE") with the objective of allowing the city to meet diversion goals and other goals mandated under the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq.); 
E.  The person awarded the franchise shall be required to pay any and all fees as may be established (and from time to time adjusted) by City Council resolution and such other fees as may be established under the terms of a corresponding franchise agreement, including but not limited to administrative fees, franchise fees, AB 939 fees and HHW and e-waste fees; 
F.  The franchisee shall be required to post a bond to secure its performance under the franchise agreement. The form and amount of the bond shall be set forth in the franchise agreement in amounts approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.040 - Limited exception to franchise requirement. 
The award of a franchise issued under this chapter shall not be required for the performance of the following activities by the following persons under the limited set of circumstances set forth below: 
A.  The performance of solid waste handling services as defined under Section 40195 of the California Public Resources Code by a solid waste enterprise that has lawfully provided such service in the city of El Monte for a period of three (3) consecutive years or more pursuant to a nonexclusive franchise, a nonexclusive contract, a license or a permit authorized by the city of El Monte, but only for a period not exceeding five (5) consecutive years from the date of mailed notification from the city of El Monte that exclusive solid waste handling services are to be provided or authorized; 
B.  The performance of solid waste handling services as defined under Section 40195 of the California Public Resources Code by a solid waste enterprise possessing an exclusive franchise or an exclusive contract to provide such services, but only for the lesser of the following: five (5) consecutive years; or the remaining unexpired term of the exclusive franchise or exclusive contract, whichever the case may be; 
C.  The performance of any activities falling with the definition of solid waste handling services as defined under Section 40195 of the California Public Resources Code, by any officer, employee or agent of the city of El Monte acting on behalf of the city of El Monte in their official capacity or in the course of their employment or agency; 
D.  The disposal or composting of green waste in accordance with a program sponsored or authorized by the city of El Monte by any person possessing a valid business license, and if necessary a valid business permit, authorizing the performance of gardening services, landscape contracting services, tree trimming services or tree removal services. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.050 - Minimum insurance requirements. 
A.  Mandatory Varieties of Coverage/Coverage Limits. Any person awarded a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall, at a minimum, procure and at all times maintain throughout the franchise term, the following policies of insurance: 
1.  Workers' Compensation/Employers Liability Insurance. Workers' compensation and employers liability insurance at limits no less than those limits required under the California Labor Code and employers liability limits in an amount recommended by the City's Risk Manager and the City Attorney but in no event less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; 
2.  Commercial General Liability Insurance. Commercial general liability insurance with coverage limits of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage; and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) in the aggregate; or such higher limits as may be recommended by the City's Risk Manager or the City Attorney; 
3.  Automobile Liability Insurance. Automobile liability insurance with coverage limits of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per accident for bodily injury and property damage; and aggregate limits of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00); or such higher limits as may be recommended by the City's Risk Manager or the City Attorney. 
B.  Commercial general liability insurance policies and automobile liability insurance policies mandated under this section shall provide, or be endorsed to provide, that such insurance shall be primary over any other insurance maintained by the city of El Monte. Any insurance maintained by the city of El Monte shall be in excess of, and shall not contribute to, that procured by the person awarded a franchise under this chapter. No coverage procured by a person awarded a franchise under this chapter shall be suspended, voided or canceled except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, given to the city of El Monte care of the Environmental Services Division. 
C.  All insurance polices placed with insurers pursuant to this section shall be with carriers admitted to issue such policies of insurance in the state of California and approved by the California Department of Insurance. Except as otherwise authorized by the City's Risk Manager for the city of El Monte in writing, all policies of insurance shall be procured from carriers with an A.M. Best's rating of no less than A:VII. 
D.  Except with respect to workers' compensation insurance, all mandated insurances coverages shall be endorsed to name the city of El Monte and its elected or appointed officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers as additional insureds. 
E.  As a condition precedent to the performance of any services authorized under the franchise, any person awarded a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall be required to first file certificates and original endorsements evidencing the procurement of any coverages required under this section. In addition, the city of El Monte shall have the right to inspect all insurance policies required under this section. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city of El Monte from requiring by way of any franchise agreement, insurance requirements and insurance coverage terms in excess of minimum coverage requirements and terms set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.060 - Minimum indemnification requirements. 
A.  Any person awarded a franchise under this chapter shall, at a minimum, indemnify, defend and hold free and harmless, the city of El Monte, its elected or appointed officials, officers, employees, volunteers and agents (collectively, the "indemnified parties") from and against any and all claims, losses, fines, penalties, damages, liabilities or judgments, including attorneys fees, arising out of or resulting in any way from the person's conduct of business in the city of El Monte or with respect to operations and actions taken by both the person awarded the franchise and the city of El Monte, unless such a claim against the city is due solely and exclusively to the negligent acts or omissions of the city of El Monte. For purposes of this section, the term "agents" excludes any person awarded a franchise under this chapter. 
B.  Without regard to any insurance coverages or requirements set forth under this chapter, and without in any way limiting the general indemnification obligation set forth under subsection A, above, any person awarded a franchise under this chapter shall, at a minimum, reimburse, indemnify, and hold free and harmless the indemnified parties, as previously defined under this section, from and against any and all claims, actions, liabilities, damages, demands, judgments, losses, costs, liens, expenses, suits, actions, attorneys' fees, consultant fees, penalties, and any and all other losses, damages, fees and expenses of whatever kind or nature ("claims") (including, but not limited to, response costs, investigative costs, assessment costs, monitoring costs, treatment costs, cleanup costs, removal costs, remediation costs, and similar costs, damages and expenses) that arise out of any negligent or willful act of the franchisee that results in the improper disposal or release of any hazardous contaminant as the term is defined under this chapter. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city of El Monte from requiring indemnification that is broader in scope by way of a duly approved franchise agreement upon the recommendation of the City's Risk Manager and/or the City Attorney. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter or in any franchise awarded by the city shall operate to extinguish or supersede any prior indemnification duty imposed upon any person authorized by way of a prior franchise, license, permit or other like city authorization to provide or perform solid waste handling services and/or services involving the compensated collection, transportation, storage, transfer and/or processing of recyclable materials within the city prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.070 - Source reduction and recycling plan. 
Any person awarded a franchise contemplated under this chapter shall be required to submit an annual source reduction and recycling plan ("SRRP") that pertains exclusively to the city of El Monte. The SRRP must include, but need not be limited to, the following essential elements: 
A.  The identification of targeted materials including special wastes for source reduction, recycling and composting; 
B.  A hazardous waste exclusion plan; 
C.  Detailed identification of diversion methods; 
D.  Detailed explanation of reporting methodology; 
E.  A detailed contingency plan; and 
F.  A detailed listing and explanation of methods used for the handling of white goods including CFC removal, PCB removal, and compliance with the requirements of Sections 42160 through 42185 of the California Public Resources Code. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.071 - AB 939 cost recovery special fund. 
A.  There is created a special fund to be known as the "AB 939 cost recovery special fund." The Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services is authorized and directed to: 
1.  Establish appropriate accounting procedures for the management of the AB 939 cost recovery special fund; and 
2.  Deposit all funds in said fund as may be received or collected by the city in accordance with AB 939 or the city source reduction and recycling element, including grants or state subvention revenues, or local regulatory program fees or charges as authorized under this chapter. 
B.  All sums deposited into the AB 939 cost recovery special fund, together with any accrued interest thereon, shall be used and applied to pay for costs associated with the city's preparation, adoption and implementation of its source reduction and recycling element. Said funds may also be used for any other purpose authorized under AB 939 or under the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.072 - Establishment of fees. 
By resolution or negotiated franchise agreement, the City Council may adopt, and from time to time adjust, regulatory program fees or charges as authorized under AB 939 to provide a source of funds to pay for the preparation, adoption and implementation of the city source reduction and recycling element. By resolution or negotiated franchise agreement, the City Council may also adopt administrative fees and other regulatory fees for the development and enforcement of the city's franchise system for solid waste handling; solid waste disposal and the for fee collection of recyclable materials. Fees and charges authorized under this section may include AB 939 fees; franchise fees; administrative fees, HHW and e-waste fees and the like. The method of apportionment and collection of all fees and charges may also be established by City Council resolution or negotiated franchise agreement. All action authorized under this section shall be preceded by the conduct of a noticed public hearing as set forth under Section 66016 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.073 - Failure to pay fees. 
It is unlawful for any franchisee to fail to file any report or pay any fee or charge to the city as may be authorized under this chapter or as may be set forth in the franchisee's franchise agreement with the city. The violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor under the El Monte Municipal Code. Any remedies available to the city for the violation of this section shall be in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city under the El Monte Municipal Code, the franchise agreement or at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.080 - Compliance with applicable laws and agreements. 
No person engaged in the collection and/or recycling activities in the city of El Monte shall fail to comply with the provisions of: 
A.  This chapter or other applicable provisions of the El Monte Municipal Code; 
B.  Any franchise agreement such person has entered into with the city of El Monte; 
C.  Applicable provisions of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq.); or 
D.  Any other applicable laws regulating or otherwise governing such activities. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.090 - Recordkeeping. 
A.  All persons subject to this chapter shall establish and maintain a data retention and preservation system which accurately identifies the specific location where solid waste collected by the person is disposed of. Such identification, shall include the specific state, city and street address of the location where such solid waste is disposed of and the last known name and phone number of the facility or establishment where such solid waste is disposed of. 
B.  All persons subject to this chapter shall create, maintain and preserve written records identifying hazardous waste that has been found within solid waste and diverted from landfilling. Such records shall identify the hazardous waste by type and quantity. 
C.  Copies of all data and/or records required under this section shall be provided to the city of El Monte within ten (10) calendar days of the first day of July of each calendar year or during such other time schedule as may be provided for under the terms of a duly approved franchise agreement with the city of El Monte. The original data reports shall be retained and preserved for a period of no less than fifty (50) years from the date the person subject to this chapter was last authorized to perform solid waste services or recycling services in the city of El Monte or in lieu of such fifty (50) year retention, shall be provided to the city of El Monte upon request by the city of El Monte. 
D.  All data and reports created, maintained and provided to the city pursuant to this section as well as any additional data or reports required under the terms of a duly approved franchise agreement with the city shall be submitted with a signed, written declaration stating that the information contained in such data and/or reports is true and correct under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.100 - Hazardous contaminants fund. 
To protect the health, safety, and welfare of all persons in the city, the City Council may establish by resolution a hazardous contaminants fund. Such resolution shall set forth form, structure, parameters and potential associated charges related to the establishment of the fund. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.110 - Suspension and/or revocation of franchise. 
A.  General Suspension and Termination Procedures. As more specifically set forth by way of a duly approved franchise agreement with the city, any franchise awarded pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension and/or termination by the city. 
B.  Special Suspension and Revocation Procedures. 
1.  In the event the franchise agreement is silent as to whether a franchisee's performance deficiency or failure to comply with a specific provision(s) of this chapter, Chapter 18.2 or the franchise agreement itself warrants the suspension and/or revocation of the franchise, the provisions of this subsection B shall control. 
2.  With respect to any performance deficiency or failure of compliance subject to this section, the franchisee shall have fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the city's issuance of written order to correct the performance deficiency and/or to enter into compliance, whichever the case may be. The foregoing notwithstanding, the City Manager shall have discretion to grant additional time for the franchisee to correct a performance deficiency and/or enter into compliance provided such additional time does not exceed a maximum of thirty (30) additional calendar days. The failure of the franchisee to correct the performance deficiency and/or enter into compliance within the time frame authorized under this section shall constitute grounds for the suspension of the franchise. The written order referenced herein may be faxed to the franchisee's designated fax number and/or mailed by certified mail. 
3.  In the event of suspension, the City Manager shall designate a Hearing Officer to conduct an administrative hearing to determine, among other things, whether or not the franchisee's performance deficiency and/or failure of compliance warrants a revocation of the franchise. The administrative hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days from the date upon which the City Manager designates a Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall submit written findings and recommendations to the City Manager. The City Manager may adopt the findings and recommendations of the Hearing Officer or make his or her own findings and determinations, including whether or not to revoke the franchisee's franchise. 
4.  A franchisee may appeal any decision to suspend or revoke the franchise to the City Council, provided a written appeal request is filed with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days from the effective date of any suspension or revocation. If the fifteenth day falls on a day in which the city of El Monte is not open for business, the deadline shall be extended to five-thirty p.m. of the next business day. The City Council shall hear the matter within forty (40) days from the date the appeal request is filed and the decision of the City Council shall be final. Pending the City Council's hearing on the matter, any suspension of the franchisee's franchise shall remain in effect and any revocation of the franchise shall be tolled. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007)  
18.12.120 - Definitions. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided under this chapter, those defined terms set forth under Section 8.20.270 (Definitions) of Chapter 8.20 (Solid Waste—Removal, Collection, Disposal and Diversion) of the El Monte Municipal Code shall have the same meaning when used under this chapter. 
B.  When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning set forth below: 
"Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services" means the Deputy City Manager for Administrative Services of the city of El Monte or designee. 
"Special waste" shall have the same meaning as set forth under Section 18720 (Definitions) of Article 3 (Definitions) of Chapter 9, Division 7 (California Integrated Waste Management Board) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations. 
"White goods" means discarded, enamel-coated major appliances, such as washing machines, clothes dryers, hot water heaters, stoves and refrigerators. 
(Ord. 2702 § 3 (part), 2007) 
