Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Title 3 TAXES
Title 4 ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Title 5 RESERVED
Title 6 OPERATIONS PERMITS
Title 7 EXPENDITURES
Title 8 BEACHES, PARKS, AND WATERWAYS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 9 PUBLIC SAFETY, PEACE, AND WELFARE
Title 10 FIRE PREVENTION
Title 11 HEALTH
Title 12 PERSONNEL ORDINANCE
Title 13 RESERVED
Title 14 TRAFFIC CODE
Title 15 CITY STREETS
Title 16 RESERVED
Title 17 RESERVED
Title 18 SANITARY SEWER
Title 19 RESERVED
Title 20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Title 21 RESERVED
Title 22 RESERVED
Title 23 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 24 SUBDIVISIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 30 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.04 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.08 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS OF MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 1.10 VOLUNTARY MEDIATION FOR LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Chapter 1.12 APPEALS
Chapter 1.16 FEES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

Chapter 1.04 CODE ADOPTION
1.04.010 Adoption.
The ordinances embraced in the following titles, together with such amendments as may be made, shall constitute and be cited as the “Encinitas Municipal Code.” The Encinitas Municipal Code shall include such secondary codes that are adopted by reference, except those portions of the secondary codes that are modified or deleted by provisions of the Encinitas Municipal Code. (Ord. 86-13)

 

1.04.020 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, and will pass any amendments thereto, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 86-13)

 

1.04.030 Definitions.
A.     Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, words and phrases in this Code shall be construed and understood according to their common and approved usage. Words or phrases that have acquired a particular meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.

B.     Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of this Code.

C.    The provisions of this Code, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.

 

1.04.040 Judicial Review.
Pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure are hereby made applicable to persons seeking judicial review of a decision of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 86-13)

 

1.04.050 Repeal of Ordinance.
The repeal of any ordinance within this Code shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance, nor shall it revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 86-13)

 

1.04.060 Duties of Officers and Employees.
The obligations imposed upon the City officers and employees for implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this Code are directory in nature. Nothing in this Code shall be construed as limiting or eliminating any defense or immunity from liability for the City or its officers or employees established by the provisions of Title 1, Division 3.6 of the California Government Code, or by any other provision of law. The manner and timing of enforcement and implementation of this Code shall be within the discretion of the City Manager and other designated City officers and employees. This Code shall not be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of a failure to enforce, implement or execute any of the provisions of this Code. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage resulting to persons or property by reason of any interpretation of this Code by any City officer or employee. (Ord. 86-13)

 

1.04.070 Amendments to the Municipal Code.
Whenever the title of a City employee and/or department name is changed, the City Clerk shall be authorized to make appropriate changes to that title as it appears throughout the Municipal Code and the City of Encinitas’ Procedures Manual and such changes shall be deemed a clerical revision and not an amendment to the Municipal Code. (Ord. 86-13; Ord. 2003-08)

Chapter 1.08 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS OF MUNICIPAL CODE
1.08.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this Code within the City.

B.     In addressing a particular Code violation, the City may use one or more of the enforcement procedures provided herein. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from enforcing the provisions of this Code in any manner authorized in law. (Ord. 86-13; Ord. 91-25)

 

1.08.020 Enforcement Officer.
The City Manager may designate one or more enforcement officers to enforce provisions of this Code in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 86-13)

 

1.08.030 Violation as Public Nuisance.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to create, cause, commit or maintain a public nuisance within the City.

B.     A violation of any regulatory provision of this Code constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 86-13)

 

1.08.035 Persons Responsible.
Whenever the term “person” is used in this Code, it shall mean individuals, partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, non-profit corporations, trustees, associations or any other legal entity. The persons responsible for violations of the Code on real property include the owners, lessees, tenants, sublessors, sublessees, occupants, operators, managers, or any other person who has custody or control over the property. (Ord. 2003-06)

 

1.08.040 Nature of Violations.
A.     Continuing Violations. Each separate day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this Code is committed, continued, maintained, permitted or allowed shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as such.

B.     Responsibility of New Owners. When a continuing violation of this Code is created or maintained on real property, each successive owner of the real property, including responsible persons described in Section 1.08.035, who neglects to abate the continuing violation is responsible for the violation in the same manner as the former owner.

C.    Aiding and Abetting a Violation. Whenever an act or omission is unlawful under this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, conceal, suffer, permit, allow or maintain such violation, or become an accessory to such violation after the fact.

D.    Lapse of Time. No lapse of time shall legalize a violation of this Code. (Ord. 2003-06)

 

1.08.050 Enforcement Through Criminal Prosecution.
A.     Infraction. Any person who violates a provision of this Code, where such violation constitutes a crime, shall be guilty of an infraction, unless otherwise expressed, punishable as follows:

1.     A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

2.     A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same section of the Municipal Code within one year;

3.     A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation of the same section of the Municipal Code within one year.

B.     Misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating a provision of this Code, where such violation is expressly made a misdemeanor, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C.    Discretionary Charging of Infractions and Misdemeanors. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any violation of this Code that constitutes an infraction or a misdemeanor, may be charged as a misdemeanor or an infraction, respectively, at the discretion of the City Attorney.

D.    Treble Costs. Upon a second or subsequent offense within two years, the City shall request as part of the criminal prosecution that the court order the convicted defendant who owns the property on which the violation is maintained to pay treble the costs incurred by the City in obtaining the abatement of the nuisance, in accordance with law. (Ord. 2015-09)

 

1.08.060 Enforcement Through Civil Lawsuit.
A.     A violation of a provision of this Code may be redressed by civil action which seeks, among other things, declaratory and injunctive relief. A public nuisance that is not a violation of a provision of this Code may nonetheless be redressed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

B.     Recovery of Costs. In seeking a civil judgment against any person who creates, causes, commits or maintains a public nuisance within the City, the City may seek an award of damages in an amount equal to the expenses incurred by the City in abating the nuisance, including court costs, related administrative costs, and reasonable attorneys’ fees. If the City elects at the initiation of the action to seek recovery of its attorneys’ fees, then the other party may also recover attorneys’ fees if it is the prevailing party. However, in no case shall the other party recover attorneys’ fees in excess of the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City.

C.    Treble Costs. Upon a second or subsequent offense within two years, the City shall request that the court order the person who creates, causes, commits or maintains a violation of this Code within the City to pay treble the costs incurred by the City in obtaining the abatement of the violation, in accordance with law. (Ord. 2003-06)

 

1.08.070 Administrative Nuisance Abatement and Cost Recovery.
A.     Conduct of Administrative Hearing. An administrative hearing may be conducted for the purpose of abating a violation of this Code as follows:

1.     The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall serve as the hearing officer and shall set an administrative hearing at which the City presents its case in support of the contention that a violation of this Code does in fact, and in law exist on real property within the City limits.

2.     No less than 30 days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be:

a.     Served on the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, in the same manner as a summons is served in a civil action;

b.     Served by mail on any mortgagee or beneficiary of a deed of trust recorded against the property where the nuisance is occurring, and on any lessee or occupant of the real property; and

c.     Posted on the affected premises. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation.

3.     Proof of service and posting of the notice shall be made by declaration, under penalty of perjury, and shall be retained as part of the code enforcement file.

4.     The responding parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present a response to the City’s presentation.

5.     If the hearing officer determines, based upon competent, sworn evidence that a violation of this Code does in fact and in law exist and that the responding party or parties have created, caused, committed or maintained the violation within the City, the hearing officer shall issue an administrative order of abatement which:

a.     Describes the violation;

b.     Sets forth the time and manner in which the public nuisance is to be abated;

c.     Directs the responsible party or parties to abate the violation; and

d.     Includes a statement that if the violation is not timely abated by the responsible party or parties, the City will cause the abatement to be accomplished at the expense of the responsible party or parties.

6.     The City may record an administrative order of abatement with the County Recorder.

B.     Abatement by the City.

1.     If the responsible party or parties fail to comply fully with the administrative order of abatement, the City may abate the violation in accordance with law.

2.     In abating the violation, the City Manager is authorized to utilize City forces or private contract.

3.     To abate the violation, the City forces are authorized to go upon the affected premises in accordance with law.

4.     The City Manager shall ensure that there is kept an account of the cost incurred by the City in abating the violation on each premises and shall cause to be prepared an itemized report, in writing, showing the cost of abatement. The cost of abatement may include related administrative costs.

C.    Hearing to Assess Costs.

1.     If the City is required to incur costs in abating the violation, the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall serve as the hearing officer and shall set an administrative hearing:

a.     To establish the costs incurred by the City in abating the violation; and

b.     To determine the method for assessing the obligation.

2.     No less than 30 days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be:

a.     Served on the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, in the same manner as a summons is served in a civil action;

b.     Served by mail on any mortgagee or beneficiary of a trust recorded against the property where the nuisance is occurring, and on any lessee or occupant of the real property; and

c.     Posted on the affected premises. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation.

3.     Proof of service of the notice shall be made by declaration, under penalty of perjury, and shall be retained as part of the code enforcement file.

4.     The responsible party or parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present a response to the City’s presentation.

5.     Upon ascertaining that the costs claimed by the City in abating the violation are correct and reasonable, the hearing officer may direct one of the following:

a.     That an abatement lien be recorded against the property on which the violation is maintained and that notice be given to the owner of record of that property prior to such recordation, in accordance with law; or

b.     That the costs of such abatement shall be a special assessment against the land on which the violation is maintained, in accordance with law, to be collected in the same manner as the real property tax is collected.

6.     From the date of recording at the county recorder’s office, the nuisance abatement lien shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. The lien must be foreclosed by an action brought by the City for a money judgment. If a special assessment is placed on the property it shall be a personal obligation of the property owners and may be collected as such by a civil action, or any other means allowed by law.

D.    Summary Abatement.

1.     If a Code enforcement officer determines that a public nuisance, as defined by this chapter, exists and poses an immediate risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public or persons in the vicinity, the City may cause the abatement of the nuisance without the prior notice described in subsection A of this section.

2.     Within 24 hours after the determination is made by the City to summarily abate the nuisance, notice of the determination shall be posted on the property. Within five working days after the determination is made by the City to summarily abate the nuisance, notice of the determination shall be served on the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, in the same manner as a summons is served in a civil action, and served by mail on any mortgagee or beneficiary of a trust recorded against the property where the nuisance is occurring, and on any lessee or occupant of the real property. All such notices need not be given prior to the actual abatement, but the posting of the notice on the property shall not occur later than the beginning of the abatement by the City.

3.     If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation.

4.     Proof of service and posting of the property shall be made by declaration, under penalty of perjury, and retained as part of the Code enforcement file.

5.     A hearing to assess costs shall be held pursuant to subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2003-06)

 

1.08.080 Administrative Citations.
A.     Administrative Fines. Every violation of a provision of this Code, the penalty for which is defined as an “infraction” or “misdemeanor,” shall be subject to an administrative fine. The provisions of this section are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the City and nothing shall prevent the City from initiating a civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this section, or abating a nuisance and recovering the costs of abatement.

B.     Issuance of Administrative Citations. Whenever a code enforcement officer finds that a provision of this Code has been violated, the code enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to the person responsible for the violation. The administrative citation shall state the fine imposed by the City as a result of the violation. If the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the Citation shall provide for a reasonable period of time to correct the violation prior to the imposition of an administrative fine. Reasonable period of time shall be at least five days, but not more than 45 days, unless the code enforcement officer finds that a greater length of time for compliance is necessary. The code enforcement officer may also provide for the same reasonable period of time to correct other types of violations.

C.    Contents of an Administrative Citation. Each administrative citation issued to a person shall contain the following:

1.     The date of the violation.

2.     The address or a legal description of the location where the violation occurred.

3.     The section of the Code violated and a description of the violation.

4.     A description of the action required to correct the violation, if applicable.

5.     The number of days allowed to correct the violation prior to the imposition of the fine, if applicable.

6.     The amount of the fine assessed for the violation.

7.     A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the due date and the place where the fine shall be paid.

8.     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation described in the administrative citation.

9.     A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and where a request for hearing may be obtained.

10.   The name and signature of the code enforcement officer.

D.    Service of the Administrative Citation. Service shall be made by:

1.     Personal service by any of the methods for service of a summons in a civil action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10; or

2.     First class mail. Service shall be complete at the time the citation is deposited into the United States mail; or

3.     If personal service or service by first class mail is not possible, service shall be provided by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation and posting an 8-1/2″ x 11″ enlargement of the administrative citation in a conspicuous location on the property.

E.     Amount of Fines. The amount of fines imposed pursuant to this section shall be established by resolution of the City Council. If the violation would otherwise constitute an infraction, the fine shall not exceed the maximum amount of the fine established for an infraction in Section 1.08.050A of this Code. If the violation would otherwise constitute a misdemeanor, the fine shall not exceed the maximum amount of the fine established for a misdemeanor in Section 1.08.050B of this Code.

F.     Time to Pay. All fines shall be paid to the City within 30 calendar days from the effective date of the administrative citation. The effective date of an administrative citation shall be the date the citation is issued, unless the code enforcement officer granted an opportunity for the person cited to correct the violation. Where a correction period has been granted, the effective date of the administrative citation shall be on the final date of the correction period, if the person has not corrected the violation. An administrative citation fine shall be refunded if it is determined, after hearing that the person charged was not the person responsible for the violation, or there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.

G.    Methods of Collection. The City may use all available legal means to collect any past due fines imposed by administrative citations including, but not limited to, contracting with collection agencies, filing liens and seeking judgments in court.

H.    Request for Hearing.

1.     Any person issued an administrative citation may contest the issuance of the Citation by filing a written request for hearing no later than 15 calendar days from the effective date of the Citation. The written request shall include a detailed written explanation of the reasons for contesting the administrative citation.

2.     The person to whom an administrative citation is issued shall deposit the amount of the fine with the City Clerk at the time of the request for hearing, or request an advance deposit hardship waiver pursuant to subsection I of this section.

3.     The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than 15 calendar days from the date that a completed request for administrative hearing is filed in accordance with the above provisions.

I.      Advance Deposit Hardship Waivers.

1.     Any person who requests an administrative hearing and is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine, may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver by completing a form approved by the City Manager and submitting the form to the City Clerk within three days after filing the request for a hearing.

2.     The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, may waive the requirement of an advance deposit only if the applicant submits the required advance deposit hardship waiver form and includes supporting documents demonstrating to the satisfaction of the City Manager that it would be a significant financial burden on the recipient of the administrative citation to deposit the fine prior to the hearing. The City Clerk shall serve written notice of the City Manager’s determination on the recipient of the administrative citation by first class mail, return receipt requested. Service shall be deemed complete at the time the notice is deposited into the mail and addressed to the person at the address indicated on the hearing request form. Personal service may also be used.

3.     If an advance deposit hardship waiver is not granted, the recipient of the administrative citation shall deposit the fine with the City Clerk within five days of service of the decision, or at least 24 hours before the hearing, whichever is sooner.

J.     Appointment of Hearing Officer. The City Manager shall designate a fair and impartial hearing officer for the administrative citation hearings.

K.     Hearing Procedure.

1.     All hearings shall be held before the hearing officer.

2.     Failure of the party contesting the administrative citation to appear at the hearing shall constitute forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

3.     The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the code enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation. The code enforcement officer may present additional evidence at the hearing.

4.     At the hearing, the person contesting the validity of an administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence concerning the administrative citation. Both parties may cross-examine the witnesses.

5.     The hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time and provide the person with additional time to remedy the violation. In addition, the hearing officer may request additional information or evidence from the code enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.

6.     All hearings shall be recorded by a video or audio device, unless the City decides to utilize a court reporter. If a court reporter is not utilized, the City is not required to provide a transcription of the hearing, but shall make the video or audio tape available to the person cited within 30 days after the hearing. The City may charge a reasonable fee for reproducing the tapes. If a court reporter is utilized, the recipient of the administrative citation may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of any applicable reasonable fees or costs. The City may destroy such tapes or transcripts after all appeals of the administrative citation are exhausted.

7.     The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule that might consider such admission improper in a civil action. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

8.     After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to affirm or cancel the administrative citation. The written decision shall include the hearing officer’s findings and information regarding the recipient’s appeal rights to the Superior Court. The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision by first class mail, or by personal service. The decision of the hearing officer shall be the City’s final administrative decision.

9.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be affirmed, the fine on deposit with the City shall be retained. In addition, the hearing officer shall assess the cost of holding the hearing to the violator, and order the violator to pay the hearing costs to the City within 30 days.

10.   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine and the cost of the hearing.

11.   If the hearing officer determines that the evidence presented does not support the issuance of the administrative citation, the fine shall be deemed null and void and the City shall, within 30 calendar days, refund the amount of the fine. In addition, the City shall not assess hearing costs.

L.     Right to Judicial Review. A person aggrieved by the administrative decision of a hearing officer may file an appeal with the San Diego County Superior Court within 20 days of the service of the hearing officer’s decision, in accordance with the provisions in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 2003-06; Ord. 2017-07)

 

1.08.083 Civil Penalties.
Civil penalties for violations of the Encinitas Municipal Code are hereby established. As an alternative to the administrative citation process, in any civil action filed by the City to enforce the provisions of this Code, the City may request the Court to impose civil penalties in the maximum amount that could have been imposed by the City by the administrative citation process in Section 1.08.080. (Ord. 2003-06)

 

1.08.085 Citizen Complaints.
A.     To file a complaint alleging a violation of one or more of the provisions of this Code, the complaining citizen shall submit, in writing, a statement signed under penalty of perjury which sets out the location of the alleged violation, the person involved and each and every fact upon which the complaint is based.

B.     Upon receipt of a properly prepared citizen’s complaint, the City of Encinitas may direct an investigation into the alleged violation and take further action as appropriate. (Ord. 2003-06)

 

1.08.090 Code Enforcement Officer.
A.     A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a criminal or administrative citation for a violation of portions of the Municipal Code which the Officer is authorized to enforce.

B.     The City Manager is authorized to appoint one or more City employees to serve as a code enforcement officer, so long as the person:

1.     Has satisfactorily completed a course of initial instruction in criminal enforcement procedures required by the City;

2.     Has satisfactorily completed an examination demonstrating competence to apply the City’s Code enforcement policies; and

3.     Has demonstrated the ability to perform the tasks of a code enforcement officer.

C.    The appointment of a code enforcement officer shall be in writing and shall include a designation of the portions of the Municipal Code which that code enforcement officer is authorized to enforce. The appointment shall include the issuance of an identifying badge.

D.    The City Manager shall approve a course of refresher training and periodic recertification for appointed code enforcement officers.

E.     The City Manager shall revoke the appointment of any code enforcement officer who:

1.     Fails to satisfactorily complete refresher training;

2.     Fails to satisfactorily complete recertification; or

3.     Fails to satisfactorily perform the duties assigned to the code enforcement officer.

F.     A code enforcement officer whose appointment is revoked shall not be reappointed until the person has satisfactorily completed a course of instruction required by the City.

G.    In their capacity as law enforcement officers for the City, members of the Sheriff’s Department are authorized to enforce the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2003-06)

Chapter 1.10 VOLUNTARY MEDIATION FOR LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
1.10.010 Declaration of Purpose.
The City Council finds there is a need for mediation as a form of alternative dispute resolution for purposes of maintaining and fostering good will and cooperation among community members when faced with potentially divisive land use and development proposals. The City Council recognizes and acknowledges that mediation may not be appropriate for all land use and development proposals in dispute and, in fact, may prove unsuccessful at times. However, the City Council believes that mediation can be an effective tool between willing parties to resolve land use and development disputes consistent with the City’s General Plan and Municipal Code, pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2015-16)

 

1.10.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Days” shall mean consecutive calendar days and not business days.

“Director” shall mean the Director of the Planning and Building Department of the City of Encinitas, or designee.

“Disputing parties” shall mean any person that has received approval for a permit or other entitlement for a land use or development project from either the Director or Planning Commission, and any person who has appealed such approval.

“Mediation” shall mean a voluntary confidential meeting, conducted within a three-day timeframe, between or among disputing parties and stakeholders with an impartial mediator to clarify their differences and discuss the possibility of a mutually acceptable outcome to resolve their differences. Mediation in this context is not intended to result in a decision or to be legally binding upon the disputing parties and stakeholders; instead, it is intended to facilitate dialogue regarding a dispute in a respectful, positive and productive manner.

“Mediator” shall mean a person who attempts to make people involved in a conflict come to an agreement.

 

“Stakeholder” shall mean any person, organization or association that is affected by and maintains an interest in the approval of a permit or other entitlement for a land use or development that is the subject of mediation between disputing parties. Stakeholders shall be identified by the disputing parties in the application for mediation pursuant to Section 1.10.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-16)

 

1.10.030 Mediation—Request for—Application—Cost Paid by Applicant.
Upon request to the Director, by application, on a form provided by the Planning and Building Department, executed and signed by the disputing parties, the disputing parties shall be entitled to mediation pursuant to this chapter and City Council Resolution No. 2015-58. The project applicant shall pay all costs related to mediation pursuant to this chapter. The Director shall maintain a schedule of the costs in the Planning and Building Department. (Ord. 2015-16; Ord. 2017-07)

 

1.10.040 Completed Application—Hearings/Processing and Related Time Lines—Stayed.
Upon receipt of a completed application pursuant to this chapter, any further hearings, related processing, and applicable time lines shall be stayed pending written notice of the Director, which in no case shall exceed 30 days subsequent to the completion of mediation. (Ord. 2015-16)

 

1.10.050 Mediation Results—Remand to Decision Making Authority—Director Determination.
Within 10 days of completion of mediation pursuant to this chapter, the disputing parties shall provide the written results of the mediation (e.g., agreement) to the Director. Within 10 days of the receipt of the same, the Director shall notify the disputing parties as to the consequences of the results on the project application; such as, the compromises reached are: (1) consistent with the current approval and may be implemented; (2) inconsistent with the current approval and the project application will be remanded to the approving authority for further review and consideration; or (3) violates the General Plan, Municipal Code or other applicable rules or regulations, and must be disregarded. (Ord. 2015-16)

 

1.10.060 Refund of Appeal Fees—Completion to Mediation—Prevail on Appeal.
The City shall refund any appeal fees paid by any person, organization or association that: (1) appealed an approval of a permit or other entitlement for a land use or development project, completed mediation pursuant to this chapter and withdrew the subject appeal; or (2) appealed an approval of a permit or other entitlement for a land use or development project, completed mediation pursuant to this chapter, and ultimately prevailed on the subject appeal. (Ord. 2015-16)

 

1.10.070 City Council—Referral to Mediation.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent or restrict the Director, Planning Commission or City Council from referring parties to mediation at any time, in any manner and by whatever means the Director, Planning Commission or City Council and parties deem appropriate or necessary. (Ord. 2015-16)

Chapter 1.12 APPEALS
1.12.010 Scope.
A.     As used in this chapter, “determination” refers to a final, non-recommending determination by a board, committee, commission, or department subordinate to the City Council. Unless otherwise provided by law, or this Code, or an action of the City Council, an appeal of a determination shall be made and processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The procedures in this chapter shall also apply when this Code authorizes an appeal to a superior authority (other than the City Council) of a final determination by a subordinate authority. In such case, “City Council,” as used in this chapter, shall be deemed to refer to the superior authority.

C.    The decision by the City Council is the final action of the City.

D.    Whenever a time limit provided for in this chapter falls upon a City holiday, the limit shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. of the next business day of the City. (Ord. 98-03)

 

1.12.020 Filing an Appeal.
A.     Appellant. One or more persons may file an appeal objecting to a determination.

B.     Sufficiency of Appeal. To be sufficient for filing, an appeal must be:

1.     Delivered to the City Clerk, by 5:00 p.m. of the 15th calendar day following the determination which is challenged. Except, an appeal of the approval or denial of a subdivision map, a lot line adjustment, or certificate of compliance reviewed pursuant to Title 24 of the Municipal Code must be delivered by 5:00 p.m. of the 10th calendar day following the date of the determination;

2.     Accompanied by a proper filing fee as established by City Council resolution; and

3.     In writing and legibly set forth:

a.     The appellant’s full name, address and phone number;

b.     The board, commission, committee or department which rendered the determination;

c.     The date of the determination;

d.     The determination to which the appeal is made;

e.     The appellant’s interest in the challenged determination; and

 

f.      Each issue which the appellant alleges was wrongly determined together with every argument and a copy of every item of evidence submitted to the subordinate entity that supports the appellant’s allegations.

C.    An insufficient appeal shall be returned to the person without filing.

D.    When the time for filing an appeal has expired and a person has filed a timely appeal, the City Clerk shall notify the appropriate department director who shall:

1.     Notify the real party in interest (unless the real party in interest filed the appeal) that an appeal has been filed and that the determination has been suspended;

2.     Set the matter on an agenda for public hearing by the City Council; and

3.     Notify the parties involved of the date and time of the public hearing.

4.     Exception: If the appeal concerns a determination involving a subdivision map, a lot line adjustment or certificate of compliance determination reviewed pursuant to Title 24 of the Municipal Code, the department director shall set the appeal for a public hearing. The public hearing shall be set within 30 days of the appeal being filed and shall be conducted in accordance with City Council procedures for public hearings. (Ord. 98-03; Ord. 2001-09; Ord. 2003-08)

 

1.12.030 Material for Public Hearing.
A.     Material From Other Persons. On or before 5:00 p.m., seven calendar days prior to the public hearing, any person may submit to the City Clerk for filing a written position with arguments, documents, and information, and also may file exhibits, letters, photos, charts, diagrams, videos, etc., addressing the challenged determination. Written positions with arguments, documents, information, exhibits, letters, photos, charts, diagrams, or videos, etc., will not be filed, submitted to or considered by the City Council for public hearing, unless they are timely filed with the City Clerk. Upon filing with the City Clerk, those items will be available to the public.

B.     Appeal Documents. The appellant’s appeal documents shall be available to the public, and will be submitted at the public hearing.

C.    Staff Report. The City department may prepare and submit to the City Council a public hearing staff report which may include a proposed resolution setting forth proposed findings, conclusions and determinative actions. It shall incorporate materials submitted to the subordinate entity. The public hearing staff report will be made available to the public no less than three calendar days prior to the public hearing.

D.    Staff Review of Material Submitted From Other Persons. The City department may review and respond in writing to the material submitted pursuant to subsection A of this section. The City department response may be provided to the City Council up to the time of the public hearing. (Ord. 98-03; Ord. 2005-07)

 

1.12.040 Public Hearing to Consider Appeal.
The public hearing to consider the appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the following:

A.     Materials. At the public hearing, the City Council shall only receive and consider the following materials:

1.     Public hearing staff report which will include the materials submitted to the subordinate entity. The report may include a proposed resolution setting forth proposed findings, conclusions and determinative actions.

2.     Each timely filed written position with arguments, documents, information, exhibits, letters, photos, charts, diagrams, or videos, etc. (required to be submitted seven calendar days prior to the hearing pursuant to Section 1.12.030A).

3.     Any written response provided by a City department pursuant to Section 1.12.030D.

4.     No other materials shall be received or considered at the public hearing.

B.     Oral Presentations. At the public hearing, the City Council shall only receive and consider the following oral presentations:

1.     The oral staff report, if any. The City Council may ask questions of City staff in order to clarify information;

2.     An oral presentation from the appellant and the appellant’s representative, if any. The City Council may ask questions of the speaker in order to clarify information;

3.     An oral presentation from any member of the public who submits a “request to speak” slip to the City Clerk, prior to the Mayor calling the public hearing item at the meeting. The City Council may ask questions of the speaker in order to clarify information; and

4.     An oral rebuttal/summation from the appellant and the appellant’s representative, if any. The City Council may ask questions of the speaker in order to clarify information.

C.    Determination. Applying City standards to the information presented at the public hearing, the City Council shall make a final determination affirming, overruling, or modifying the subordinate entity’s determination; and may direct that such action be taken as the City Council deems necessary. (Ord. 2001-09; Ord. 2005-07)

Chapter 1.16 FEES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
1.16.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures for imposing fees to pay for the costs of providing administrative services.

B.     A “fee for providing an administrative service” is a fee which does not exceed the estimated reasonable cost of providing the service for which the fee is charged.

C.    This chapter does not apply to fees which are imposed as an exaction upon development of land.

D.    Fees for producing copies of public records.

 

Type of Record

Fee

Photo copy - per page

$0.10

City Clerk’s certification

 

1st page

$1.00

2nd page

$0.50

Add’l pages

$0.10

Audio/video cassette and CDs

 

1st tape

$15.00

Add’l tapes

$5.00 ea.

Search for subject matter when document not identified (subject to available time and resources)

Hourly rate of employee plus applicable city overhead rate

Transmit FAX copies

 

1st page

$1.00

Add’l pages

$0.20

Copying by commercial firm (actual cost plus administrative fee)

$5.00

Blueline reproduction

$5.00

Citywide zoning map (“E” size 34″x 44″)

$20.00

Special map requests

Hourly rate of employee plus applicable City overhead rate plus cost of printing map

(Ord. 87-15; Ord. 2002-16; Ord. 2003-06)

 

1.16.020 Scope.
This chapter applies to the levying of new fees and to the increasing of existing fees for administering the following:

A.     Zone variances, zone changes, use permits.

B.     Building inspections and building permits.

C.    Specific plans.

D.    Producing copies of public record documents.

E.     Documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act.

F.     Appeals.*

G.    Water and sewer connection and service charges.

*      See Chapter 1.12.

 

1.16.030 Procedure.
A.     Prior to levying a new fee or service charge, or prior to approving an increase in an existing fee or service charge, a local agency shall hold at least one public meeting, at which oral or written presentations can be made, as part of a regularly scheduled meeting.

B.     At least 14 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be sent in response to written requests.

C.    Notice shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least 10 days prior to the hearing with at least five days intervening between the dates of first and last publication.

D.    At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the City shall make available to the public data indicating the amount of the cost, or estimated cost, required to provide the service for which the fee is charged and the revenue sources anticipated to provide this service, including general fund revenues. (Ord. 91-30)

 

1.16.040 Limitation on Enactment.
If the proposed fee will exceed the estimated costs required to provide the service for which the fee is levied, the City Council may:

A.     Adopt a fee which does not exceed the cost;

B.     Abandon the proposal; or

C.    Adopt a resolution approving the fee and referring the matter to a vote of the electorate. The proposed fee will become law upon the approving vote of two thirds of those electors voting on the measure.

 

1.16.050 Basis of Fee.
A.     A flat fee may be charged for a request or application which is within established criteria defining a standard request or application.

B.     If the department providing the service initially determines that the request or application exceeds the criteria for a standard request or application, or if such department determines during the course of the processing of a request or application that the matter will exceed the criteria defining a standard request or application, then the department may require the applicant to deposit with the City an amount sufficient to reimburse the City for the time and expense actually incurred in providing the service. During the course of providing the service, additional deposits may be required. At the completion of providing the service or upon the termination of the process by the applicant, any unused amount remaining on deposit shall be returned to the applicant.

 

1.16.060 Fee Becoming Effective.
A.     Except as otherwise provided, the fee shall be effective 30 days after the adoption of the ordinance imposing the fee.

B.     An ordinance increasing a fee upon single-family or multifamily development will be effective 60 days following its adoption. However, the City Council may adopt an urgency measure imposing the fee immediately for an interim period.

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-16. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.
Chapter 2.12 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
Chapter 2.16 CAMPAIGN REGULATIONS AND POLITICAL OR OTHER NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS—QUANTITY, TIMING AND DISPLAY AREA
Chapter 2.20 MAYOR/CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.24 CITY MANAGER
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 2.28 EXECUTIVE TEAM POSITIONS AND OFFICERS
Chapter 2.30 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Chapter 2.34 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.37 ARBITRATION COMMITTEE
Chapter 2.38 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION
Chapter 2.44 SENIOR CITIZEN COMMISSION
Chapter 2.46 COMMISSION FOR THE ARTS
Chapter 2.48 YOUTH COMMISSION
Chapter 2.49 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
Chapter 2.50 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 2.60 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Chapter 2.64 SURPLUS SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY
Chapter 2.74 PRIVATE PROPERTY RIGHTS ACT OF 2005

Chapter 2.12 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
2.12.010 Purpose.
A.     The Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code Section 81000 et seq., “Act” herein), requires the City to adopt and promulgate a conflict of interest code. The Fair Political Practices Commission has adopted a regulation, California Code of Regulations Section 18730, which contains the terms of the Standard Conflict of Interest Code and amendments thereto by the Fair Political Practices Commission in accordance with the Act.

B.     This chapter shall be known as the “Conflict of Interest Code” of the City.

C.    Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or abridge the provisions of the Act commencing with Government Code Section 87100, which is applicable to all public officials of the City and directs that no public official of the City shall make, participate in the making or in any way attempt to use their official position to influence a City decision in which the official knows, or has reason to know, that he or she has a financial interest as defined by the Act.

D.    Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or abridge the provisions of the Act commencing at Government Code Section 87200, which requires the Mayor, members of the City Council, members of the Planning Commission, City Manager, City Attorney, City Treasurer, and other public officials who manage public investments to file a financial disclosure statement using Form 700.

E.     This chapter intends to designate those public officials of the City who are involved in City decisions, and to require designated officials to disclose those financial interests (using Form 700) which could foreseeably be affected, in a material manner, by a City decision made by the official in the performance of the official’s responsibilities. (Ord. 92-26; Ord. 95-08; Ord. 2018-08)

 

2.12.015 Amendment and Review.
A.     Amendment.

1.     Changed Circumstances. Changed circumstances includes, but is not limited to, the following: the creation of new positions which must be designated pursuant to this chapter and relevant changes in the duties assigned to existing positions.

2.     Amendment Due to Changed Circumstances. Within 90 days after the changed circumstances necessitating the amendment to this chapter become apparent, the City Manager shall submit a proposed amendment to the City Council.

3.     Manner of Amendment. This chapter shall be amended by the City Council after a noticed public hearing is held prior to introduction of the proposed amendment.

B.     Biennial Review.

1.     No later than July 1st of each even-numbered year, the City Manager or designee shall review this chapter.

2.     If a change in this chapter is necessitated by changed circumstances, it shall be amended pursuant to subsection A of this section.

3.     If no change in this chapter is required, the City Manager shall submit a written statement to that effect to the City Council no later than October 1st of the same year. (Ord. 2018-08)

 

2.12.020 Definitions Incorporated.
Unless otherwise indicated, the definitions of the Act, regulations and amendments thereto and binding judicial opinions thereon are incorporated herein, and this chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with such definitions.

 

2.12.030 Standard Code.
A.     By this reference, California Code of Regulations Section 18730, the Standard Conflict of Interest Code, is incorporated herein together with each and every amendment thereto duly adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission.

B.     The filing officer shall maintain three copies of the Standard Conflict of Interest Code for the public review.

 

2.12.040 Filing Officer.
The City Clerk is the filing officer of the City.

 

2.12.050 Disclosure Categories.
A.     Category 1—Business Position/Investment Interests. Disclose each City-related, business entity in which the employee/member holds a position or has a direct or indirect business investment worth more than $1,000.00.

B.     Category 2—Real Property Interests. Disclose each interest in real property located within the jurisdiction of the City in which the employee/member has a direct or indirect interest worth more than $1,000.00.

C.    Category 3—Income Interests. Disclose all income of the employee/member from any City-related source aggregating $250.00 or more (or $25.00 or more in the case of gifts) during the reporting period.

D.    Category 4—Less Inclusive Reportable Interests. Disclose all investment and management interests in business entities (as described in Categories 1 and 3) contracting with or selling to the City or which foreseeably could so contract or sell; and all income from a source (as described in Category 2) which sells or contracts with the City or which foreseeably could so sell or contract.

 

2.12.060 Department Positions.
The following are the designated positions along with the required disclosure category:

 

 

 

Position

A.

All positions as may be designated by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

B.

Government Code Section 87200 Designated Filers—Disclosure Categories 1, 2, 3 apply to all positions listed below:

1.

Mayor

2.

City Council

3.

City Manager

4.

City Attorney

5.

Director of Finance/City Treasurer

6.

Planning Commission

7.

Mayor and City Council candidates

C.

Designated City Positions—Disclosure Categories 1, 2, 3 apply to all positions listed below:

1.

Human Resources Technician I-II

2.

Facilities Specialist

3.

Planner I-IV

4.

Program Coordinator

5.

Accountant I-III

6.

Code Enforcement Officer I-III

7.

Engineering Specialist I-III

8.

Recreation Supervisor I-II

9.

Stormwater Environmental Specialist I-III

10.

Deputy City Clerk

11.

Deputy Fire Marshal I-II

12.

Finance Analyst I-III

13.

Geographic Information Systems Analyst I-III

14.

Human Resources Analyst I-III

15.

Information Technology Analyst I-III

16.

Management Analyst I-III

17.

Parks & Beach Supervisor I-II

18.

Risk/Safety Analyst I-III

19.

Facilities Supervisor

20.

Fleet Maintenance Supervisor

21.

Special Events & Projects Supervisor

22.

Assistant Center Manager

23.

Code Enforcement Supervisor

24.

Senior Deputy Fire Marshal

25.

Arts Program Administrator

26.

Center Manager

27.

Finance Manager I-III

28.

Information Technology Project Manager

29.

Program Administrator

30.

Senior Management Analyst

31.

Climate Action Plan Administrator

32.

Engineer I-II

33.

Environmental Project Manager

34.

Information Technology Supervisor

35.

Senior Planner I-II

36.

Park Operations Manager

37.

Recreation Services Manager

38.

Superintendent

39.

Principal Planner

40.

Senior Engineer

41.

Principal Engineer

42.

Department Manager I-II/Chief Information Officer I-II

43.

Assistant Director of Public Works/Assistant General Manager

44.

Assistant Finance Director

45.

City Engineer

46.

City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services

47.

Department Director I-IV

48.

Assistant Director of Development Services/City Planner

49.

Director of Human Resources

50.

Director of Parks and Recreation

51.

Director of Public Works/General Manager

52.

Development Services Director

53.

Acting City Manager

54.

Assistant City Manager

55.

Marine Safety Sergeant

56.

Marine Safety Lieutenant

57.

Marine Safety Captain

58.

Fire Marshal

59.

Deputy Fire Chief

60.

Department Director - Fire Chief

 

(Ord. 99-09; Ord. 2008-20; Ord. 2014-10; Ord. 2016-09; Ord. 2018-08; Ord. 2019-11; Ord. 2020-12)

 

2.12.070 Boards, Commissions, and Committees.
Members of the following boards, commissions and committees occupy designated positions with the following disclosure categories:

Position—Disclosure Categories 1, 2, 3 apply to all positions listed below:

A.     All members of boards, commissions or committees designated by resolution of the City Council, from time to time.

B.     Parks and Recreation Commission.

C.    Traffic and Public Safety Commission.

D.    Encinitas Ranch Golf Authority Board.

E.     Commission for the Arts.

F.     Environmental Commission. (Ord. 96-05; Ord. 98-12; Ord. 2010-17; Ord. 2014-10; Ord. 2016-09; Ord. 2018-08)

 

2.12.080 Consultants.
A.     “Consultant” shall include any natural person who, pursuant to a contract with a local government agency, makes final government decisions or performs substantially all the same duties for an agency that would otherwise be performed by an individual holding a position specified in the agency’s conflict of interest code. However, that “consultant” shall not include a person who:

1.     Conducts research and arrives at conclusions with respect to his or her rendition of information, advice, recommendation, or counsel independent of the control and direction of the agency or of any agency official, other than normal contract monitoring; and

2.     Possesses no authority with respect to any City decision beyond the rendition of information, advice, recommendation, or counsel.

B.     Disclosure Category. Position Category: Consultant 1, 2, 3.

C.    Limitation to the Disclosure Category. The City Manager may determine that a particular consultant, although in a “designated position,” is hired to perform a range of duties that is limited in scope and thus is not required to fully comply with the disclosure requirements described in this section. Such determination shall include a description of the consultant’s duties and, based upon that description, a statement of the extent of disclosure required. The determination shall be included in the contract by which the consultant is hired by the City. The City Manager’s determination is a public record and shall be retained for public inspection in the same manner and location as this Conflict of Interest Code. (Ord. 94-18)

Chapter 2.16 CAMPAIGN REGULATIONS AND POLITICAL OR OTHER NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS—QUANTITY, TIMING AND DISPLAY AREA
2.16.010 Application.
A.     The provisions of this chapter are applicable to persons, including candidates and committees, participating in an election within the City and, in addition to the requirements of the Political Reform Act as amended, whose provisions, definitions and interpretations are to be relied upon in administering this chapter; except as otherwise provided for herein.

B.     As used in this chapter, “committee” shall include any person or combination of persons who directly or indirectly receives contributions or makes expenditures or contributions for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence the action of the voters for or against the election of one or more candidate. (Ord. 97-24)

 

2.16.020 Limitation and Disclosure—Contribution to Candidates and Committees.
A.     No contributor shall contribute more than $250.00 total to any candidate or their controlled committee, for any one election.

B.     No contributor shall contribute more than $250.00 total, for any one election, to any committee, as defined in Section 2.16.010B, formed to support or oppose a candidate.

This section shall not apply to candidates’ contributions of his/her personal funds to his/her own campaign account. (Ord. 2001-19)

 

2.16.030 Filing Fee.
A filing fee in the amount of $25.00 is hereby established for processing candidate nomination papers to be paid at the time of filing. (Ord. 97-24)

 

2.16.040 Political or Other Noncommercial Signs—Quantity, Timing and Display Area.
In addition to the signage otherwise authorized pursuant to the provisions of this Code, subject to the standards contained in this section, an unlimited number of temporary signs displaying political or other noncommercial messages shall be permitted at all times and authorized per parcel with the property owner’s permission.

A.     Residential Uses in Residential Zones. For individual signs, the display areas shall not exceed three square feet (each side) with a maximum height of five feet; and, shall otherwise comply with Section 30.60.080 of this Code, except to the extent Section 30.60.080 is inconsistent with this section.

 

B.     Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zones. For individual signs, the display areas shall not exceed 32 square feet (each side) with a maximum height of eight feet; and, shall otherwise comply with Section 30.60.080 of this Code, except to the extent Section 30.60.080 is inconsistent with this section.

C.    Nonresidential Zones. For individual signs, the display areas shall not exceed 32 square feet (each side) with a maximum height of eight feet; and, shall otherwise comply with Section 30.60.110 of this Code, except to the extent Section 30.60.110 is inconsistent with this section.

D.    This section shall not create or establish the potential for legal nonconforming uses or vested rights related to the use or display of signage. (Ord. 2014-03; Ord. 2016-03)

Chapter 2.20 MAYOR/CITY COUNCIL
2.20.010 Election and Tenure.
The electors of the City of Encinitas shall elect one Mayor and four Council Members pursuant to Sections 2.20.080 and 2.20.090. General municipal elections are held every two years in even-numbered years. The general municipal election shall be consolidated with the statewide general election. The Mayor and City Council Members will be installed the second Tuesday of December in even-numbered years. (Ord. 2014-05; Ord. 2017-15)

 

2.20.011 Temporarily Designating One Council Seat to a Two-Year Term to Evenly Stagger the Election of Council Members Due to the Establishment of an Elected Mayor.
For the 2016 general municipal election only, the candidate elected who received the least votes shall serve a two-year term, and in the event of a tie for second place, the two-year term seat shall be decided by lot. (Ord. 2014-05)

 

2.20.015 City Council.
A.     City Council Members are elected to serve a term of four years. After 2016 (see Section 2.20.011 of this chapter), Council Members’ terms shall be evenly staggered with two Council Members’ terms expiring in each even-numbered year.

B.     The City Council shall be the legislative body with the exclusive and original jurisdiction to interpret and govern all matters described and/or set forth within City ordinances, resolutions, codes, and other regulatory directives adopted previously by the Council by reference or currently applicable to any activity, event, request, forbearance and/or issue raised of any nature within the boundary of the City.

C.    In the case of a vacancy on the City Council, for any reason, the Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment. If the Council fails to fill the vacancy within 60 days, it shall call an election to be held not less than 114 days thereafter. A person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 2014-05)

 

2.20.020 Mayor/Presiding Officer.
A.     The Mayor is elected and shall serve a term of two years, beginning with the November 4, 2014, general municipal election.

B.     The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council.

C.    The Mayor is a member of the City Council with all the powers and duties of a member of the City Council. The Mayor may make or second motions and otherwise participate fully in the workings of the City Council. The Mayor shall vote on all questions. Whenever the vote is taken by means of a roll call, the Mayor’s name shall be called last.

D.    The Mayor shall be the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes, and shall perform all other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or by the Council consistent with the office.

E.     The Mayor shall sign all:

1.     Warrants drawn on the City Treasurer;

2.     Written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the City; and

3.     Instruments requiring the City Seal (the Council may provide by ordinance that the instruments described above be signed by an officer other than the Mayor).

F.     The Mayor may administer oaths and affirmations, take affidavits, and certify them.

G.    The Mayor may acknowledge the execution of all instruments executed by the City and required to be acknowledged.

H.    The Mayor, with approval of the City Council, shall make all appointments to boards, commissions, and committees unless otherwise provided by statute.

I.      In the case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor for any reason, the Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment. If the Council fails to fill the vacancy within 60 days, it shall call an election to be held not less than 114 days thereafter. A person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 2010-09; Ord. 2014-05)

 

2.20.030 Deputy Mayor.
A.     At the first regular City Council meeting in December of odd-numbered years and the second Tuesday of each December in even-numbered years, the City Council shall choose one of its members as Deputy Mayor.

B.     The Deputy Mayor shall serve a term of one year, or until a successor is chosen and rotated annually. Three affirmative votes shall be required to choose or change the Deputy Mayor as established by resolution.

C.    In addition to the powers and duties of a Council Member, in the Mayor’s absence, the Deputy Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council. (Ord. 2014-05)

 

2.20.035 Compensation.
A.     The Mayor shall be entitled to the same salary as a Council Member plus $100.00 per month and the operative date of this compensation adjustment shall take effect upon the seating of the legislative body after the general municipal election held in November 2018.

B.     Each Council Member shall be entitled to a salary in the amount of $1719.70 per month. The operative date of the compensation adjustment shall take effect upon the seating of the City Council legislative body after the general municipal election held in November 2018.

C.    Upon the submission of an itemized account, the Mayor and Council Members may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duty. (Ord. 2007-09; Ord. 2014-05; Ord. 2017-01)

 

2.20.040 Regular Meetings.
A.     Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second, third, and fourth Wednesday of each month. Regular meetings shall commence at 6:00 p.m.

B.     The City Council may, by resolution, designate another date, time and location for a regular meeting. (Ord. 2001-21)

 

2.20.050 Rules of Procedure.
The City Council may, from time to time, adopt by resolution, rules of procedure for the conduct of meetings. These resolutions shall be compiled and maintained by the City Clerk and made available to the public and to the City Council during every meeting.

 

2.20.060 Orderly Conduct.
A.     Any person who fails to comply with a direction given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order at a City Council meeting shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     All persons shall comply with the meeting procedures announced by resolution of the City Council and no person shall interfere with or interrupt a City Council meeting.

C.    The presiding officer may designate a member of the County Sheriff’s Department as sergeant at arms who shall carry out the directions of the presiding officer to include making arrests as directed by the presiding officer.

 

2.20.070 Representation on Other Boards, Commissions and Committees.
A.     Unless otherwise prescribed by state law, in December of each year, the Mayor, with City Council approval, shall make all appointments to outside boards, commissions, and committees. If otherwise provided by statute, the Council will make the appointment.

B.     At the first meeting in December of each year, the Mayor and Council shall review and discuss the list of outside appointments for representation on other boards, commissions, and committees. At the second meeting in December of each year, the Mayor, with City Council approval shall make all appointments to outside boards, commission and committees.

C.    Each selection shall be based upon a recommendation made by motion of the Mayor, seconded, and adopted by a majority of the City Council. (Ord. 87-78; Ord. 2014-05)

 

2.20.080 By-District Electoral System for Four City Council Members.
A.     Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 34886 and 34871(c), Council Members shall be elected by-districts in four single-member districts. The Mayor will be separately elected by a citywide vote.

B.    1.     Beginning with the general municipal election in November 2018, Council Members shall be elected in the electoral districts reflected on the map contained in Figure 1 and as subsequently reapportioned as provided by State law. Elections shall take place on a by-district basis as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871, meaning one member of the City Council shall be elected from each district, by the voters of that district alone, except for the Mayor, who shall be elected citywide. In accordance with Section 2.20.015(A), and except as provided in Section 2.20.011, each Council Member, except the Mayor, shall serve a four-year term until his or her successor has qualified.

2.     Except as provided in subsection (B)(3), the Council Member elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City Council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227. Termination of residency in a district by a Council Member shall create an immediate vacancy for that Council district unless a substitute residence within the district is established within 30 days after the termination of residency.

3.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, each of the Council Members in office at the time this chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified, except as otherwise provided in Section 2.20.011. Vacancies in Council Member offices elected at-large may be filled from the city at-large. At the end of the term of each Council Member, that Member’s successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in subsection A and the map contained in Figure 1 (Citizen Map 016), as subsequently reapportioned as provided by State law. A vacancy in a Council Member office elected by-district shall be filled by a person qualified to hold the office, who is a resident of the district.



Figure 1 Council Map 016

(Ord. 2017-15)

 

2.20.090 Election Schedule for Council Members Elected By District.
A.     Consistent with Section 2.20.011, Council Members shall be elected in Council Districts 3 and 4 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2018, and every four years thereafter.

B.     The Council Members from Council Districts 1 and 2 shall be elected beginning at the general municipal election in November 2020, and every four years thereafter. (Ord. 2017-15)

Chapter 2.24 CITY MANAGER
2.24.010 Office of City Manager Created.
A.     The office of City Manager is hereby created and established.

B.     The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and control of the City Council and shall exercise those general powers necessary for the efficient administration of the City as well as those powers set forth in this chapter.

C.    The City Council and its members shall deal with the administration of the City only through the City Manager. Except for purposes of inquiry, neither the City Council nor a member of the City Council shall give orders to the subordinates of the City Manager. (Ord. 86-03)

 

2.24.020 Appointment.
A.     The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of the City Manager’s executive and administrative qualifications and ability.

B.     The residence of the City Manager shall be located so as to allow for the effective and timely performance of the duties and responsibilities of the position.

C.    No person elected or appointed as a Council Member of the City shall, subsequent to such election or appointment, be eligible for appointment for City Manager until one year has elapsed since such person has held the position of City Council Member.

D.    The City Manager may appoint a City officer or employee to serve as temporary City Manager. If required, failing such an appointment, the City Council may designate a temporary City Manager.

 

2.24.030 Removal.
The City Manager shall hold the office at the pleasure of the City Council.

 

2.24.040 Full-Time Position.
The City Manager shall expend full time on the performance of the duties enumerated herein and shall not take on additional employment without the consent of the City Council.

 

2.24.050 Compensation.
A.     The City Manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the City Council shall, from time to time, determine and fix by resolution.

B.     The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by the City Manager in the performance of the City Manager’s duties to include travel on City business.

 

2.24.060 Bond.
The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the amount of $100,000.00 from a surety approved by the City Council for the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the City Manager. The premium for such bonds shall be a proper charge against the City.

 

2.24.070 Duties, Responsibilities and Authority.
The duties, responsibilities and authority of the City Manager shall be, without limitation:

A.     To enforce all laws and ordinances of the City;

B.     To enforce all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City;

C.    To act as the Secretary to the San Dieguito Water District, and Executive Director of the Housing Authority of the City of Encinitas and the Encinitas Public Finance Authority;

D.    To appoint, remove, promote and demote all department directors serving at the pleasure of the City Manager;

E.     To control, order and give directions to all department directors;

F.     To attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused therefrom;

G.    To attend commission meetings upon the City Manager’s own volition or upon the direction of the City Council;

H.    To recommend to the City Council the adoption of such measures and ordinances as the City Manager deems necessary;

I.      To keep the City Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the City and to furnish financial reports to the City Council;

J.     To control the purchase of all supplies for all departments or divisions of the City to include submitting or recommending expenditures to the City Council;

K.     To prepare and submit a proposed annual budget and a proposed salary plan to the City Council each year;

L.     To investigate into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof, and into the proper performance of any contract or other obligation pertaining to the City;

M.    To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City to include services maintained by public utilities in the City;

N.    To supervise the use of all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City and to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers and authority as may be delegated to the City Manager from time to time by action of the City Council. (Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2010-18)

Chapter 2.28 EXECUTIVE TEAM POSITIONS AND OFFICERS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-16. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


2.28.010 City Manager Executive Team Positions.
The following executive team positions consisting of heads of departments and department managers in the City Manager’s Department are established; each of which shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority necessary for the performance of the position, to include, without limitation, the authority to appoint and promote and for cause remove or demote any employee who works for such executive team member:

A.     Assistant City Manager;

B.     Director of Finance/City Treasurer;

C.    Director of Parks and Recreation;

D.    Director of Public Works;

E.     Fire Chief;

F.     Director of Development Services;

G.    City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services;

H.    Director of Human Resources;

I.      Department Manager—Information Technology;

J.     Department Manager—Risk Management. (Ord. 2010-18; Ord. 2012-10; Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2016-02; Ord. 2017-04; Ord. 2017-09)

 

2.28.020 Appointment/Removal of Department Heads and Department Managers Designated as Executive Management.
A.     The City Manager is authorized to appoint, remove, promote and demote all heads of department and department managers designated as part of the executive team.

B.     All heads of department and department managers designated as executive management serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. (Ord. 2017-04)

 

2.28.030 Compensation of Department Heads and Department Managers Designated as Executive Management.
The salaries, compensation, and benefits of executive managers shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. The City Manager is authorized to determine the salaries, compensation, and benefits within City Council fixed limits at appropriate levels for each executive manager. (Ord. 2017-04; Ord. 2017-09)

 

2.28.040 Duty to Cooperate.
It shall be the duty of all heads of department to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City in an efficient, economic, and harmonious manner, so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law.

 

2.28.050 Director of Finance/City Treasurer.
The Director of Finance/City Treasurer shall be appointed by the City Manager and serve under general direction of the City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties, responsibilities, and authority of the Director of Finance/City Treasurer shall be to:

A.     Perform the functions specified in this Code.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs and personnel of the Finance Department.

C.    Be responsible for the administration of contracts for services obtained from other public agencies, private contractors, and consultants relating to the Finance Department.

D.    Act as chief accounting officer for the City and assume the duties of City Treasurer. The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by the Government Code are hereby transferred to the Director of Finance.

E.     Act as Director of Finance/City Treasurer, Treasurer for the San Dieguito Water District, Housing Authority of the City of Encinitas and Encinitas Public Financing Authority.

F.     Furnish a corporate bond in the amount of $100,000.00 for the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the Director of Finance. The premium of such bond shall be a proper charge against the City.

G.    Administer laws and ordinances pertaining to taxes, licenses, and permits as directed.

H.    Cause current accounts to be kept of all funds, revenues, receipts, expenditures, and financial commitments of the City.

I.      Maintain a system of budgetary accounting for the recording of actual and estimated revenues and expenditures in such a manner as to show the financial position of each fund and department of the City at all times.

J.     Collect, receive, and deposit all moneys of the City and keep proper records thereof.

K.     Assist the City Manager in the preparation of the annual budget and certify to the accuracy of anticipated revenues to meet the proposed budget.

L.     Serve as the custodian of the City’s permanent accounting records.

M.    Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned program areas.

N.    Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2003-04; Ord. 2010-18; Ord. 2016-02)

 

2.28.055 Assistant City Manager.
The Assistant City Manager shall be appointed by the City Manager and serve under general direction of the City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties, responsibilities, and authority of the Assistant City Manager shall be to:

A.     Perform those functions specified in this Code.

B.     Assist the City Manager in planning, coordinating and directing the activities of the City.

C.    Supervise, direct and provide leadership to the staff of the City Manager’s Department, Department Directors and Department Managers, as assigned.

D.    Oversee, direct and perform a variety of special projects.

E.     Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned program areas.

F.     Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2010-18; Ord. 2016-02)

 

2.28.060 Director of Parks and Recreation.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the City Manager and serve under general direction of the City Manager and/or Assistant City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties, responsibilities, and authority of the Director of Parks and Recreation shall be to:

A.     Perform those functions specified in this Code.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs and personnel of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department.

C.    Administer contracts for services obtained from other public agencies and private contractors and consultants.

 

D.    Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned program areas of recreational services, cable television, animal control, and park and beach acquisition, development, and maintenance.

E.     Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2003-04; Ord. 2016-02; Ord. 2017-04)

 

2.28.070 Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the City Manager and serve under general direction of the City Manager and/or Assistant City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties of the Director of Public Works shall be to:

A.     Perform those functions specified in this Code and by state law.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs and personnel of the Public Works Department.

C.    Supervise and provide oversight to the San Dieguito Water District General Manager.

D.    Administer contracts for services obtained from other public agencies, private contractors and consultants.

E.     Ensure the maintenance and repair of all streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, storm drains, street lights, and traffic control devices owned by the City of Encinitas.

F.     Maintain contacts with professional organizations of Public Works Directors.

G.    Serve as General Manager for the San Dieguito Water District, or designate an individual to serve in that capacity under the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works.

H.    Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned program areas.

I.      Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2012-10; Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2016-02; Ord. 2017-04)

 

2.28.085 Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager and serve under the general direction of the City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties of the Fire Chief shall be:

A.     Perform those functions specified in this Code.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs of the Fire Department, including, but not limited to, fire prevention, fire suppression, investigation and inspection, emergency medical services, and public education.

C.    Administer contracts for services obtained from other public agencies, private contractors, and consultants relating to the Fire Department.

D.    Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned areas.

E.     Maintain contacts with professional organizations of fire chiefs.

F.     Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2003-04)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 2.28.090 Director of Development Services.
The Director of Development Services shall be appointed by the City Manager and serve under general direction of the City Manager and/or Assistant City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties of the Director of Development Services shall be to:

A.     Perform those functions specified by state law and this Code.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs and personnel of the Development Services Department, to include planning, building, engineering, and code enforcement services.

C.    Administer contracts for services obtained from other public agencies and private contractors and consultants.

D.    Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned program areas.

E.     Perform related work as required.

F.     The Director or designee shall make a final determination as authorized by the Code for the following applications:

1.     CDP;

2.     Minor use permits;

3.     Minor variances;

4.     Tentative parcel maps;

5.     Waivers of EMC Section 30.16.010B10;

6.     Administrative design review;

7.     Lot line adjustments;

8.     Certificates of compliance;

9.     Extension requests;

10.   Agriculture permits;

11.   Other applications and duties as required by this Code.

G.    Procedure. Public notification shall be provided as specified for each application type in Section 2.28.090F. For coastal development permits, public notice procedures shall conform to the requirements in Chapter 30.80, Coastal Development Permit, in addition to the requirements of this section. Standard procedure shall consist of administrative review and written determination. The Director may elect to conduct a public hearing in order to gather information and/or resolve conflicts. Projects with significant issues or controversy shall be referred to the Planning Commission with a recommendation from the Director.

H.    Appeal of Director Decision. All decisions of the Director shall be posted at City Hall and shall become final 15 days thereafter unless a timely appeal is filed to the City Council in accordance with provisions of this Code. (See Chapter 1.12.) (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2003-04; Ord. 2016-02; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-04)

 

2.28.095 City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services.
The City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services shall be appointed by and serve under general direction of the City Manager and/or Assistant City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services shall be:

A.     Perform duties of the office as defined by California Statutes and the Municipal Code, and undertake all responsibilities associated with this function. Remain abreast of legislation which would affect City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services activities.

B.     Direct, administer and coordinate the operation and activities of the City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services Department. Establish policies, standards and procedures to ensure the efficient administration of the department. Prepare an annual budget for the department.

C.    Perform Council-related coordination and Council clerical and secretarial support services. Prepare official correspondence and reports. Prepare certain nontechnical resolutions, ordinances, proclamations and commendations.

D.    Prepare Council agendas and packets. Attend all City Council meetings and keep minutes record of the action, indexing the same. Upon request, advise City Council regarding parliamentary procedures.

E.     Act as City’s records manager and administer the records management program of the City. Maintain public records and official files. Perform research through City records. Respond to requests for production of records.

F.     Serve as the City’s election official and provide for the conduct of municipal elections. Act as the filing officer for all Fair Political Practices Commission reports. Monitor the City’s Conflict of Interest Code and filings.

G.    Act as keeper of the City Seal. Certify and attest to official documents. In accordance with Government Code Section 40814, administer oaths.

H.    Maintain the Municipal Code, and distribute revised pages. Publish/post legal and official notices.

I.      Respond to questions from the public by phone and in person.

J.     Accept service on behalf of the City.

K.     Receive and open bids for various departments.

L.     Maintain contacts with professional organizations of City Clerks.

M.    Serve as Board Secretary for the Encinitas Public Finance Authority and the Housing Authority of the City of Encinitas, and Board Clerk for the San Dieguito Water District.

N.    The City Clerk/Director of Legislative Services shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the amount of $100,000.00 for the faithful performance of duties imposed. The premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City. (Ord. 99-08; Ord. 2010-18; Ord. 2016-02)

 

2.28.097 Director of Human Resources.
The Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by and serve under general direction of the City Manager and/or Assistant City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the Director of Human Resources shall be:

A.     Perform those functions specified in this Code and by federal and state law.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs and personnel of the human resources functions.

C.    Administer contracts for services obtained from other public agencies, private contractors and consultants.

D.    As delegated by the City Manager, exercise the Municipal Code Chapter 12 responsibilities and authorities of the Personnel Officer.

E.     Serve as the Employee Relations Officer as defined by the Employer-Employee Organizations Relations Resolution. Exercise Human Resources Director responsibilities and authorities as defined by memoranda of understanding with represented employee bargaining units, administrative manual policies, and personnel rules.

F.     Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned program areas.

G.    Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2012-10; Ord. 2016-02; Ord. 2017-09)

 

2.28.098 Department Manager—Information Technology.
The Department Manager of Information Technology shall be appointed by and serve under general direction of the City Manager and/or Assistant City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the Department Manager of Information Technology shall be:

A.     Perform those functions specified in this Code and by federal and state law.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs and personnel of the information technology and geographical information systems functions.

C.    Administer contracts for services obtained from other public agencies, private contractors and consultants.

D.    Render advice and consultation to the City Manager and City Council in assigned program areas.

E.     Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2012-10; Ord. 2016-02)

 

2.28.099 Department Manager—Risk Management.
The Department Manager of Risk Management shall be appointed by and serve under general direction of the City Manager and/or Assistant City Manager. In addition to other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may from time to time prescribe, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the Department Manager of Risk Management shall be:

A.     Perform those functions specified in this Code and by federal and state law.

B.     Plan, organize, and direct, under general administrative direction, the programs and personnel of risk management functions.

C.    Administer contracts for services obtained from other public agencies, private contractors and consultants.

D.    Render advice and consultation to the City Manager, City Attorney and City Council as assigned program areas.

E.     Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2012-10; Ord. 2016-02)

 

2.28.100 Officers.
The following office is established which shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority necessary for the performance of the position in accordance with the Municipal Code and other applicable law: City Attorney. (Ord. 99-08)

 

2.28.110 Appointment/Removal of Officers.
A.     The City Council is authorized to appoint, remove, promote and demote all officers.

B.     All officers serve at the pleasure of the City Council.

 

2.28.120 Compensation of Officers.
The salaries, compensation, and benefits of officers shall be fixed and determined by resolution of the City Council.

 

2.28.130 Duty to Cooperate.
It shall be the duty of all officers to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City in an efficient, economic, and harmonious manner, so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law.

 

2.28.150 City Attorney.
A.     The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney and may appoint an Assistant City Attorney on such terms and conditions as the City Council deems appropriate.

B.     The City Attorney and the Assistant City Attorney shall be members of the State Bar of California.

C.    The City Attorney and any appointed Assistant City Attorney shall perform those duties directed by the City Council to include working with other attorneys designated as special counsel for the City on particular matters.

Chapter 2.30 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
2.30.010 Appointment.
A.     Three affirmative votes of members of the City Council are required to appoint an individual to a City board, commission or committee for a full term or unexpired portion of a vacated term. Beginning in January 2015, the elected Mayor will make recommendations for appointments with Council confirming the appointments.

B.     On or before December 31st of each year, the City Clerk shall prepare and post an appointments list of all regular and ongoing boards, commissions and committees which are appointed by the City Council as required by law.

C.    Whenever a vacancy occurs, the City Clerk shall post and publish a notice. Final appointment shall not be made for at least 10 days after the posting of notice. (Ord. 2013-09)

 

2.30.020 Terms and Term Limits.
A.     Persons appointed to a City board, commission or committee serve at the pleasure of the City Council.

B.     All commissions with the exception of the Youth Commission shall have three-year staggered terms of office. The Youth Commission shall have a one-year term of office.

C.    All commissions, with the exception of the Youth Commission shall have term limits of two consecutive full terms of office. After reaching the term limit, a person must sit out one appointment cycle before reapplying to the same City commission. Upon terming out of one commission, a person may apply for a different City commission.

D.    Appointees to any City commission will not be selected from among members currently serving on any other City commission.

E.     A board, commission, or committee member’s term shall be automatically terminated, with or without cause, upon the happening of one or more of the following:

1.     The member is absent from three consecutive, regular meetings held by the member’s agency;

2.     A motion is adopted by the affirmative votes of no less than three Council Members declaring the member’s term to be terminated.

F.     Commission seats, for scheduled term expirations, shall not be deemed vacated until a successor is appointed and seated. (Ord. 99-01; Ord. 2013-09; Ord. 2017-10)

 

2.30.030 Compensation of Members.
The City Council may by resolution compensate board, commission or committee members in accordance with applicable law for expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in the performance of official duties. (Ord. 2009-02)

 

2.30.040 Rules and Regulations.
Each agency may adopt such rules and regulations as are required for their occupation and which are consistent with the provisions of this Code.

A.     Each board, commission or committee established by the City Council is authorized to adopt its own rules and regulations to assist in the conduct of their business, so long as such rules and regulations are consistent with the provisions of this Code and City Council policies.

B.     Each board, commission or committee established by the City Council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the hour, day of the month and location of its regular meetings.

C.    Each board, commission or committee shall prepare a work plan and present an annual report to the City Council. (Ord. 2013-09)

 

2.30.050 Finances.
The City Council shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the work of each agency.

 

2.30.060 Records.
Each agency shall keep a record of the resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations made, which shall be filed with the City Clerk and maintained as a public record.

Chapter 2.34 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.34.010 Planning Commission Established.
The Planning Commission of the City of Encinitas is hereby established. (Ord. 86-27)

 

2.34.020 Membership.
A.     The Planning Commission shall consist of five members; each Commissioner shall be appointed to one of the following positions:

1.     Cardiff-by-the-Sea position.

2.     Leucadia position.

3.     New Encinitas position.

4.     Old Encinitas position.

5.     Olivenhain position.

B.     Each Commissioner shall be a registered voter of the City and shall maintain residency and voter registration in the geographic area designated for the position to which the Commissioner is appointed.

C.    To be qualified for appointment, a person shall have resided as a registered voter, for a period of no less than six months prior to appointment, in the geographic area designated for the position for which appointment is sought.

D.    The affirmative votes of three Council Members shall be required to appoint an individual to the Planning Commission.

E.     Planning Commissioners shall serve staggered, three-year terms. (Ord. 88-29; Ord. 89-06; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2013-09)

 

2.34.030 Meetings.
A.     Three members of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum.

B.     The regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be two each month.

C.    The Planning Commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members for one-year terms. (Ord. 96-02)

 

2.34.040 Duties of Planning Commission.
A.     The Planning Commission shall perform such duties as may be specified by ordinance or resolution of the City Council or by the laws of the State of California. Further, the Planning Commission shall study and report to the City Council upon any matter referred to it by the City Council and shall keep the City Council currently advised of all matters pending, and shall furnish any special information, reports or materials which the City Council may request.

B.     The Planning Commission shall make a final determination as authorized by this Code for the following applications:

1.     Coastal development;

2.     Conditional use permit (major);

3.     Tentative tract map;

4.     Zoning code interpretation;

5.     Application for project in more than one community planning area;

6.     Other applications and duties as required by this Code.

C.    The Planning Commission shall make recommendation to the City Council as authorized by this Code for the following applications:

1.     General Plan interpretation;

2.     General Plan amendment;

3.     Zoning Code amendment;

4.     Zoning Map amendment;

5.     Specific plan;

6.     Other applications as required by this Code. (Ord. 96-07)

 

2.34.060 Appeal of Planning Commission Decision.
All decisions of the Planning Commission shall be posted at City Hall and shall become final unless appealed in accordance with Chapter 1.12.

Chapter 2.37 ARBITRATION COMMITTEE
2.37.010 Arbitration Committee Established.
The Arbitration Committee of the City of Encinitas is hereby established. (Ord. 92-12)

 

2.37.020 Membership.
A.     The Arbitration Committee shall consist of two members of the following:

1.     One Planning Commissioner, appointed by the Planning Commission.

2.     One City Council Member, appointed by the City Council.

B.     The chairperson shall be the City Council Member and the vice-chairperson shall be the Planning Commission member.

 

2.37.030 Meetings.
A.     Two members of the Arbitration Committee shall constitute a quorum.

B.     The Arbitration Committee shall meet when called by the Director of Planning and Building at the written request of a proponent or an interested person after the appropriate filing fees, as established by the City Council, have been received by the City from the requesting proponent or interested person. The Arbitration Committee shall meet within 10 calendar days after the date of the request for the meeting and it shall render a decision on the dispute within 20 calendar days of the date of said request. All Arbitration Committee meetings shall be open to the public, but no notification shall be required, except an oral notification to the person who requested the meeting and other parties involved and a posted agenda.

C.    The Director of Planning and Building, proponent or interested person may make written or oral presentations to the Arbitration Committee. The Director of Planning and Building shall keep a written record of the Committee’s decision, and shall send a copy of the decision to the proponent or person who requested the meeting.

D.    The proponent or interested person who requested the Arbitration Committee meeting may appeal the Committee’s decision pursuant to Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

2.37.040 Duties of Arbitration Committee.
A.     The purpose of the Arbitration Committee is to settle disputes which arise after the final decision has been made on an application for a minor use permit, major use permit, tentative parcel map, tentative map, minor variance, major variance, lot line adjustment, coastal development permit, or design review permit. The Arbitration Committee should act with a minimum of time, delay, cost and administrative effort.

B.     The Arbitration Committee shall only confirm or reverse the Director of Planning and Building’s decision regarding conformance of construction with, expiration, extension, or suspension of a minor use permit, major use permit, tentative parcel map, tentative map, minor variance, major variance, lot line adjustment, coastal development permit, or design review permit. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

2.37.050 Appeals.
A.     A final determination by the Arbitration Committee shall be appealed only to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 1.12.

B.     All decisions of the Arbitration Committee shall be posted at City Hall and shall become final 16 days thereafter unless a timely appeal is filed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

Chapter 2.38 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2.38.010 Parks and Recreation Commission Established.
The Parks and Recreation Commission of the City of Encinitas is hereby established. (Ord. 87-70)

 

2.38.020 Membership.
A.     The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven members who are registered voters of the City.

B.     The affirmative votes of three Council Members shall be required to appoint an individual to the Parks and Recreation Commission.

C.    Parks and Recreation Commissioners shall serve staggered, three-year terms. (Ord. 87-76; Ord. 2013-09)

 

2.38.030 Meetings.
A.     Four members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall constitute a quorum.

B.     The regular meetings of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be one each month.

C.    The Parks and Recreation Commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members for one-year terms. (Ord. 87-76; Ord. 96-02)

 

2.38.040 Duties of Commission.
The Commission shall conduct public hearings and prepare recommendations to the City Council on matters regarding public parks, recreational facilities, and community services to include, without limitation:

A.     Policies and plans for the acquisition, development, improvement, and utilization of parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities.

B.     Policies and plans for the development and operations of community service programs for the benefit of the residents of the City.

C.    Policies and plans for developing community service programs in cooperation with other public and private agencies to include school districts.

D.    Such matters that may be referred to the Commission by the City Council.

Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC AND PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION
2.40.010 Traffic and Public Safety Commission Established.
There is hereby established the Traffic and Public Safety Commission of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2013-10)

 

2.40.020 Membership.
A.     The Traffic and Public Safety Commission shall consist of seven members. Each Commissioner shall be appointed to one of the following positions:

1.     Cardiff-by-the-Sea position.

2.     Leucadia position.

3.     New Encinitas position.

4.     Old Encinitas position.

5.     Olivenhain position.

6.     At-large.

7.     At-large.

8.     Ex-Officio Members. The Fire Chief, the Police Chief or their designees (and such representatives of the Sheriff’s Department as are designated by the City Manager) and the City Engineer shall be ex-officio members of the Commission. Ex-officio members shall not be entitled to a vote or to serve as an officer of the Commission other than secretary and shall not be counted for the purpose of establishing a quorum.

B.     For appointment to a specific geographic area, each Commissioner shall be a registered voter of the City and shall be a resident of the geographic area designated for the position to which the Commissioner is appointed. To be qualified for appointment, a person shall have resided for a period of no less than six months prior to appointment in the geographic area designated for the position for which appointment is sought.

C.    For at-large appointments, each Commissioner shall be a registered voter of the City.

D.    Applicants for a vacant position on the Traffic and Public Safety Commission must reside in the geographic area designated for the position for which appointment is sought or be a registered voter of the City for an at-large position.

E.     The affirmative votes of three Council Members shall be required to appoint an individual to the Traffic and Public Safety Commission.

F.     Traffic and Public Safety Commissioners shall serve staggered, three-year terms. (Ord. 2013-10)

 

2.40.030 Meetings.
A.     Four members of the Traffic and Public Safety Commission shall constitute a quorum.

B.     The regular meeting of the Traffic and Public Safety Commission shall be one each month.

C.    The Traffic and Public Safety Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members for one-year terms. (Ord. 2013-10)

 

2.40.040 Duties of the Traffic and Public Safety Commission.
The Traffic and Public Safety Commission shall study and report to the City Council upon any matter referred to it by the City Council. The Traffic and Public Safety Commission shall have advisory responsibility in regards to traffic issues and public safety.

A.     It is the duty of this Commission to serve as a liaison between the public and the City Council, and to conduct analyses and provide recommendations to the Council on matters related to the circulation of motorized vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles, and on matters related to public safety. The scope of the Commission’s role with respect to public safety includes but is not limited to traffic safety, emergency response for fire, medical and other crises, as well as the City’s efforts to control and reduce criminal activities of all types. The Commission may conduct informational and educational meetings, prepare reports and analyses, and work with fire, marine safety, ambulance, and sheriff personnel.

B.     If the recommendations of the Traffic and Public Safety Commission are to modify existing traffic controls, devices, markings, or measures, or install new controls, devices, markings or measures, then those recommendations shall be included with a report by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee in an agenda item to the City Council.

C.    If the recommendations of the Traffic and Public Safety Commission are to not modify existing traffic controls, devices, markings, or measures nor to install new traffic controls, devices, markings or measures, then these recommendations shall be included in a report by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee to the Council for information only. The Commission decision can be reviewed by Council if an appeal is filed or by Council request. (See Chapter 1.12.)

D.    The City Council may refer to the Traffic and Public Safety Commission requests to review and prepare recommendations on major roadway projects.

E.     Powers Delegated to the Traffic and Public Safety Commission to Be Advisory. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any of the powers of the City Council, or as a delegation to the Traffic and Public Safety Commission of any of the authority or discretionary powers vested and imposed by law in the City Council. The City Council declares that the public interest, convenience and welfare require the appointment of a Traffic and Public Safety Commission to act in a purely advisory capacity to the City Council for the purpose enumerated. Any power herein delegated to the Commission to adopt rules and regulations shall not be construed as a delegation of legislative authority but purely a delegation of administrative authority. (Ord. 2013-10; Ord. 2014-12)

Chapter 2.44 SENIOR CITIZEN COMMISSION
2.44.010 Senior Citizen Commission Established.
The Senior Citizen Commission of the City of Encinitas is hereby established. (Ord. 89-05)

 

2.44.020 Membership.
A.     The Senior Citizen Commission shall consist of seven members who are registered voters of the City.

B.     The affirmative votes of three Council Members shall be required to appoint an individual to the Senior Citizen Commission

C.    No less than five members of the Commission will be persons who are 55 years or older.

D.    To be eligible for appointment, applicants must demonstrate knowledge of senior citizen issues.

E.     Senior Citizen Commissioners shall serve staggered, three-year terms. (Ord. 2013-09)

 

2.44.030 Meetings.
A.     Four members of the Senior Citizen Commission shall constitute a quorum.

B.     The regular meetings of the Senior Citizen Commission shall be once each month.

C.    The Senior Citizen Commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its members for one-year terms. (Ord. 96-02)

 

2.44.040 Duties of Commission.
The Commission shall conduct public hearings to gather information and thereafter make recommendations to the City Council on matters regarding services for senior citizens which include, without limitation:

A.     Policies and plans for the development and operation of programs and services for the benefit of senior citizens within the City.

B.     Policies and plans for developing programs and services in cooperation with other public and private agencies which would benefit senior citizens.

C.    Such matters that may be referred to the Commission by the City Council. (Ord. 96-02)

Chapter 2.46 COMMISSION FOR THE ARTS
2.46.010 Commission for the Arts Established.
The Commission for the Arts of the City of Encinitas is hereby established under the provisions of Ordinance 98-05. (Ord. 98-05)

 

2.46.020 Membership.
A.     The Commission for the Arts shall consist of seven members who are registered voters of the City.

B.     The affirmative votes of three Council Members shall be required to appoint an individual to the Commission for the Arts.

C.    Commission for the Arts members shall serve staggered, three-year terms. (Ord. 98-05; Ord. 2013-09)

 

2.46.030 Meetings.
A.     Four members of the Commission for the Arts shall constitute a quorum.

B.     The Commission for the Arts shall meet once each month.

C.    The Commission for the Arts shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members for one-year terms. (Ord. 98-05)

 

2.46.040 Duties of Commission.
The Commission shall conduct public hearings and prepare recommendations to the City Council on matters regarding the visual, performing and literary arts.

A.     The Commission will promote the arts within the community through:

1.     Quality visual, performing and literary arts programming;

2.     Exposure and advocacy;

3.     Arts education programs;

4.     The development of arts venues.

B.     The Commission will assist the City Council on matters that may be referred to the Commission by the City Council. (Ord. 98-05; Ord. 2007-06)

Chapter 2.48 YOUTH COMMISSION
2.48.010 Youth Commission Established.
The Youth Commission of the City of Encinitas is hereby established under the provisions of Ordinance 2000-16. (Ord. 2000-16)

 

2.48.020 Membership.
A.     The Youth Commission shall consist of up to nine voting members, all residents of the City of Encinitas. In the event of a vacancy, the position will remain unfilled until the next annual recruitment unless the membership falls below a quorum, at which time a recruitment will occur. Youth Commission composition shall include:

1.     Representatives from school grades 7 through 12.

B.     Term of Service. Youth Commission voting members shall be appointed by City Council and serve a one-year term. (Ord. 2000-16; Ord. 2005-02; Ord. 2007-06; Ord. 2014-07; Ord. 2017-12; Ord. 2018-09)

 

2.48.030 Attendance Requirement.
Members are automatically removed from the Commission if the member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings conducted during the months of July 1st through June 30th of each year. (Ord. 2000-16; Ord. 2009-05; Ord. 2017-12)

 

2.48.040 Project Advisors.
The Commission may appoint project advisors to assist in the research, planning, development and presentation of specific projects as may be defined in a City Council-approved work plan. (Ord. 2000-16)

 

2.48.050 Public Meetings.
A.     A quorum for the purpose of conducting business shall be determined based upon the number of Youth Commissioners appointed.

B.     Meetings shall be held at least once each month and at a time and place as designated by the Commission and pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act.

C.    The Youth Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from among its voting members for one-year terms. (Ord. 2000-16)

 

2.48.060 Duties of Commission.
Duties include:

A.     Development of annual work plan and presentation to City Council.

B.     Review and update from time to time, as necessary, the youth/teen master plan.

C.    Advise City Council on matters regarding youth and teen services, programs, and cooperation with other public and private agencies.

D.    As necessary, appointment of an ad hoc subcommittee among its members to help achieve elements of their approved work plan.

E.     Appointment of an elementary school age subcommittee to help address issues and programs for elementary age youth, as may be related to the Commission’s approved work plan.

F.     Implementation of City Council directives. (Ord. 2000-16)

Chapter 2.49 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
2.49.010 Environmental Commission Established.
The Environmental Commission of the City of Encinitas is hereby established under the provisions of Ordinance 2008-03. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

2.49.020 Membership.
A.     The Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members who are registered voters of the City.

B.     Environmental Commissioners shall serve staggered, three-year terms. (Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2013-09)

 

2.49.030 Meetings.
A.     Four members of the Environmental Commission shall constitute a quorum.

B.     The Environmental Commission shall hold regular meetings once each month.

C.    The Environmental Commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its members for one-year terms. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

2.49.040 Duties of the Commission.
The Commission shall conduct public hearings and prepare recommendations to the City Council on matters regarding the environment to include without limitation:

A.     Develop an annual work plan and presentation to the City Council.

B.     Review and update from time to time, as necessary, the Environmental Action Plan.

C.    Develop policies and plans to provide for and advocate for environmental protection within the City of Encinitas.

D.    Develop policies and plans for developing environmental awareness in cooperation with other public and private agencies to include school districts.

E.     Provide review and recommendations to the Council on such matters that may be referred to the Commission by the City Council. (Ord. 2008-03)

Chapter 2.50 EMERGENCY SERVICES
2.50.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 87-65)

 

2.50.020 Definition.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.

2.50.030 Disaster Council Membership.
The City of Encinitas Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

A.     The Mayor, who shall be chairperson.

B.     The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be vice chairperson.

C.    The Assistant Director of Emergency Services.

D.    The Emergency Services Coordinator.

E.     Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this chapter.

F.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans’, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Ord. 89-19)

 

2.50.040 Disaster Council Powers and Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances, resolutions, and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in his or her absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairperson.

 

2.50.050 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
A.     There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.

B.     There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services who shall be appointed by the Director.

C.    There is hereby created the Office of Emergency Services Coordinator. The Fire Department position of administrative deputy shall serve in this capacity. (Ord. 89-19)

 

2.50.060 Powers and Duties of the Director of Emergency Services, Assistant Director and Emergency Services Coordinator.
A.     The Director is hereby empowered to:

1.     Request that City Council proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

2.     Request that the Governor proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.

4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

5.     Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.

6.     In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the Director is hereby empowered:

a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations are confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

c.     To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this City is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster services workers;

d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and

e.     To execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, and all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

B.     The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

C.    The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.

D.    The Emergency Services Coordinator coordinates emergency procedures and activities and plans operations to be implemented in the event of a natural or manmade disaster or emergency. In the event of an emergency, the Emergency Services Coordinator assists in mobilizing personnel, equipment and supplies, and manages recovery operations. The Emergency Services Coordinator will respond to the scene of the emergency, or the City EOC, upon direction of the Fire Chief. (Ord. 89-19)

 

2.50.070 Emergency Organization.
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City.

 

2.50.080 Emergency Plan.
The Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Encinitas Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.

 

2.50.090 Expenditures.
Any lawful expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City.

 

2.50.100 Punishment of Violations.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency to:

A.     Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter.

B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof.

C.    Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state.

 

2.50.110 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.
Under the provisions of Section 8668(a) of the California Emergency Services Act, existing civil defense and disaster ordinances will remain in full force and effect until revised, amended, or revoked; therefore, the existing ordinances should be expressly repealed by number. In subsequent revisions of a City emergency services ordinance, the following proviso should be included in the repealing section in order to preserve existing rights and privileges:

“Provided, that it is the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter that it shall be considered a revision and continuation of the ordinance repealed by this chapter, and the status of volunteers shall not be affected by such repeal; nor shall plans and agreements, rules and regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to such repealed ordinance be affected by such repeal until amended, modified, or superseded as provided in this chapter.”

Chapter 2.60 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
2.60.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide procedures for the care, retention and disposition of unclaimed property in the possession of the City. (Ord. 89-44)

 

2.60.020 Definitions.
A.     “Unclaimed property” includes personal property unattended to, lost or abandoned by its owner and taken into possession by City personnel in the course of the performance of their duties.

B.     “Unclaimed property” includes personal property turned in to the City by a person who has found the personal property.

C.    “Unclaimed property” does not include animals which shall be turned over to the animal control authorities of the City.

D.    “Unclaimed property” does not include evidence or contraband taken into possession by the law enforcement officials of the City.

E.     “Unclaimed property” does not include property worth less than $10.00 which may be disposed of forthwith.

F.     “Unclaimed property” does not include property that has been intentionally abandoned by its owner which may be disposed of forthwith.

G.    “Unclaimed property” does not include vehicles abandoned on public property.

 

2.60.030 Care and Storage.
Unclaimed property taken into possession by the City shall be delivered to the City Manager or his/her designee which shall administer its care, retention and disposition.

 

2.60.040 Retention.
A.     Except as otherwise provided, unclaimed property shall be retained for a period of 90 days and then disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Unclaimed property is not subject to the 90-day retention period and may be disposed of forthwith in accordance with the provisions of this chapter: when the unclaimed property is in danger of perishing or of losing the greater part of its value; when the lawful storage charges for the unclaimed property amount to two-thirds of the value of the unclaimed property; or when the owner of the unclaimed property has been identified and thereafter refuses to take possession of the property or to pay the storage charges thereon.

 

2.60.050 Disposition of Unclaimed Property.
A.     Restoration to Owner.

1.     If the owner of the unclaimed property is known to, or becomes known to, the City, the City shall inform the owner that the unclaimed property has been taken into possession.

2.     If, prior to the disposition of the unclaimed property, the owner of the property appears and proves ownership, the City shall restore the property to him or her upon the reimbursement by the owner of the costs incurred by the City.

B.     Transfer to Finder. At least five days after the publication of notice of the disposition auction and prior to the conduct of such auction, the finder of the unclaimed property, other than a City employee, may claim possession of the unclaimed property. Upon the payment of a charge to reimburse the City for all of the costs incurred, the City shall transfer possession of the unclaimed property to the finder.

C.    Use by City. After the required retention period, if the City Manager or his/her designee determines that the unclaimed property is needed for public use by the City, the City Manager or his/her designee shall retain the unclaimed property for use by the City.

D.    Quick Sale. When unclaimed property is not subject to the 90-day retention period, the City Manager or his/her designee may sell such property by public auction in the same manner as in the sale of personal property under execution.

E.     Auction. After the required retention period, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within San Diego County a notice of auction at least five days prior to the time fixed for the auction. Unclaimed property shall be sold to the highest bidder and the proceeds shall be deposited into the City’s general funds. The unclaimed property may be transferred to the County of San Diego to conduct the auction in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Code.

F.     Destruction. Unclaimed property which is not sold at auction or otherwise disposed of in accordance with this chapter, shall be destroyed. (Ord. 2003-04)

 

2.60.060 City Personnel Prohibited.
No City officer, employee, or appointed person including officers, employees, working under contract to the City, shall purchase unclaimed property sold in accordance with this chapter.

Chapter 2.64 SURPLUS SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY
2.64.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide procedures for identifying, redistributing and disposing of surplus City property, other than real property. (Ord. 89-44)

 

2.64.020 Identification of Unneeded Property.
Each City department shall submit periodic reports to the Director of Finance indicating supplies, equipment or other personal property which the department no longer needs. (Ord. 2003-04)

 

2.64.030 Redistribution of Unneeded Property.
The Director of Finance shall determine whether supplies, equipment or other personal property identified by a City department as being unneeded can be used by some other City department. (Ord. 2003-04)

 

2.64.040 Identification of Surplus Property.
A.     Periodically, the Director of Finance shall submit a report to the City Manager indicating supplies, equipment and personal property that are no longer needed by the City together with a written estimate of the market value thereof.

B.     The City Manager shall review the report and declare as surplus property that is no longer needed by the City. (Ord. 2003-04)

 

2.64.050 Disposal of Surplus Property.
A.     Surplus property may be used to exchange for or trade in to obtain new supplies, equipment or personal property.

B.     If surplus property is worth less than $1,000.00, the City Manager is authorized to sell the property at its fair market value, without advertising or otherwise soliciting bids.

C.    If surplus property is worth $1,000.00 or more, the City Manager shall dispose of the surplus property either by noticed auction or by advertising for bids. Surplus property shall be sold to the highest cash bidder.

D.    Monies received from the sale of surplus property shall be placed in the general funds of the City.

 

2.64.060 City Personnel Prohibition.
No City officer or employee or appointed person, including officers or employees working under contract to the City, shall purchase surplus property sold in accordance with this chapter.

Chapter 2.74 PRIVATE PROPERTY RIGHTS ACT OF 2005
2.74.010 Condemnation—Requirement for Vote of the People.
The City Council shall not condemn property for the purpose of transferring it from one private property owner to another for specified governmental purposes without the approval of a two-thirds vote of the electorate voting in a regularly scheduled election. (Ord. 2005-11)

 

2.74.020 Chapter Amendment—Four-Fifths Vote of the City Council.
This chapter may only be amended by a four-fifths vote of the City Council. (Ord. 2005-11)

Title 3 TAXES
Chapter 3.12 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.20 DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.24 SALES AND USE TAX

Chapter 3.12 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.12.010 Taxable Event.
A.     For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of eight percent of the rent charged by the operator. In addition, each hotel guest shall pay an additional tax of two percent of the rent charged by the hotel operator which shall be used only for beach sand replenishment and stabilization projects. The transient satisfies this tax obligation by paying the tax to the operator.

B.     The tax is payable at the time that rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The balance of the tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing occupancy in the hotel.

C.    If sufficient funds are not paid to the operator by the transient to pay the tax in full, the tax administrator may commence an action against the transient to recover the amount of the tax. (Ord. 86-22; Ord. 98-28)

 

3.12.020 Exemptions.
No tax under this chapter shall be imposed upon:

A.     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided.

B.     Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on official business.

C.    Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator.

 

3.12.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Hotel” means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, short term rental, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location or other.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

“Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent or any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy; provided, that any person who actually occupies the same premises for a period of 31 or more consecutive days shall be deemed exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter on that specific occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 2008-04)

 

3.12.040 Collection of Tax.
A.     It shall be unlawful for an operator to fail to collect from the transient the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from the transient.

B.     The operator shall deliver to the transient a receipt for payment which states the amount of the tax separately from the amount of the rent charged.

C.    No operator shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that the tax will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in a manner provided in this chapter.

 

3.12.050 Registration.
Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the Director of Finance and obtain from the Director a “transient occupancy registration certificate” which certificate shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.     The name of the operator;

B.     The address of the hotel;

C.    The date upon which the certificate is issued; and

D.    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting the tax to the Director of Finance. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 2017-07)

 

3.12.060 Obligation of Operator.
A.     If the operator receives any consideration for allowing the transient to occupy the hotel, the value of such consideration shall be first applied by the operator to satisfy the tax owed. It shall be unlawful for the operator to fail to hold the tax collected by the operator in trust for the benefit of the City. It shall be unlawful for the operator to fail to remit the collected tax to the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.     On or before the last day of each month, or if determined appropriate by the Director of Finance, the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, the operator shall file a return with the tax administrator, on a form approved by the City, setting forth for the previous month or quarter (if appropriate):

1.     The total rents charged;

2.     The total rents received;

3.     The amount of tax funds held by the operator;

4.     An explanation if the amount of paragraph 3 of this subsection B is less than eight percent of the amount of paragraph 1 of this subsection B.

C.    The tax funds collected for the previous month/quarter shall be remitted together with the return for that reporting period.

D.    The operator shall comply with shorter reporting and payment periods if imposed by the tax administrator in order to facilitate the collection of this tax.

E.     If the operator ceases business, it shall be unlawful for the operator to fail to file immediately with the City the return and tax funds for the previous month/reporting period and the return and tax funds for the period of the current reporting period in which the operator ceased business. (Ord. 2008-24)

 

3.12.070 Penalties and Interest.
A.     Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.

B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10% first imposed.

C.    Fraud. If the Director of Finance determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the amount of tax shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E.     Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

 

3.12.080 Records and Inspection.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the Director of Finance shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

 

3.12.090 Refunds.
A.     Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section; provided, that a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, shall be filed with the Director of Finance within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Director of Finance.

B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Director of Finance that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C.    A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

Chapter 3.20 DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX
3.20.010 Taxable Event.
A.     In accordance with the provisions of the Documentary Transfer Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11901 et seq., there is hereby imposed a documentary transfer tax on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her, or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00.

B.     The tax shall be imposed at the rate of 27-1/2 cents for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof of the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed.

C.    The tax shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 86-9)

 

3.20.020 Exemptions.
Exemptions from this tax are those set forth in Division 2, Part 6.7, Chapter 3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code commencing at Section 11921.

 

3.20.030 Administration.
This chapter shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Division 2, Part 6.7, Chapter 4 of the Revenue and Taxation Code commencing at Section 11931.

 

3.20.040 Claims for Refund.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

Chapter 3.24 SALES AND USE TAX
3.24.010 Taxable Event—Retail Sale.
A.     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, every retailer in the City shall pay a sales tax at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold by that person at retail within the City.

B.     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his/her agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 86-10)

 

3.24.015 Taxable Event—Use.
A.     A tax at the rate of one percent of the purchase price is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased from a retailer for storage, use or consumption in the City.

B.     The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

 

3.24.020 Adoption of State Law.
A.     The provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code commencing with Section 6001, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, are hereby adopted by this reference and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein; except insofar as those provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B.     In adopting the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the City of Encinitas, as the taxing agency, shall be substituted for that of the state except in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203; and further, except in those circumstances in which the result would be obtained contrary to the intent of the Revenue and Taxation Code and this chapter.

C.    An additional sellers permit shall not be required if a permit has been or is issued to the seller under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

D.    All subsequent amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code adopted by reference in this chapter shall automatically become part of this chapter so long as those amendments relate to sales and use tax and are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

 

3.24.030 Contract with Board of Equalization.
This chapter is operative as of November 1, 1987. Prior thereto, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter which shall continue in effect so long as the County of San Diego has an operative sales and use tax ordinance enacted pursuant to Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

 

3.24.040 Exclusions and Exemptions.
A.     The storage use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in California, shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

B.     The amount subject to tax under this chapter shall not include the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

C.    There is exempt from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D.    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E.     There is exempt from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of California, the United States or any foreign government.

F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of or property for hire or compensation under a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued pursuant to the laws of California, the United States or any foreign government is exempt from the use tax.

Title 4 ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 4.04 ANIMAL REGULATIONS

Chapter 4.04 ANIMAL REGULATIONS
4.04.010 Purpose.
Any person who keeps, possesses or maintains an animal within the City shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and the failure to so comply shall be unlawful. (Ord. 86-24)

 

4.04.020 Adoption of Code by Reference.
There is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Encinitas, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, the following portions of the San Diego County Code together with such secondary references as set forth in this chapter. The provisions of the San Diego County Code and future amendments shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Encinitas to include without limitation, the fees, regulatory provisions, and definitions, and only those procedural provisions for processing applications, conducting investigations, issuing permits and enforcing regulatory provisions; excluding all other procedural provisions:

A.     Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 1, regulating livestock;

B.     Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 3, relating to strays on military property;

C.    Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 6, relating to rabies, animal control and regulations;

D.    Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 7, relating to animals in vehicles;

E.     Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 8, relating to the disposal of dead animals; and

F.     Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 9, relating to bees. (Ord. 2018-06)

 

4.04.030 Effective Date.
The operative date of this chapter is April 24, 2010. (Ord. 2010-07)

 

4.04.040 Issuing Authority.
The City of Encinitas contract service provider together with the County veterinarian is hereby designated as the veterinarian for the City of Encinitas with authority to enforce and observe within the City of Encinitas the following:

A.     All orders, quarantine regulations, statutes and rules and regulations issued by the State of California relating to animal control.

B.     Those portions of the San Diego County Code pertaining to animal control as are set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06)

 

4.04.050 Regulations.
A.     Each applicant for a license or permit required by this chapter shall apply to the City of Encinitas contract service provider or their designated agent.

B.     The City of Encinitas contract service provider or their designated agent shall collect and retain for the benefit of the contract service provider the fees and payments imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06)

 

4.04.060 Use of Leg-Hold Traps Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to set, trigger, activate or otherwise use or cause to be set, triggered, activated or used any leg-hold trap within the City of Encinitas. A leg-hold trap is any spring-powered device used to trap animals which has metal jaws that clamp shut on an animal’s leg or other body part when the animal steps on or comes in contact with the trap’s pressure sensitive trigger. This section is not intended to regulate the use of spring loaded traps designed to kill gophers, rats, mice and other small rodents. (Ord. 92-33; Ord. 2018-06)

 

4.04.070 Limitation on Number of Dogs Allowed.
A.     Purpose. Supplemental regulations governing the keeping of dogs are intended to provide for the compatibility between such animals and neighboring land uses. These are in addition to the general requirements governing animals established by the City of Encinitas Municipal Code.

B.     Dogs. In residential zoning districts, or in conjunction with any residential uses in any other zoning district, not more than six dogs per parcel shall be permitted, with the following exception:

1.     Newborn and baby animals up to the age of four months shall not be counted in determining compliance with the numerical limits of this subsection. (Ord. 2019-25)

Title 5 RESERVED

Title 6 OPERATIONS PERMITS
Chapter 6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.08 REGULATED BUSINESSES
Chapter 6.10 ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 6.11 OPERATIONS PERMIT: SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 6.13 SPECIAL OPERATIONS PERMIT: USE OF PUBLIC BEACHES FOR PROFESSIONAL SURF INSTRUCTION
Chapter 6.14 SPECIAL OPERATIONS PERMIT: USE OF PUBLIC RECREATIONAL PROPERTY FOR COMMERCIAL OR PROFESSIONAL INSTRUCTION
Chapter 6.15 OPERATIONS PERMIT: SIDEWALK VENDING
Chapter 6.18 OPERATIONS PERMIT: EMERGENCY TEMPORARY SHELTER EVENT
Chapter 6.24 OPERATIONS PERMIT: PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS
Chapter 6.25 OPERATIONS PERMIT: NEWSRACK
Chapter 6.30 OPERATIONS PERMIT: ALARM SYSTEM USER
Chapter 6.40 OPERATIONS PERMIT: MASSAGE BUSINESS
Chapter 6.41 OPERATIONS PERMIT: MASSAGE TECHNICIAN
Chapter 6.52 NON-CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Chapter 6.56 CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Chapter 6.60 BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE

Chapter 6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.02.010 Purpose.
In addition to any other licenses or permits required by this Code, an operations permit is required for those activities set forth in this title. The described activities require regulation by the City to protect and promote the health, safety and public peace of the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a standard procedure for the administration of such operations permits. Notwithstanding the provisions of this title, proposed activities shall be subject to Zoning Regulations and Coastal Development Requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 94-06)

 

6.02.020 Definitions.
A.     As used in this title “Director” shall mean the City Manager.

B.     An “issuing authority” is the individual designated to exercise the specific authority relating to an operations permit in accordance with the general authority granted to all issuing authorities by this chapter.

C.    “Notice to permittee” includes notice to a responsible employee or agent of the permittee conducting the activity.

D.    “Person” includes an individual, associate, partnership or corporation.

 

6.02.030 Permit Required.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor any activity regulated by this title without an operations permit.

B.     When an operations permit has been issued, it is unlawful for any person to conduct the identified activity:

1.     When that permit is suspended, expired or revoked; or

2.     Contrary to the provisions of the permit.

C.    This title shall not be construed to require any person to obtain an operations permit if such requirement conflicts with the Constitutions or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California.

 

6.02.040 Claim of Exemption.
A.     Any person claiming an exemption from the provisions of this title shall file a statement under penalty of perjury with the Director stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed.

B.     The Director shall approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the claim of exemption and notify the applicant.

 

6.02.050 Fees.
Fees for this title may be established, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council, as follows:

A.     An application fee based upon the costs of processing application; payable at the time of application.

B.     A permit issuance fee based upon the costs of issuing the permit and enforcing the applicable provisions; payable as a condition to the issuance of the permit.

C.    A permit replacement fee based upon the costs of replacing a lost or destroyed permit; payable at the time of application.

D.    A permit renewal fee based upon the costs of processing the application; payable at the time of the application.

 

6.02.060 Application.
A.     The Director and each issuing authority shall prepare and have available application forms calling for such information as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title.

B.     Applications for initial, renewal and replacement permit shall be submitted under penalty of perjury to the Director and referred to the appropriate issuing authority for action.

C.    If the application is submitted by an agent, then the agent shall file (with the application) written evidence that the principal has authorized the agent to apply for the permit on the principal’s behalf.

D.    If the application is not filed within the specified time, the Director may still accept the application for processing provided that the application can be thoroughly analyzed for purposes of approving the issuance of the permit.

 

6.02.070 Investigation.
The issuing authority shall conduct an investigation for the purpose of reaching a determination as to whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for permit. As part of the investigation, the issuing authority may conduct a background investigation and may publish notice in a local newspaper including the name of the applicant, the permit applied for, the proposed location of the activity and a date before which interested persons may file written statements, under penalty of perjury, with the issuing authority regarding the application.

 

6.02.080 Confidential Information.
No person having access to or charge over the information or records obtained in the course of administering this title shall disclose or release or allow the examination by any unauthorized third person of such information and records, in whole or in part, in abstract or particulars. Authorization to access the information and records may be obtained from the City Manager or in accordance with a lawful court order.

 

6.02.090 Approval for Issuance.
The issuing authority shall approve or conditionally approve the issuance of the permit unless one or more of the following conditions is found to exist:

A.     The applicant or persons having a direct influence on the conduct of the activity are not qualified in terms of skill or experience to carry on the proposed activity; or, have been convicted of an offense related to the conduct of the same or similar type of activity and have not shown a significant and material change in circumstances since the conviction.

B.     The activity at the location proposed will endanger the public peace, health or safety.

C.    The proposed manner for conducting the activity will endanger the public peace, health or safety; or will not comply with all the requirements, policies, standards or laws applicable to such activity; or will adversely impact the aesthetic quality of the community.

D.    The applicant or any person connected or associated with the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact:

1.     In the application for permit;

2.     In a report or record required to be filed with the City; or

3.     In response to inquiries by the City.

E.     The applicant has had the same or similar type of permit previously revoked or denied and has not shown a significant and material change in circumstances since the date of revocation or denial.

F.     The applicant fails to meet the requirements for the issuance of the particular permit set forth in this title.

G.    The applicant has not submitted (in a timely and complete manner) the application and all other documents required for the issuance of the permit.

H.    The request for City personnel, property or equipment will require the diversion of City resources so as to inhibit the normal level of protection and service provided to the City.

I.      The activity will interfere with the fire protection, police protection, ambulance service or other public services provided to the City.

J.     Zoning and/or coastal development permit approvals, if required under Title 30 of this Code, have not been obtained. (Ord. 94-06)

 

6.02.100 Hearing on Denial or Conditional Approval.
If the issuing authority denies or conditionally approves the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing and provided an opportunity to present further information to the issuing authority within two working days of receipt of such notice.

 

6.02.110 Preparation of Permit.
A.     If the application for permit is approved or conditionally approved for issuance, the issuing authority shall prepare a permit containing, without limitation, the following:

1.     The name and address of the permittee to whom the permit is issued;

2.     The name under which the activity is to be conducted;

3.     A description of the activity permitted;

4.     The location or locations where such activity is to be conducted;

5.     The date of expiration of such permit;

6.     The amount of the permit issuance fee;

7.     A statement for signature by the permittee whereby the permittee agrees:

a.     To abide by each and every term and condition imposed on the activity and further agrees to reimburse the City for all costs incurred, including attorney’s fees, in enforcing those terms and conditions against the permittee.

b.     To hold the City harmless and indemnify the City and each and every one of its employees and officials from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation and liability arising out of or related to the activity for which the permit is issued.

c.     To post evidence of liability insurance in favor of the City, in an amount to be determined by the issuing authority equal to the anticipated maximum amount of potential liability that could arise out of the activity for which the permit is issued. The policy shall contain an express requirement that the insurance company notify the City 30 to 60 days prior to any termination, cancellation, suspension or expiration of the policy of insurance. In lieu of liability insurance, the permittee may post a bond with similar provisions.

8.     Such additional conditions and restrictions as are necessary for the enforcement and administration of this title to protect the public peace, health and safety.

B.     The issuing authority shall forward the completed permit to the Director.

 

6.02.120 Issuance of Permit.
A.     Upon receipt of the completed permit from the issuing authority, the Director shall issue the operations permit to the applicant when:

1.     The prescribed issuance fee is paid;

2.     The permittee has signed the permit; and

3.     All other preconditions to the issuance of the permit have been satisfied.

B.     On issuance of the permit, the Director shall notify:

1.     All interested City department heads;

2.     Any public entity that will be affected by the conduct authorized by the permit;

3.     Any person requesting notification and who has paid to the City the costs involved in providing such notice.

 

6.02.130 Term of Permit.
A.     Unless otherwise prescribed, the term of an operations permit shall be concurrent with the term of business license required for such activity.

B.     The issuing authority may establish a specific term for a permit to accomplish the purpose of this title.

 

6.02.140 Replacement Permit.
Upon application by a permittee, a replacement permit may be issued by the Director to replace a permit which has been lost or destroyed.

 

6.02.150 Permit Nontransferable.
A permit issued in accordance with this title shall be nontransferable.

 

6.02.160 Display of Permit.
An issued permit shall be displayed in accordance with the provisions applicable to the display of business licenses as specified in this title.

 

6.02.170 Revocation/Additional Conditions.
A.     An operations permit may be revoked or additional conditions may be imposed by the issuing authority upon five working days written notice to the permittee setting forth the basis of the intended action and giving the opportunity to present responding information to the issuing authority.

B.     After the five-day period, or the presentation of responding information, whichever shall first occur, the issuing authority shall determine whether to revoke the permit or impose additional conditions upon the permit and thereafter, give written notice to the permittee and to the Director.

C.    A revocation shall become effective two working days after notice, unless a timely appeal is made to the City Council. (See Chapter 1.12.)

 

6.02.180 Grounds for Revocation/Additional Conditions.
After issuance of the permit, the imposition of additional conditions or revocation may take place only upon one or more of the following grounds:

A.     The applicant or any person connected or associated with the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact:

1.     In the application for permit;

2.     In information required to be submitted to the City; or

3.     In response to inquiries by the City.

B.     License taxes required by the City have not been paid.

C.    The conduct of the activity:

1.     Has resulted in a conviction against any principal or employee of the activity;

2.     Is contrary to local, state or federal laws;

3.     Constitutes a public nuisance; or

4.     Is contrary to any condition or restriction previously established in the operations permit.

 

6.02.190 Emergency Suspension.
A.     When the conduct of the activity immediately threatens the public peace, health or safety, any City official responsible for enforcing this Code may immediately suspend the operations permit by serving notice to the permittee.

B.     The City official suspending the permit shall reinstate the permit when the threat is removed. The permittee may request that the City Manager determine whether an existing threat requires the continuation of the suspension.

C.    A reinstatement of the permit after an emergency suspension shall not preclude an action to revoke the permit.

 

6.02.200 Appeal.
A.     Except as otherwise provided, a permittee or applicant may appeal, in accordance with this section, any final determination taken under the authority of this title.

B.     An appeal must be initiated by submitting a written statement (signed under penalty of perjury) to the Office of the City Manager within two working days of receipt of notice of the appealed determination. The statement shall set forth all facts and arguments upon which the appellant relies.

C.    The City Manager shall review the record of the matter and determine whether to affirm, set aside or modify the determination and thereafter notify the appellant.

D.    Within two working days of notice of the City Manager’s determination, the appellant may appeal the City Manager’s determination by orally requesting that the City Manager file the previously submitted statement with the City Clerk who shall set the matter for administrative hearing at the next available City Council meeting. (See Chapter 1.12.)

E.     The action of the City Council shall be final as to all issues involved.

 

6.02.210 Enforcement.
A.     The issuing authority, Director and any other authorized officer or employee of the City may enforce the provisions of this title.

B.     During hours of operation at the location for which an operations permit has been issued, the permittee shall allow authorized officers and employees of the City to enter the premises, free of charge or restraint, for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this title.

 

6.02.220 Violation.
A.     Any person who violates a regulatory provision of this title, or who knowingly misrepresents to any officer or employee of the City any material fact either in procuring an operations permit or in reference to the activity for which the permit is issued, shall be guilty of an infraction.

B.     Commencing, conducting, managing, participating in or sponsoring an activity in violation of this title or commencing, conducting, managing, participating in or sponsoring a permitted activity in light of a material misrepresentation of fact knowingly made to an officer or employee of the City regarding such activity shall constitute a separate violation of this title for each and every day that the activity is carried on.

Chapter 6.08 REGULATED BUSINESSES
6.08.010 Purpose.
Any person who conducts a business or activity which is described in this chapter shall first obtain a permit or license required by the provisions of this chapter, together with any other licenses and permits required by this Code. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, proposed activities shall be subject to Zoning Regulations and Coastal Development Requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 94-06)

 

6.08.020 Adoption of Code by Reference.
There is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Encinitas, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, the following portions of the San Diego County Code, together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in Section 6.08.030 of this chapter. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Encinitas to include, without limitation, regulatory provisions, and definitions, but excluding the procedural provisions, to include fees:

A.     Title 2, Division 1, Chapter 1 relating to Procedures, except that an appeal must be filed with the City Clerk for hearing by the City Council. (See Chapter 1.12.)

B.     Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.301 relating to Taxicabs and Taxicab Operations. Amendments to references to the San Diego County Code are as follows:

1.     Section 21.301(a) reference is amended to read:

“Medallion” means the unique, pre-numbered decal placed on a taxicab windshield by the Issuing Officer or designee annually, signifying that the “taxicab operator” is authorized to operate the vehicle as a taxicab in the City of Encinitas.

2.     Section 21.301(g) reference is amended to read:

“Taxicab operator’s license” means the annual license issued by the Issuing Officer authorizing a taxicab operator to pick up passengers in the County of San Diego.

3.     Section 21.305(c) reference is amended to read:

If the Issuing Officer is satisfied that a taxicab has passed an inspection required by this section, the Issuing Officer shall issue an annual taxicab permit and he or she or his/her designee shall affix a medallion on the vehicle rear window thereby authorizing the operator to place the taxicab in service for one year or until the expiration of the medallion.

4.     Section 21.305(d) reference is amended to read:

It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Issuing Officer or his/her designee to place a medallion on or remove a medallion from a taxicab. It shall also be unlawful to tamper with or alter a medallion. As designees, law enforcement officers are authorized to remove expired medallions or medallions found on vehicles for which the medallions were not issued.

5.     Section 21.305(e) reference is amended to read:

The absence of a valid medallion on a taxicab operating in the City of Encinitas is a violation of Encinitas Municipal Code and the violator is subject to citation and fine.

6.     Section 21.307(a) reference is amended to read:

It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to pickup or discharge passengers in the City of Encinitas without first obtaining a taxicab driver’s identification card from the Issuing Officer. The Issuing Officer may issue an applicant a temporary identification card for up to 60 days, while an investigation is pending.

7.     Section 21.308 reference is amended to add:

(e) Driving a taxicab in the City of Encinitas with an expired Driver’s Identification Card is a violation of Encinitas Municipal Code and the violator is subject to citation and fine.

8.     Section 21.308 reference is amended to add:

(f) Driving a taxicab in the City of Encinitas without a Driver’s Identification Card is a violation of Encinitas Municipal Code and the violator is subject to citation and fine.

9.     Section 21.311(a) reference is amended to read:

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab business within the City of Encinitas unless the person has in effect insurance coverage issued by a company authorized to transact insurance business in the State of California with coverage for combined single limit of $1,000,000 pursuant to Section 21.311(b). A taxicab operator shall furnish the Issuing Officer and the City with a Certificate of Insurance coverage and a separate endorsement of the City of Encinitas as additional insured. This is a prerequisite to obtaining a taxicab operator’s license. The certificate shall provide that the insurer will notify the Issuing Officer in writing of any policy status change, including cancellation and any cancellation notice shall be sent to the Issuing Officer by registered mail at least 30 days prior to cancellation of the policy. The certificate shall also state:

(1)    The full name, address and phone number of the insurer;

(2)    The full name, address and phone number of the insured as they appear on the taxicab operator permit and on the City taxicab permit application;

(3)    The insurance policy number;

(4)    The type and limits of coverage;

(5)    The specific vehicle(s) insured;

(6)    The effective dates of the certificate; and

(7)    The certificate issuance date.

10.   Section 21.315(h) reference is amended to read:

A taxicab driver shall not operate a taxicab unless he or she has affixed his or her driver’s identification card in a prominent location inside the taxicab, visible to passengers in the passenger compartment. A taxicab driver while working shall display the name and photo identification badge issued to him or her by the Issuing Officer. The driver shall prominently display the badge on the outside front of the driver’s clothing, between the waist and shoulders. A taxicab driver in violation of any provisions of this section shall be subject to citation and fine.

C.    Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.601 relating to Junk Yards and Motor Vehicle Wrecking Yards.

D.    Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.701 relating to Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers.

E.     Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.901 relating to Amusement Devices and Establishments.

F.     Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.1201 relating to Firearm Dealers.

G.    Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.1301 relating to Swap Meets.

H.    Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.2101 relating to Entertainment Establishments.

I.      Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.2201 relating to Public Dances.

J.     Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.2301 relating to Teenage Public Dances.

K.     Title 3, Division 7, commencing with Section 37.400 relating to Bingo.

L.     Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.1051 relating to Regulation of Carnivals.

M.    Title 2, Division 1, commencing with Section 21.1901 relating to Fees. (Ord. 2008-01; Ord. 2011-02)

 

6.08.030 Effective Date.
The operative date of this chapter is July 1, 2011. (Ord. 2011-02)

 

6.08.040 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is the issuing authority for the permits specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.08.050 Regulations.
Each applicant for a permit or license required by this chapter shall submit the application to City Hall.

 

6.08.060 Penalties for Delinquent Payment.
A.     In any case where the applicant has failed for a period of 30 days to file the application and obtain the required permit, there shall be added to and collected with the required fee a penalty equal to 10% of the fee and for each additional month or fraction of a month after the expiration of the 30-day period that the applicant fails to file such application and obtain such permit, there shall be added to and collected with the fee an additional penalty equal to 10% of the fee; provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the fee pursuant to this section be more than 60% of the fee. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this Code or prevent the prosecution for violation of this Code.

B.     The annual fee for renewal, if unpaid, is delinquent on the first day of the second month after the month in which the permit expires and thereafter a penalty equal to 10% of the annual fee shall be added thereto, and shall be collected at the time application for renewal is made.

C.    If the annual fee for renewal and the penalty is not paid the first month after it is due there shall be added to and collected with the annual fee, an additional penalty equal to 10% of the annual fee for each month or fraction of a month during which the annual fee or any penalty continues to remain unpaid; provided, however, in no event shall the total penalty added to the annual fee pursuant to this section be more than 60% of the annual fee. The imposition of, or payment of the penalty imposed by this section, shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this Code or prevent the prosecution for violation of this Code. (Ord. 2017-07)

Chapter 6.10 ADULT BUSINESSES
6.10.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the operations of adult businesses, which tend to have judicially recognized adverse secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, increases in crime in the vicinity of adult businesses; decreases in property values in the vicinity of adult businesses; increases in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their properties when such properties are located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise, and vandalism; and deterioration of neighborhoods. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse secondary effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of adult businesses while at the same time protecting the First Amendment rights of those individuals who desire to own, operate or patronize adult businesses.

It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform operational standards for adult businesses.

 

6.10.020 Definitions.
In addition to any other definitions contained in the Municipal Code, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any current provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall prevail.

“Adult arcade” shall mean a business establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and where coin, card or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled devices, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Such devices shall be referred to as adult arcade devices.

“Adult booth/individual viewing area” shall mean a partitioned or partially enclosed portion of an adult business used for any of the following purposes:

1.     Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where the performances and/or images displayed or presented are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;

2.     Where adult arcade devices are located.

“Adult business” shall mean:

1.     A business establishment or concern that as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as an adult retail store, adult motion picture theater, adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel, adult modeling studio; or

2.     A business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes adult oriented material or sexually oriented merchandise, or which offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by state law.

“Adult cabaret” shall mean a business establishment (whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) that features adult live entertainment.

“Adult hotel/motel” shall mean a hotel or motel (as defined in the Municipal Code) that is used for presenting on a regular and substantial basis images through closed circuit television, cable television, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or other image-producing devices that are distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult live entertainment” shall mean any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which: (1) the performer (including but not limited to topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar performers) exposes to public view, without opaque covering, specified anatomical areas; and/or (2) the performance or physical human body activity depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered.

“Adult modeling studio” shall mean a business establishment which provides for any form of consideration, the services of a live human model, who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, displays specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, filmed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying for such consideration. Adult modeling studio does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the State of California.

“Adult motion picture theater” shall mean a business establishment, with or without a stage or proscenium, where, on a regular and substantial basis and for any form of consideration, material is presented through films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser disks, digital video disks, holograms, virtual reality devices, or similar electronically-generated reproductions that is characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult oriented material” shall mean accessories, paraphernalia, books, magazines, laser disks, compact discs, digital video disks, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes, holograms or electronically generated images or devices including computer software, or any combination thereof that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult oriented material shall include sexually oriented merchandise.

“Adult retail store” shall mean a business establishment having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, adult oriented material.

“Child day care facility” shall mean any child day care facility as defined in Section 1596.750 of the California Health and Safety Code other than family day care homes.

“Establishment of an adult business” shall mean any of the following:

1.     The opening or commencement of any adult business (as defined above) as a new business;

2.     The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business;

3.     The addition of any adult business to any other existing adult business;

4.     The relocation of any adult business; or

5.     Physical changes that expand the square footage of an existing adult business by more than 10%.

“Owner/permit holder” shall mean any of the following: (1) the sole proprietor of an adult business; (2) any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an adult business; (3) the owner of a controlling interest in a corporation that owns and operates an adult business; or (4) the person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the permit holder for an adult business owned and operated by the corporation.

“Performer” shall mean a person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business or any other person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, provides adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business.

“Sexually oriented merchandise” shall mean sexually oriented implements, paraphernalia, or novelty items, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include any of the following:

1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered, and/or simulated to be reasonably anatomically correct, even if completely and opaquely covered:

a.     Human genitals, pubic region;

b.     Buttocks, anus; or

c.     Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

2.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.

“Specified sexual activities” shall mean and include any of the following, irrespective of whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

1.     Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or

2.     Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or

3.     Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; and/or

4.     Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain, or bondage and/or restraints; and/or

5.     Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; and/or

6.     Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast.

 

6.10.030 Adult Business Regulatory Permit Required.
All adult businesses are subject to the adult business regulatory permit requirements of this chapter as well as all other applicable ordinances of the City and laws of the State of California.

A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult business within the City of Encinitas unless the person first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult business regulatory permit as herein required.

Any occurrence of the establishment of an adult business as defined in Section 6.10.020 shall require a new application for an adult business regulatory permit. The adult business regulatory permit shall be subject to the development and operational standards of this chapter and the underlying zone where the facility is located.

B.     The City Planning Official or his/her designee shall grant or deny adult business regulatory permits in accordance with these regulations.

C.    The City Planning Commission shall suspend or revoke adult business regulatory permits in accordance with these regulations.

D.    Permit applicants shall file a written, signed, and verified application on a form provided by the Planning Department. Such application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

1.     If the permit applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.

2.     If the permit applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

3.     If the permit applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process.

4.     A signed and verified statement that the permit applicant, if an individual, or partners, officers, directors, if a partnership or corporation, has not pled guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex or sex-related offense and (a) more than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) more than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) more than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

5.     The permit applicant shall sign the application. All persons who sign the application must also provide names, aliases, addresses, and date of birth.

6.     If the permit applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the permit applicant, the permit applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

7.     A description of the type of adult business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site.

8.     The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

9.     A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be oriented to the north or some other designated street or object and drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

10.   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and entries to the premises of the adult business, also showing the location of the lighting system required by this chapter.

E.     The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. The amount of such fees shall be set by the City Council.

F.     The completeness of an application for an adult business regulatory permit shall be determined by the Planning Official within five working days of its submittal. If the Planning Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, the Planning Official shall immediately notify in writing the permit applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is incomplete. Within five working days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the Planning Official shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the provisions set forth above. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided herein until such time as the application is found to be complete.

G.    The fact that a permit applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the permit applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business regulatory permit.

 

6.10.040 Investigation and Action on Application for Adult Business Regulatory Permit.
A.     Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the Planning Official shall immediately write or stamp the application Received and, in conjunction with City staff, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether an adult business regulatory permit shall be granted. Investigation shall not be grounds for the City to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application, nor is it grounds to extend the time period to conduct a hearing pursuant to this section.

B.     Within 21 days of receipt of the completed application, the investigation shall be completed and the Planning Official shall notice and conduct a public hearing with notice of such hearing to be made pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905.

C.    In reaching a decision, the Planning Official shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence in the California Evidence Code.

D.    The Planning Official shall render a written decision on the application for an adult business regulatory permit within two working days of the public hearing required by this section. The failure of the Planning Official to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval, subject to appeal to the City Council, pursuant to Section 6.10.080. The Planning Official’s decision shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the application, and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Code.

E.     Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this section or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the City of the pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

F.     The Planning Official shall grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

1.     The Planning Official shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2.     If the application is denied, the Planning Official shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial.

3.     If the application is granted, the Planning Official shall attach to the application an adult business regulatory permit.

G.    The Planning Official shall grant the application and issue the adult business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets, or will meet, all of the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter, unless the application is denied based upon one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection I of this section.

H.    If the Planning Official grants the application, the applicant may begin operating the adult business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter. The permit holder shall post the permit conspicuously in the premises of the adult business.

I.      The Planning Official shall deny the application if the applicant fails to establish any of the following:

1.     The adult business complies with the City’s zoning requirements as to its underlying zoning designation.

2.     The adult business complies with the development, operational or performance standards found in this chapter.

3.     The permit applicant is at least 18 years of age.

4.     The required application fees have been paid.

5.     The application complies with Section 6.10.030D3.

J.     A person cannot re-apply for an adult business regulatory permit for a particular location within one year from the date of prior denial.

K.     Any affected person may appeal the decision of the Planning Official in writing within five days in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.10.080.

 

6.10.050 Operating Standards.
A.     Hours of Operation. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or employee of an adult business to allow such adult business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee or performer to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day excepting herefrom an adult hotel/motel.

B.     Exterior Lighting Requirements. All exterior areas, including parking lots, of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.50 foot-candle, maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within 24 hours.

C.    Interior Lighting Requirements. All interior areas of the adult business excepting therefrom adult hotels/motels shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.00 foot-candle, maintained and evenly distributed at floor level. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within 24 hours, excepting herefrom an adult hotel/motel.

D.    Regulation of Adult Booth/Individual Viewing Area.

1.     No adult booth/individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time.

2.     Each adult booth/individual viewing area within the adult business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing the entire interior of the adult booth/individual viewing area from the main aisle. A manager shall be stationed in the main aisle at all times. Further, no one shall maintain any adult booth/individual viewing area in any configuration unless the entire interior wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible from one main aisle. The entire body of any patron in any adult booth/individual viewing area must be visible from the main aisle without the assistance of mirrors or any other device.

3.     No doors are permitted on an adult booth/individual viewing area. No partially or fully enclosed adult booth/individual viewing areas or partially or fully concealed adult booth/individual viewing areas shall be maintained.

4.     No holes or other openings (commonly known as glory holes) shall be permitted between adult booths/individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within 24 hours using pop rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plates.

5.     No beds shall be permitted in an adult booth/individual viewing area.

E.     On-Site Manager—Security Measures. All adult businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least 18 years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. No performer may serve as the manager. The individual(s) designated as the on-site manager shall provide his/her name to the Planning Official to receive all complaints and be given by the owner and/or operator the responsibility and duty to address and immediately resolve all violations taking place on the premises.

All adult businesses shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, state-licensed, uniformed security guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas during all times during which the business is open. If the business employs security guards, they shall provide written confirmation to the Police Chief prior to their employment that the guards are duly registered. No performer may serve as a security guard.

A sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the exterior of the premises between four to six feet from the ground. The sign shall not exceed two feet by three feet and shall at a minimum be one foot by one and a half feet and shall utilize red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size.

F.     Interior of Premises. No exterior door or window on the premises of an adult business shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque coverings at all times.

G.    Signs. All adult businesses shall comply with the following sign requirements, in addition to those specified elsewhere in the Encinitas Municipal Code. Should a conflict exist between the other requirements of the Encinitas Municipal Code and this subsection, the more restrictive shall prevail.

1.     If an adult business does not serve alcohol, it shall post a notice inside the establishment, within 10 feet of every entrance used by customers for access to the establishment, stating that persons below the age of 18 years of age are prohibited from entering onto the premises or within the confines of the adult business. This notice shall be posted on a wall in a place of prominence. The dimensions of the notice shall be no less than six inches by six inches, with a minimum typeface of 25 points. If the adult business serves alcohol, it shall comply with all notice and posting requirements of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Department.

2.     No adult-oriented material shall be displayed in window areas or any area where it would be visible from any location other than within the confines of the adult business.

H.    Regulation of Public Restroom Facilities. If the adult business provides restrooms for patron use, it shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from adult oriented material. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the adult business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall insure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and that the restroom facilities are used only for their intended sanitary purposes. Access to restrooms for patron use shall not require passage through an area used as a dressing area by performers.

I.      Trash. All interior trash cans shall be emptied into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag at least once a day. At least four times a day, the front and rear exteriors of any adult business shall be inspected for trash and debris and any trash and debris found shall be immediately removed and placed into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag.

J.     Adult Live Entertainment—Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult businesses providing adult live entertainment:

1.     No person shall perform adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a permanently fixed stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor.

2.     No performer shall be within 10 feet of a patron while the performer is performing. This 10-foot separation shall be marked by a continuous railing or other physical barrier designed to obstruct any contact between the performer and the patron(s).

3.     No performer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer, while the performer is performing on the premises. In addition, while on the premises, no performer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with a performer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person’s body either before or after any adult live entertainment by such performer. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. And, if necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the establishment.

4.     All employees, except therefrom performers while performing on the fixed stage, while on or about the premises or tenant space, shall wear at a minimum an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas.

5.     If patrons wish to pay or tip performers, payment or tips shall be placed in containers placed at least 10 feet from the stage or other area used by the performers. Patrons shall not throw money to performers, hand money directly to performers, place monies in the performers’ costumes or otherwise place or throw monies on the stage. Patrons shall be advised of this requirement by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size.

6.     The adult business shall provide dressing rooms for performers, that are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers’ use and which the performers shall use. Same gender performers may share a dressing room. Patrons shall not be permitted in dressing rooms.

7.     The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit to the establishment for performers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, which the performers shall use at all times.

8.     The adult business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms that is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers and the patrons must also be seven feet away from the walk aisle. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped accessibility.

9.     Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this subsection.

K.     Adult Motion Picture Theater—Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters:

1.     If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions:

a.     Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area;

b.     Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible from the aisle at all times;

c.     Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area; and

2.     If an adult motion picture theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, child day care facility, public park, school, or religious institution or any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence.

 

6.10.060 Transfer of Adult Businesses or Adult Business Regulatory Permits.
A.     A permit holder shall not operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the application for the permit.

B.     In the event of a transfer of ownership of the adult business or the adult business regulatory permit, the new owner shall be fully informed of the requirements of this Code, including the operational and development standards of this chapter.

C.    In the event of a transfer of the adult business or the adult business regulatory permit, the transferee must provide the Planning Official with the following information within seven days of the transfer:

1.     If the transferee is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.

2.     If the transferee is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

3.     If the transferee is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process.

 

6.10.070 Suspension or Revocation of Adult Business Regulatory Permits.
A.     On determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the Planning Official or his/her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permit holder. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a public hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Encinitas Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permit holder, or shall be delivered to the permit holder personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. Public hearings pursuant to this section shall be noticed in accordance with Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905 and conducted by the Planning Commission. Public hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Planning Commission but, at a minimum shall include the following:

1.     All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel.

2.     The Planning Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

3.     Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the permit holder. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a permit holder shall not be considered delay on the part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on permit suspensions or revocations.

4.     The Planning Commission’s decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 6.10.080.

B.     A permit may be suspended or revoked based on the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permit holder, or an employee, independent contractor, partner, director, or manager of the permit holder:

1.     The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult business fails to comply with all provisions of these regulations and this section relating to adult businesses, including the adult business development and operational standards contained in Section 6.10.050, and all other applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health, and zoning requirements of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

2.     The permit holder has failed to obtain or maintain all required City permits.

3.     The permit holder has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business regulatory permit.

4.     The permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued.

5.     That an individual employed by the adult business (whether classified as an employee or independent contractor) has been convicted of two or more sex-related offenses that occurred in or on the licensed premises within a 12-month period and was an employee of the adult business at the time the offenses were committed.

6.     That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more.

7.     That the transferee/new owner of an adult business or adult business regulatory permit failed to comply with the requirements of Section 6.10.060.

8.     The permit holder, partner, director, or manager has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business; or a permittee has been convicted of violating any of the following state laws on the premises of the adult business:

a.     Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

b.     Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.

c.     Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

d.     The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Section 315, 316, or 318 of the California Penal Code.

e.     Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4.

f.      Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use, possession, or possession for sale of any controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code.

g.     An act or omission in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter if such act or omission is with the knowledge, authorization, or approval of the permit holder or is as a result of the permit holder’s negligent supervision of the employees of the adult facility. This includes the allowance of activities that are or become a public nuisance which includes the disruptive conduct of business patrons whether on or immediately off the premises where such patrons disturb the peace, obstruct traffic, damage property, engage in criminal conduct, violate the law and otherwise impair the free enjoyment of life and property.

C.    After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the Planning Commission finds and determines that there are grounds for suspension or revocation, the Planning Commission shall impose one of the following:

1.     Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; or

2.     Revocation of the permit. The Planning Commission shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the permit holder within five days of the public hearing.

D.    Any affected person may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission in writing within five days in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.10.080.

E.     In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult business regulatory permit to operate an adult business shall not be granted to the permittee within 12 months after the date of such revocation.

 

6.10.080 Appeal Procedures.
A.     After approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, any affected person may appeal the decision to the City Council in writing within five days after the written decision.

B.     Consideration of an appeal of the decision shall be at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905 and which hearing shall occur within 30 days of the filing or initiation of the appeal.

C.    The City Council action on the appeal of the decision shall be by a majority vote of the members present and upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the City Council shall grant or deny the appeal.

The City Council’s decision shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within four working days of the hearing, such written decision to be immediately mailed to the party appealing the Planning Commission’s decision.

D.    In reaching its decision, the City Council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

E.     Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this division or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the City of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

F.     Failure of the City Council to render a decision to grant or deny an appeal of a permit denial within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval of the adult business regulatory permit.

G.    The time for a court challenge to a decision of the City Council is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

H.    Notice of the City Council’s decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

I.      Any applicant or permit holder whose permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

 

6.10.090 Employment of and Services Rendered to Persons Under the Age of 18 Years Prohibited; 21 if Liquor Is Served.
A.     Employees. Employees of an adult business must be at least 18 years of age. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10% or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not at least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, employees of the adult business must be at least 21 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10% or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not 21 years of age, and shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons seeking to contract with, be employed by, or otherwise service the adult business.

B.     Patrons. Patrons of an adult business must be at least 18 years of age. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10% or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, patrons must be at least 21 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10% or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least 21 years of age, and shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons entering the adult business.

C.    X-Rated Movies. The selling, renting and/or displaying of X-rated movies, videotapes, digital video disks (DVDs), compact disks (CDs) and laser disks shall be restricted to persons over 18 years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to the establishment to persons under 18 years of age sells, rents, or displays movies, videos, DVDs, or laser disks that have been rated X or rated NC-17 by the motion picture rating industry (AMPAA), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the movies, videos, DVDs, CDs, and laser disks shall be located in a specific section of the establishment from which persons under the age of 18 shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

6.10.100 Inspections.
Each owner, operator, manager, employee of an adult business or other person in charge of an adult business shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Planning Department, License and Code Services Division and other City departments, to inspect the adult business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the laws and operating standards applicable to adult businesses at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner.

 

6.10.110 Regulations Non-Exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse non-compliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City of Encinitas.

 

6.10.120 Violations.
A.     Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of these provisions regulating adult businesses shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 pursuant to Government Code Sections 36900 and 36901, and any and all other civil remedies including permit revocation. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

B.     The restrictions imposed pursuant to this section constitute a permitting process, and do not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Encinitas Municipal Code, the City does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of this chapter related to sexual conduct or activities.

 

6.10.130 Public Nuisance.
In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation.

 

6.10.140 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part, or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective.

Chapter 6.11 OPERATIONS PERMIT: SPECIAL EVENTS
6.11.010 Purpose and Intent.
The City Council recognizes that special events enhance the City’s lifestyle and provide benefits to area residents, visitors, and businesses through the creation of unique venues for expression, recreations, and entertainment that are not normally provided as a part of governmental services. However, the City Council also recognizes that special events, if unregulated, can have an adverse effect on the public health, safety and welfare due to noise, traffic, safety, abuse of alcohol, possible civil or anti-event demonstrations and/or protestors, and health hazard impacts.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to set forth reasonable regulations by establishing a process for permitting special events within the City. Permits will protect the rights and interests granted to special event permit holders, ensure the health and safety of patrons, prohibit illegal activity from occurring within special event venues, minimize any adverse effects from special events, and ensure the efficient use of public property and City services. It is further intended to create a mechanism for cost recovery to the City for special events without having an adverse effect on those special events that contribute to the community.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, proposed activities shall be subject to Title 30 Zoning Regulations and Coastal Development Requirements. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.020 Definitions.
“Affected parties” means businesses and residents located within 500 feet of the area around the special event that are likely to experience impact from the special event.

“Business registration” means a City of Encinitas issued business registration.

“Citizen participation plan meeting” means a public meeting where notice has been given to occupants within 500 feet of the event/course area at the expense of the event organizer. Applicants are responsible for cost recovery fees for City staff time to attend the public meeting.

“City” means the City of Encinitas.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or authorized designee.

“City staff” means any officer, elected official, employee, or authorized agent of the City of Encinitas.

“Commercial business” means an organization engaged in the trade of goods, services, or both to consumers (e.g., retail, corporation, LLC, or sole proprietorship) whose primary purpose is a for-profit venture.

“Demonstration” means any formation, procession or assembly of 25 or more persons which, for the purposes of expressive activity, is:

1.     To assemble or travel in unison on any street in a manner that does not comply with normal traffic regulations or controls; or

2.     To gather at a public park or other public area. “Event” means a special event or a demonstration.

“Event promoter” means any person who conducts, manages, promotes, organizes, aids or solicits attendance at a special event.

“Expanded polystyrene disposable food service ware” means the same as defined in Chapter 11.27.

“Expressive activity” means conduct, the sole or principal object of which is the means of opinion, views, or ideas and for which no fee or donation is charged or required as a condition of participation in or attendance at such activity. It includes public oratory and distribution of literature.

“First time” or “new special event” means any event held in the City for the first time or any event that was canceled and then brought back.

“Goods” means any wares, personal property, merchandise or any other similar item that is generally sold.

“Issuing authority” means the same as defined in Chapter 6.02.

“Law enforcement” means any law enforcement personnel or agency contracted, allied or employed by the City of Encinitas.

“Major special event” means an event that includes 2,000 or more participants and/or spectators affecting City and/or contracted law enforcement personnel, resources, services, outdoor facilities, traffic circulation, street closures, the community and/or its citizens.

“Minor special event” means an organized recreational activity or event open to the public that includes 25 to 499 participants and/or spectators held on public property affecting City and/or contracted law enforcement personnel, resources, services, outdoor facilities, traffic circulation and the community and/or its citizens. Private minor events with 25 to 499 participants held on public property require a facility use permit.

“Moderate special event” means an event that includes 500 to 1,999 participants and/or spectators or requires a street closure affecting City and/or contracted law enforcement personnel, resources, services, outdoor facilities, traffic circulation, the community and/or its citizens.

“Municipal corporation” means the City of Encinitas and the San Dieguito Water District.

“Nonprofit organization” means a tax-exempt organization under relevant sections of the Internal Revenue Code.

“Nonresident” means an individual or organization residing or based outside the boundaries of the City of Encinitas or any group with more than 50% of its membership residing outside of the City limits.

“Notice to permittee” means the same as defined in Chapter 6.02.

“Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Director” means the director of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department or authorized designee.

“Permit holder” means an individual, group, or organization to which a special event permit has been issued.

“Person” means the same as defined in Chapter 6.02.

“Private party” means an individual, group or organization that excludes participation by the public and is either not-for-profit or for-profit.

“Resident” means an individual or organization residing or based within the boundaries of the City of Encinitas with a US Postal Service Code of 92024 or 92007. Use of a City PO Box mailing address is not considered residency. To be considered an Encinitas resident group more than 50% of the membership must reside within the City limits.

“Sheriff” means the San Diego County Sheriff or his/her authorized designee.

“Sidewalk” means the same as defined in Chapter 14.06.

“Sign or banner” means the same as defined in Chapters 15.10 and 30.04. “Single-use disposable bag” means the same as defined in Chapter 11.26.

“Site appropriate” means the site must be suitable to the use requested and the historical use of the site.

“Sound-amplifying equipment” means the same as defined in Chapter 9.32.

“Special event” means any scheduled or planned event occurring within the City of Encinitas that impacts the normal use of public or private property, or disrupts the normal flow of traffic or access to public property or public right-of-way and which can reasonably be expected to require support by the City and County government and/or personnel. Types of events include celebrations, festivals, fairs, musical gatherings, organized aquatics, sporting or similar events and may include live or amplified music and/or a stage, may include the sale of alcohol requiring an ABC permit and/or associated regulations, and the use of booths or vendors.

“Street” means the same as defined in Chapter 14.06.

“User classifications.” Outdoor facilities shall be available for use by the public for recreational, educational, civic and commercial purposes. Users are classified into groups for the purpose of assessing fees and determining priority of use.

1.     Priority 1—Municipal Corporation: City or City-sponsored events.

2.     Priority 2—Resident: recreational, private party or nonprofit organization.

3.     Priority 3—Resident: private party for profit or commercial business.

4.     Priority 4—Nonresident: private party or nonprofit organization.

5.     Priority 5—Nonresident: commercial business.

“Vendor” means any person who sells or offers to sell goods or provide services within a special event venue.

“Zero Waste” means diverting 85% of event waste from ending up in a landfill. (Ord. 2014-11; Ord. 2018-04; Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.030 Permit Required.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.040 Claim of Exemption.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.050 Fees.
An application fee as defined in Chapter 6.02 will be charged and is payable at the time the initial application is submitted. In addition, event organizers are responsible for full cost recovery for City staff time needed to inspect or provide services, within the staff job description, at a special event. Cost recovery fees are required to be paid 30-days prior to the event date. A canceled event may be refunded for cost recovery fees for services not rendered, when requested within five business days prior to the event date. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.060 Application.
In addition to those of Chapter 6.02, the following application requirements apply:

A.     Major special event applications must be submitted annually to the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department no later than March 15 for events taking place the following calendar year. If March 15 is a nonworking day, the deadline is extended to the following business day. Major special events are subject to date availability and permits may not be issued to events held on the same calendar date as another permitted or likely to be permitted event. Priority of use is outlined in Section 6.11.020 and preference is given to historical events. Major special event application revisions and all supporting documents are required to be submitted at least 90 calendar days before the major special event date.

City Council will review major special event applications the first and second year prior to issuance of a special event permit. Major events that are reoccurring after the first two years are subject to City Council approval if there is a change of venue, change of season, other significant change(s) as determined by staff, marked public complaints, noncompliance with event permit conditions and or requirements, or any reason deemed necessary by the City Manager or designee. City Council may choose to limit the number of major special events held at Moonlight State Beach and in the downtown areas. Permits will be processed and issued by the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department.

B.     Moderate special event applications must be submitted to the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department between 90 days and 12 months prior to the event date. Council- approved major special events will take precedence over moderate special event dates. Permits will be processed and issued by the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department. Moderate special event application revisions and all supporting documents are required to be submitted at least 90 calendar days before the moderate special event date.

C.    Applications for minor special events must be submitted to the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department between 45 days and 12 months prior to the event date. Council-approved major special events will take precedence over minor special event dates. Permits will be processed and issued by the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department. Minor special event application revisions and all supporting documents are required to be submitted at least 45 calendar days before the minor special event date.

D.    Any event where alcohol is served or sold requires an ABC license and must be reviewed, approved, and abide by all Alcohol and Beverage Control (ABC) regulations.

E.     The application for a special event permit shall set forth all of the following information, if applicable:

1.     The name, address, email address and telephone number of the applicant and event organizer and its officers.

2.     The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the headquarters of any organization for which the special event is to be conducted, and proof of the authorized representatives of the organization.

3.     An acknowledgement of financial responsibility for any City fees or costs that may be imposed for the special event by the applicant and any person authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on its behalf.

4.     A description of the nature or purpose of the special event, including a description of activities planned during the special event.

5.     Advance notification if alcohol is to be served or sold and the ability to follow applicable ABC guidelines and regulations.

6.     A statement of fees to be charged to participants of the special event.

7.     Identification of a City business registration or a copy of a document showing proof the applicant is a tax-exempt nonprofit organization.

8.     Proof of insurance required by this chapter.

9.     The date(s), time(s), and location(s) where the special event is to be conducted, including assembly and disbanding.

10.   A site plan including, but not limited to:

a.     Portable structures;

b.     Prefabricated structures;

c.     Site-built structures;

d.     Staging;

e.     Reviewing stand(s);

f.      Elevated platforms;

g.     Temporary pedestrian bridges;

h.     Tents or canopies;

i.      Portable restrooms;

j.      On-site signs;

k.     Assembly or production areas;

l.      Electrical sources and connections;

m.    Fuel storage;

n.     Cooking and open fires;

o.     Water supply;

p.     Alcohol service areas and applicable restrictions or permitting needs as required by ABC;

q.     Run-off containment features;

r.      Waste, recycling, and food diversion containers;

s.     Accessible parking;

t.      Ingress and egress points and routes for able body and disabled persons;

u.     Access points for emergency fire and ambulance equipment;

v.     Emergency medical services area(s);

w.    Any vehicles located in an enclosed area;

x.     Inflatable(s);

y.     Animals and animal rides;

z.     Carnival rides;

aa.   Location to accommodate individuals desiring to express opinions not consistent with the purpose or intent of the event;

bb.   Shuttle lot location(s) and the shuttle drop off and pick up location(s);

cc.   Other similar information that will describe the components of the event.

11.   A temporary sign/banner application as defined in Chapters 15.10 and 30.60.

12.   Traffic control plans (TCP) must be detailed, prepared by a traffic control specialist as defined in EMC Title 14, meet all California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) standards for a major or moderate event and parking management plans for all streets, sidewalks and parking lots that the special event will affect by restricting the public’s normal, typical or customary use thereof.

13.   Approximate event attendance including the number of participants, spectators, event facilitators, crowd managers, animals and vehicles.

14.   Provisions for first aid and emergency medical services.

15.   The number, type and location of sanitation facilities.

16.   A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, or other attention- getting devices to be used in connection with the special event.

17.   Letters of permission from private property owners and approval from other jurisdictions or authorities.

18.   Events impacting resident access must provide an alternate ingress and egress or resident parking plan.

F.     Applications for special events will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis to determine if the requested event is site appropriate. (Ord. 2014-11; Ord. 2018-04; Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.070 Security, Law Enforcement and Other Emergency Services.
A.     If, in the opinion of law enforcement and/or City staff, an activity warrants the presence of law enforcement, fire/emergency medical services, one or more security personnel, or crowd managers, the cost of all services (including planning, meeting attendance and reports) shall be borne by the applicant.

B.     Additional law enforcement protection, fire/emergency medical services, civilian traffic control personnel, crowd managers, private security and volunteer staff may be necessary to ensure traffic control and public safety for a special event. Determination will be based on event size, location, duration, time, date, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections blocked off from use by the public, the need to detour or preempt pedestrian and vehicular travel from the use of public streets and sidewalks, and prior event history and or associated issues or problems. The Sheriff shall provide law enforcement services, if law enforcement protection is deemed necessary.. The cost of law enforcement services will be determined by existing contractual rates as determined by the providing entity.

C.    Security personnel are subject to approval by the City. Security personnel are to be licensed and in uniform. Proof of obtaining the required security personnel must be provided to the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department no later than two weeks prior to the event in the form of a receipt and/or contract from a bonded security agency. If proof is not provided to the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department by the required date, the special event permit may be revoked. If, after proof of security has been provided to the City and the security is not present at the event, the City staff in charge may revoke the special event permit and ask the permit holder to leave the area.

D.    The costs of any event issues requiring a higher level of response by law enforcement due to problems or issues at the event (e.g., riots, civil unrest, disturbances, etc.) will be charged to the event organizer by the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2017-07; Ord. 2018-04; Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.080 Release and Indemnification Requirements.
A.     As defined in Chapter 6.02.

B.     Events with vendors or active participants require a City-approved waiver indemnifying the City. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.090 Insurance Requirements.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.100 Notification.
Public notification for special events may be required to affected parties.

Pre-approval of the event notice and public notification addresses will be provided by the City with the full cost to be borne by the applicant.

First time or new major special events require a Citizen Participation Plan meeting and notice must be given to all occupants within 500 feet of the proposed event area/course. Applicants must plan accordingly and hold the meeting prior to the City Council review of the first time or new major special event. This applies to events that begin as a moderate event and grow to a major event. Applicants are responsible for the full cost of holding the Citizen Participation Plan meeting. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.110 Noise Abatement.
Permit holder must comply with noise abatement as defined in Chapters 9.32 and 30.40. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.120 Animals.
The use of animals at special events is limited under Chapters 8.04 and 9.22. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.130 Cleanup.
If the event is utilizing City streets or facilities (e.g., parks or beaches), the permit holder is responsible for complete cleanup and returning the site or facility to its pre-event condition. A refundable cleanup deposit will be required and due in full prior to the issuance of the permit. Deposit amounts will be determined at the time the application is reviewed by the City staff and will be based on the size, location and type of event. City staff will conduct a pre-event and post-event inspection. If the site or facility has not been left as found, the City will use the deposit (e.g., all or a portion) to pay for any cleanup work necessary to return the area to its original condition. If no additional work is required, the deposit will be returned in full within 30 days from the date the event was held. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.140 Food and Alcohol Regulations.
The City reserves the right to place restrictions on the use of alcoholic beverages in accordance with ABC regulations and requirements, state law and the City Code.

A.     The distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall comply with all applicable laws, as defined in Chapters 9.28 and 9.43. All permit holders will be solely responsible for obtaining all required permits or licenses relating to the distribution and consumption of alcoholic beverages. Evidence of required permits or licenses must be provided to Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department staff two weeks prior to the scheduled event date.

B.     Alcohol is not permitted on any beach facility and is restricted at designated park facilities as defined in Chapter 9.28.

C.    No alcoholic beverage shall be served to any minor person as defined in Chapter 9.42.

D.    Security and/or law enforcement shall be required at all activities and/or events when alcoholic beverages are served. The number of security and/or law enforcement personnel will be determined during the review process. The cost of such service shall be borne by the applicant.

E.     Injuries caused to any person because of alcoholic beverages being consumed by any person on public or private property, or because of alcohol being available on public or private property, shall be the sole responsibility of the permit holder, its sponsor and representatives.

F.     All food served, catered or otherwise, must comply as defined in Chapter 11.04. Caterers and food trucks must furnish proof of liability insurance. (Ord. 2018-04; Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.150 Issuance.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.160 Hearing on Denial or Conditional Approval.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.170 Violations.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.180 Revocation or Emergency Suspension.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.190 Appeal.
As defined in Chapter 6.02. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.200 Interference with Special Events.
It is unlawful for any person to join or participate in a special event or in any other manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct without the consent of the permit holder. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.210 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court or competent jurisdiction, the decision will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.

The City Council declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase contained in it irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases are declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.220 Code of Conduct.
The City of Encinitas encourages a safe and healthy atmosphere by supporting an environment free from: drugs, intimidation or harassment, gambling or solicitation, profanity or abusive language, vandalism or property damage. This code of conduct applies to all event organizers, participants, spectators, visitors, vendors, exhibitors, facility users, organizations, or groups, staff and volunteers in any and all events held on City of Encinitas property or permitted by the City of Encinitas. The event organizer bears the sole responsibility of ensuring the code of conduct is upheld during the event.

Behavior that violates this code of conduct, as determined by the City Manager or designee, is a violation of the terms of the special event permit and permit process and will result in cancellation of the special event and denial of future special event permits. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.230 Zero Waste
The City of Encinitas desires that special events are zero waste events. Events must comply with the Special Event Zero Waste Policy as well as all city, state and federal laws. (Ord. 2020-01)

 

6.11.240 Denial of a Special Event Permit
A.     Denial of a special event by the City Manager or designee include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     There is a violation in the code of conduct.

2.     The application for the permit (including attachments and supporting documents) are not fully completed and executed.

3.     The application for the permit contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation.

4.     The applicant has failed to conduct a previously authorized event in accordance with the law or the terms of a permit or both.

5.     The use or activity would conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by the City and previously scheduled for the same time and place.

6.     A fully executed prior application for the same time or place has been received and a permit has been, or is likely to be granted, authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular site, part thereof, or area of the City.

 

7.     The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations, ordinance or City Council policies.

8.     The applicant has not tendered the required application, indemnification agreement and endorsement(s), insurance certificate(s), or permit fees within the times prescribed.

9.     The applicant has not provided for the services of a required number of law enforcement officers, fire and/or paramedic personnel, lifeguards, private security, civilian traffic controllers, or event volunteers/staff to ensure the safety of the event.

10.   The applicant has not provided adequate sanitation and other required health facilities on or adjacent to any public assembly area.

11.   The applicant has not obtained the approval of any other public agency within whose jurisdiction the special event or portion thereof will occur.

12.   The use or activity would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, other users of the site, or the public.

13.   The special event will require the exclusive use of beach or park areas.

14.   The special event will create the imminent possibility of violent disorderly conduct likely to endanger public health, safety and welfare or to result in property damage.

15.   The special event will require the diversion of a great number of law enforcement officers from their normal duties, thereby preventing reasonable law enforcement protection to the remainder of the City.

16.   The conduct of the special event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2020-01)

Chapter 6.13 SPECIAL OPERATIONS PERMIT: USE OF PUBLIC BEACHES FOR PROFESSIONAL SURF INSTRUCTION
6.13.010 Purpose.
The City Council hereby finds and determines that the unlimited and unregulated use of the beaches in the City by surf instruction establishments interferes with the use and enjoyment of such beaches by the general public and burdens the City’s related maintenance and safety services. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a special operations permit requirement for such establishments to maximize their compatibility with the use of the beaches by the general public and minimize the burden on the City’s related maintenance and safety services.

 

6.13.020 Definitions.
“Professional” shall mean any formal instruction of any nature including but not limited to instruction provided for commercial purposes or any form of consideration such as donations.

“Public beach” shall mean City-owned and/or maintained and operated beaches located within the City of Encinitas and their appurtenances such as access roads, parking lots and shore facilities including:

1.     Grandview Beach (Leucadia State Beach), 1700 Neptune Avenue;

2.     Beacon’s Beach (Leucadia State Beach), 948 Neptune Avenue;

3.     Stone Steps Beach, 350 El Portal;

4.     Moonlight State Beach, 400 B Street;

5.     D Street Viewpoint/Access, 450 D Street; and

6.     Swami’s Beach, 1298 South Coast Highway 101.

“Surf instruction” shall mean any professional instruction in the sport of surfing, wave riding or similar activity including conducting a surf camp, surf school or similar activity.

 

6.13.030 Regulation—Permit Required.
No person shall conduct any surf instruction activities on public beaches without first obtaining a special operations permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.02 and this chapter of the Encinitas Municipal Code. The issuance of permits shall be limited based upon a selection criteria established by the Parks and Recreation Department. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

6.13.040 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is the issuing authority for the Special Operations Permit: Use of Public Beaches for Professional Surf Instruction.

 

6.13.100 Violations—Enforcement and Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable pursuant to Section 1.08.050 of the Encinitas Municipal Code. This chapter is not exclusive, and is not intended to preclude enforcement pursuant to any other applicable law.

Chapter 6.14 SPECIAL OPERATIONS PERMIT: USE OF PUBLIC RECREATIONAL PROPERTY FOR COMMERCIAL OR PROFESSIONAL INSTRUCTION
6.14.010 Purpose.
The City hereby finds and determines that the unlimited and unregulated use of public recreational property in the City by commercial or professional instruction establishments interferes with the use and enjoyment of such facilities by the general public and burdens the City’s related maintenance and safety services.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a special operations permit requirement for such establishments to maximize their compatibility with the use of the public recreational property by the general public and minimize the burden on the City’s related maintenance and safety services. (Ord. 2009-09)

 

6.14.020 Definitions.
“Commercial instruction” shall mean prepared, done, or acting with the sole or chief emphasis on salability, profit or success.

“Professional instruction” shall mean any formal instruction of any nature including but not limited to instruction provided for commercial purposes or any form of consideration such as time or money/donations.

“Public recreational property” shall mean the following City-owned and/or maintained and operated beaches, parks, trails and open space located within the City of Encinitas including all land, water, road improvements, facilities therein and their appurtenances such as access roads, parking lots and shore facilities, including, but not limited to:

1.     Grandview Beach (Leucadia State Beach), 1700 Neptune Avenue;

2.     Beacon’s Beach (Leucadia State Beach), 948 Neptune Avenue;

3.     Stone Steps Beach, 350 El Portal;

4.     Moonlight State Beach, 400 B Street (including existing undeveloped parcels on B Street);

5.     D Street Viewpoint/Access, 450 D Street;

6.     Swami’s Beach, 1298 South Coast Highway 101 (including existing undeveloped parcels south of entrance on South Coast Highway 101);

7.     H Street Viewpoint, 498 H Street;

8.     I Street Viewpoint, 498 I Street;

9.     J Street Viewpoint, 398 J Street;

10.   North El Portal Viewpoint;

11.   Roseta Street Viewpoint;

12.   B Street cul-de-sac west of Fourth Street;

13.   C Street Overlook and cul-de-sac west of Moonlight Lane;

14.   E Street Viewpoint;

15.   Cottonwood Creek Park, 95 North Vulcan Avenue;

16.   Leucadia Roadside Park, 860 North Coast Highway 101;

17.   Orpheus Park, 482 Orpheus Avenue;

18.   Encinitas Viewpoint Park, Cornish Drive & D Street;

19.   Oakcrest Park, 1219 Encinitas Boulevard;

20.   Glenn Park, 2149 Orinda Drive;

21.   Cardiff Sports Park, 1661 Lake Drive;

22.   Wiro Park, 2232 El Camino Del Norte;

23.   Mildred MacPherson Park, 1045 South Vulcan Avenue;

24.   Paul Ecke Sports Park, 278 Saxony Road;

25.   Scott Valley Park, 1602 Willowhaven Road;

26.   Leo Mullen Sports Park, 951 Via Cantebria;

27.   Little Oaks Equestrian Park, 2879 Lone Jack Road;

28.   Hawk View Park, 1309 Blue Heron Drive;

29.   Sun Vista Park, 2011 Avenida La Posta;

30.   Leucadia Oaks Park, 1511 North Vulcan Avenue;

31.   Las Verdes Park, 1390 Paseo de Las Verdes;

32.   Hall Property Community Park Site, west of I-5/south of Santa Fe Drive;

33.   Standard Pacific Park Site, Olympus Avenue/Piraeus;

34.   Indian Head Canyon, Saxony/Quail Hollow Road;

35.   Encinitas Ranch Trails;

36.   Olivenhain Trails;

37.   Village Park Trails and Off-leash Dog Area;

38.   Manchester Preserve Trails;

39.   Barelman Property, Saxony Road/La Costa Avenue; and

40.   Snedeker Property, west side Saxony Road/south La Costa Avenue. (Ord. 2009-09)

 

6.14.030 Regulations—Permit Required.
No person shall operate any commercial or professional instruction for the purpose of operating boot camps, fitness classes, day camps, yoga classes, nature camps, dog training or similar activities on public property without first obtaining a special operations permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.02 and this chapter of the Municipal Code. The issuance of a special operations permit shall be limited based on an evaluation of site availability, suitability and compatibility by the Parks and Recreation Department. (Ord. 2009-09; Ord. 2017-07)

 

6.14.040 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is the issuing authority for the Special Operations Permit: Use of Public Recreational Property for Commercial or Professional Instruction. (Ord. 2009-09)

 

6.14.100 Violations—Enforcement and Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable pursuant to Section 1.08.050 of the Encinitas Municipal Code. This chapter is not exclusive and is not intended to preclude enforcement pursuant to any other applicable law. (Ord. 2009-09)

Chapter 6.15 OPERATIONS PERMIT: SIDEWALK VENDING
6.15.010 Application, Permitting and Regulation.
The City Council will establish by resolution an administrative policy to regulate the application, permitting, and operating requirements of sidewalk vending operations in the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2020-15)

Chapter 6.18 OPERATIONS PERMIT: EMERGENCY TEMPORARY SHELTER EVENT
6.18.010 Definition.
“Emergency temporary shelter event” means a public agency or a state recognized non-profit organization providing emergency temporary shelter for up to 25 individuals at any public facility for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days.

More than one shelter event can be conducted at a location per calendar year, but not to exceed 60 days in one calendar year. (Ord. 2003-19)

 

6.18.020 Permit Required.
The Planning and Building Director may authorize the issuance, without public notice, of an emergency temporary shelter event permit by a written notice of decision subject to specific conditions as deemed necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the community upon finding all of the following:

A.     Emergency conditions warrant an urgent need to provide emergency temporary shelter.

B.     The applicant has demonstrated adequate means and resources to conduct the emergency temporary shelter event in accordance with City specifications.

C.    A social service component will be provided. Guests at the event must be screened by an area social service agency to assure there will be no active drug, alcohol or mental health problems.

D.    The emergency temporary shelter event complies with the specifications of the City Building Official and Fire Marshal.

E.     The emergency temporary shelter event shall not constitute an unreasonable disruption to the community. (Ord. 2003-19)

 

6.18.030 Application for Permit.
Every applicant for an emergency temporary shelter event permit shall file with the Planning and Building Department a written application stating the name and address of the applicant, a detailed description of the premises proposed for such event, and other information the Planning and Building Department may require in order to address the required findings identified in Section 6.18.020. The applicant shall pay the established filing fee, if any, before the application will be accepted for processing. (Ord. 2003-19)

 

6.18.040 Revocation.
The Planning and Building Department may terminate any permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon finding that the permittee has violated any term or condition of permit approval. (Ord. 2003-19)

Chapter 6.24 OPERATIONS PERMIT: PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS
6.24.010 Purpose.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor a public display of fireworks without an Operations Permit: Public Display of Fireworks.

B.     Any person conducting a public display of fireworks within the City in violation of this chapter or the terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 13112.

C.    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks within the City except as authorized in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, proposed activities shall be subject to Zoning Regulations and Coastal Development Requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 87-26; Ord. 94-06)

 

6.24.020 Definitions.
“Dangerous fireworks” includes all fireworks as defined in Section 12505 of the Health and Safety Code or the Uniform Fire Code, Article 78, current edition.

“Display of fireworks” whether on public or private property, shall include any use of fireworks as defined in Health and Safety Code, Section 12505 or the Uniform Fire Codes, Article 78, current edition.

 

6.24.030 Issuing Authority.
The Fire Chief is authorized to issue the Operations Permit: Public Display of Fireworks.

 

6.24.040 Application.
The application shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the proposed date of the public display of fireworks.

 

6.24.050 Regulations.
A.     No public fireworks display shall be permitted unless the occasion involves a public 4th of July celebration or a high school homecoming celebration; would be in the interest of the public welfare and would be conducted on public property and in an area and in a manner that does not threaten the public welfare or safety.

B.     There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the public display of fireworks, the California Administrative Code, Title 19, Chapter 1, Subchapter 6, Article 15, Public Display, in its entirety.

C.    No fireworks display shall be permitted after 10:00 p.m.

D.    No concussion type, non-color shells, for example, “salutes” or “report,” shall be utilized.

E.     The display shall be conducted only by a licensed pyrotechnician.

F.     The permittee shall provide notice of the time and date of the public display by publishing a notice using a one-eighth page advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Notice shall be published no less than five days before the event.

G.    The City Manager may vary the regulations of this chapter for events which are sponsored by the City or are conducted for the benefit of the general public.

H.    The regulations of this chapter shall apply to public display of fireworks rather than other noise regulations contained in this Code.

Chapter 6.25 OPERATIONS PERMIT: NEWSRACK
6.25.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations relating to newsracks located within public rights-of-way.

B.     No person shall place, install, use, or maintain a newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, in, or on a portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of the public right-of-way without having first obtained an Operations Permit: Newsrack, together with any other license or permit required by this Code.

C.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, proposed activities shall be subject to zoning regulations and coastal development requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 92-08; Ord. 94-06)

 

6.25.020 Definition.
“Newsrack” is any device for distributing publications which are coin operated, requires the deposit of money at the newsrack site, or dispenses such publications at no charge. Newsrack does not include a device which displays publications which require payment at some location other than at the site of the device.

 

6.25.030 Issuing Authority.
The City Engineer is the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Newsrack.

 

6.25.040 Issuance of Permit.
A.     The issuing authority shall render a final determination within seven days on an application that is submitted in accordance with this chapter.

B.     A single permit will be prepared for each distributor, but covering all publications sold from newsracks and specifying locations where they are to be installed and maintained.

C.    A permit is not transferable, but upon application may be amended to show different locations. A new distributor needs a new permit.

 

6.25.050 Newsrack Standards.
A.     A newsrack shall not exceed 60 inches in height, 30 inches in width, and 24 inches in depth. A stacked assembly of modular units also shall not exceed 60 inches in height.

B.     If the deposit of money is required the newsrack shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to permit persons using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event they are unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.

C.    The newsrack shall have affixed at a place readily viewable to anyone using the newsrack a telephone number of a working telephone service to be used to report a malfunction, obtain a refund, or to give any notice provided for in this Code.

D.    The design shall not create a danger to the persons using the newsrack in a reasonably foreseeable manner.

E.     No newsrack shall be placed in such a manner that:

1.     It is directly in front of any display window abutting a sidewalk, except near the curb;

2.     It is within 10 feet of the curb return of any intersection;

3.     It is five feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking or designated bus stop;

4.     It is in any location which reduces to less than four feet the clear space for a pedestrian passageway;

5.     A total length of eight feet is exceeded from the first to the last newsrack in a group. One group of newsracks shall be no closer than four feet to another group of newsracks.

F.     Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and shall be kept in good repair at all times. The newsrack shall be kept reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling or cracked paint, be reasonably free of rust and corrosion, have no broken or cracked plastic or glass parts, and have no broken structural parts.

G.    Allowing a newsrack to remain empty for a period of 30 consecutive days establishes a rebuttable presumption of abandonment and provides a basis for revoking a permit.

H.    When placed on public right-of-way, newsracks shall only be located adjacent to property zoned general commercial, light industrial, or visitor serving commercial.

Chapter 6.30 OPERATIONS PERMIT: ALARM SYSTEM USER
6.30.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to subject security alarm systems to reasonable regulation to protect the safety and welfare of the residents of the City from false alarm impact generated by the volume and frequency of nuisance alarms which threaten the safety of the public by causing a serious drain upon limited police services and equipment needed at other locations and which threaten the welfare of the public by causing unnecessary expenditure of tax dollars through responses to nuisance alarms.

B.     Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to alarm systems used by institutions insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or to alarm systems affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles and aircraft, or to municipal, county, state and federal agencies. (Ord. 91-26)

 

6.30.020 Definitions.
“Alarm agent” is any person who is self employed or employed directly or indirectly by an alarm business operator whose duties include, but are not necessarily limited to: selling, maintaining, installing, monitoring, demonstrating or causing others to respond to an alarm in or on any building, place or premises. This definition shall not apply to local safety officers as defined in Government Code Section 20019.4.

“Alarm business” is any business which installs, maintains, alters, or services alarm systems or which responds to such alarm systems. “Alarm business,” however, shall not include a business which merely sells alarm systems from a fixed location or manufactures alarm systems, unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises.

“Alarm business operator” is any person who operates an alarm business.

“Alarm system” is any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on the premises where the system is located or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and when activated emits an audible or silent signal or message and to which City law enforcement personnel are expected to respond. It shall include those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only and supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and otherwise known as a proprietary alarm. Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system are not included in the definition.

“Alarm user” shall mean any person who uses an alarm system within the City.

“Audible alarm” shall mean an alarm system designed to emit an audible sound outside of the protected premises to alert persons of an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act.

“Direct dial device” shall mean a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of the alarm system automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response by the City.

“Nuisance alarm” shall mean the activation of an alarm system due to other than an unauthorized intrusion on the premises or the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act, which the alarm system is designed to detect. Except that: an activation of an alarm system caused by any malfunction of telephone line circuits or violent natural catastrophic conditions does not constitute a nuisance alarm.

 

6.30.030 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Alarm System User. (Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.30.040 Application.
A.     The permit application as required under this section shall state:

1.     The number of alarm systems;

2.     The specific purpose for which the alarm system or systems shall be used;

3.     The alarm user’s name and the telephone number;

4.     The address of the premises in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed;

5.     The alarm business operator or operator’s agent for selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system; and

6.     The name and telephone number of at least two persons who can be reached at any time, day or night and who are authorized to respond to an alarm signal and who can open the premises in which the system is installed.

B.     The existing alarm permit shall become invalid and a new permit is required if one of the following occurs:

1.     There is a change in alarm user, address location of the alarm system, type of alarm permit; or

2.     The existing alarm permit is revoked under the provisions of Section 6.30.070 of this chapter.

The permittee shall file a renewal application within 10 days from the date such change or revocation occurs and the appropriate fee paid.

C.    Fees. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the applicant for an alarm permit shall, at the time of filing the application, pay a fee established by the City Council.

 

6.30.050 Regulations.
A.     No person shall operate an alarm business within the City without registering the operator’s name, and filing with the issuing authority a copy of the operator’s valid state license for conducting the alarm business, as required by the State of California. No fee, application or permit shall be required for such registration.

B.     No person shall act as an alarm agent within the City without registering the person’s name and filing with the issuing authority a copy of the person’s valid state identification card for acting as an alarm agent, as required by the State of California. No fee, application or permit shall be required for such registration.

C.    No person shall use an alarm system within the City without first obtaining an Operations Permit: Alarm System User in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Within 10 days after any changes in information regarding the use of the permitted alarm system, the permittee shall notify the issuing authority of such changes.

E.     If an alarm business operator or agent uses an alarm system to protect its premises, it shall obtain a user permit as required in this chapter.

F.     It shall be unlawful to use an alarm system for purposes other than those listed in the permit.

G.    No alarm system shall be equipped with a direct dial device or any direct line equipment which will automatically dial a telephone number in or signal directly any office of the City’s law enforcement personnel when the alarm system is activated.

H.    An audible alarm system shall terminate the emission of its audible signal within 30 minutes of its being activated, and the City’s law enforcement personnel shall have the right to take such steps as may be necessary and reasonable to disconnect any activated alarm.

I.      It shall be the responsibility of the alarm business operator or the alarm agent, or both, to inform their respective alarm system users of the provisions of this chapter. An alarm business operator may obtain the necessary permits for the alarm user.

J.     For every audible alarm system, the permittee shall furnish to the issuing authority the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or service 24 hours a day.

 

6.30.060 Maintaining a Public Nuisance Alarm.
A.     The cause for activating an alarm system shall be determined by the City’s law enforcement personnel. Upon failure to find any evidence of an illegal entry on the protected premises or the commission or intended commission of an unlawful act, it shall be presumed that a nuisance alarm has occurred.

B.     A nuisance alarm fee shall be paid for each nuisance alarm, message or signal in excess of two activations in any 12-month period in accordance with a fee schedule adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

C.    The City Clerk shall cause a bill to be issued for the amount of the fee with collection pursuant to administrative regulations approved by the City Council pertaining to collection of funds. (Ord. 93-06)

 

6.30.070 Revocation of Permit.
A.     The following shall be grounds for revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

1.     Any false statement or information given by the permittee to the City;

2.     Failure to notify the issuing authority of any changes in the written permit information within the time limits provided; or

3.     Four violations or more of subsection A or B of Section 6.30.060 within any 360-day period.

B.     Following revocation of the permit, the alarm system may not be used until a new permit application is filed and a new permit is issued. A new permit will only be issued upon a determination by the issuing authority that the underlying causes of the revocation have been fully remedied, removed, or otherwise corrected.

 

6.30.100 Confidentiality.
To the extent authorized by state law, the information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter.

Chapter 6.40 OPERATIONS PERMIT: MASSAGE BUSINESS
6.40.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage businesses.

B.     It is unlawful for any person (including without limitation, a corporation, partnership, group or association) to commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage business in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter. (SDCC 66.607.1)

 

6.40.012 Exemption for Individuals.
A.     An exempt individual may commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage business without having an Operations Permit: Massage Business and without complying with the regulations of the other sections of this chapter, so long as all massages that are part of the individual’s massage business:

1.     Are administered under the control and direction of such exempt individual;

2.     Are part of the performance of the exempt individual’s profession or activity; and

3.     Are administered by a person who possesses a valid Operations Permit: Massage Technician or is exempt from such requirement.

B.     Exempt Individuals. So long as the requirements of subsection A of this section are being met, for purposes of this chapter, an “exempted individual” is one who is within one or more of the following categories:

1.     A physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, acupuncturist or physical therapist who is licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their license.

2.     A registered nurse, practical nurse or licensed vocational nurse who is licensed to practice under the laws of the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their license.

3.     A barber or beautician who is licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their license.

4.     Massage technicians licensed by the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code Section 4600.

5.     An holistic health practitioner, while engaging in practices within the scope of their practice. An “holistic health practitioner” is a non-medical health care therapist who uses massage in a therapeutic approach to caring for patrons. The practice of such health care therapist may include other services such as nutritional assistance or counseling as long as all massage activities are directed toward health care. To qualify for this exemption, the person, prior to initiating the conduct of a massage business within the City, must first present themselves to the issuing authority to be registered and provide proof of:

a.     Satisfactory completion of no less than 1,000 hours of instruction in such specialty or therapeutic approach at a school whose curriculum is accredited by the State of California;

b.     Membership in a state or nationally chartered organization devoted to the specialty of therapeutic approach whose members are subject to a code of behavior that is effectively enforced against members by the organization and which requires participation in continuing education;

c.     Fingerprints. The applicant must allow the Sheriff to fingerprint the applicant for the purpose of allowing a search through the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the California State Division of Criminal Identification and Investigation. (Ord. 2009-16)

 

6.40.014 Exemption for Entities.
A.     An exempt entity may commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage business without having an Operations Permit: Massage Business and without complying with the regulations of other sections of this chapter, so long as all massages that are part of the entity’s massage business comply with each of the following requirements:

1.     The individual who gives or administers, or offers to give or administer, the massage, is either exempt from the requirements of this chapter or holds a valid Operations Permit: Massage Technician;

2.     The massage is given or administered under the control and direction of the exempted entity within the scope of the exempted entity’s category;

3.     The massage is given or administered on the site of the exempted entity; and

4.     No person involved in the activities of the entity has been convicted of a crime within five years which would allow the City to deny an application for an Operations Permit: Massage Business.

B.     Exempt Entities. So long as the requirements of subsection A of this section are being met, an entity within one or more of the following categories qualifies as exempt:

1.     An amateur, semiprofessional or professional athletic organization where massages are given to athletes only as part of the entity’s athletic program.

2.     A hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, or other health care facility duly licensed by the State of California where massages are given only within the scope of the entity’s state or federal licenses.

3.     An accredited high school, junior college or college where massages are given to the entity’s students within the scope of the entity’s educational program.

4.     A business which provides health and physical fitness facilities and services and which:

a.     Does not have more than five percent of its floor area designed, set aside, or used as a site for the giving or administering of massages; and

b.     Did not, during the 12 months prior to the then current calendar year, receive more than 20% of its gross revenues from massage related activities.

 

6.40.016 Denial/Revocation of Exempt Status.
A.     Upon giving the individual or entity notice, and an opportunity to be heard, an exemption specified in this chapter may be denied or revoked by the City, if the individual or entity:

1.     Loses the license required to qualify for the exemption; or

2.     There is a criminal conviction that, in accordance with the express provisions of this chapter, authorizes the denial or revocation of an operations permit.

B.     An exemption, which is denied or revoked due to a loss of a qualifying license, shall not be reinstated until one year after the full, unconditioned license is reobtained.

C.    An exemption, which is revoked due to a criminal conviction, shall not be reinstated for a period of 10 years.

D.    An individual or entity whose exemption is denied or revoked is subject to all of the regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 96-13)

 

6.40.020 Definitions.
“Applicant” means, in the case of:

1.     Sole proprietor: the individual.

2.     Partnership: each individual partner.

3.     Association: each individual member.

4.     Corporation: each officer, director, and holder of five percent or more of the corporation’s stock.

“Health Department” means the Department of Environmental Health of the County of San Diego which serves as the City’s Health Department.

“Health Officer” means the Health Officer of the County of San Diego, or his/her designees, that serves as the City’s Health Officer.

“Massage” means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body: (1) with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; and (2) with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations.

“Massage business” means a commercial activity involving, in whole or in part, the recurring giving or administering of massages. A massage business may involve, among other things:

1.     A “massage establishment” which means a fixed location at which a massage business engages in or carries on a commercial activity involving, in whole or in part, the recurring giving or administering of massages on the premises.

2.     “Off-premises massage service” which means the commercial activity of giving or administering massages other than at a massage establishment.

“Massage business employee” means any person who, as an independent contractor or employee or agent, is involved in providing services to the patrons of the massage business.

“Massage business operator” means any person (including without limitation, a corporation, partnership, group or association) who commences, conducts, owns, manages, is in charge of, participates in, or sponsors a massage business doing business within the City.

“Massage technician” means any individual who, for commercial purposes, gives or administers, or offers to give or administer, a massage to another individual.

“Patron” means an individual who is seeking or receiving a massage.

“Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, or work of massage, which school or institution has been approved pursuant to the California Education Code, and which requires a resident course of study of not less than 250 hours to be given in not less than six calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or a certificate of graduation. A school offering a correspondence course, but not requiring attendance, is not a “recognized school of massage.”

“Sheriff” means the Sheriff of the County of San Diego which serves as the City’s law enforcement agency.

“Specified anatomical areas” means pubic region, human genitals, perineum, anal region and the area of the female breast that includes the areola and the nipple.

 

6.40.030 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Massage Business. (Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.40.040 Application.
A.     An application shall be filed with the issuing authority no less than 45 days prior to the proposed date for the commencement of the massage business.

B.     If, during the processing of the application, there is any change in information contained in the application, the applicant shall notify the issuing authority, in writing, within two days of such change.

 

6.40.042 Contents of Application.
The application for an Operations Permit: Massage Business shall set forth the exact nature of the massage services to be offered, the proposed place of business, the proposed massage establishment if any, and the name and address of each applicant. In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall furnish the following information:

A.     The two previous addresses of the applicant immediately prior to the present address of the applicant.

B.     Written proof satisfactory to the Sheriff that the applicant is over the age of 18 years.

C.    Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair.

D.    Four portrait photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches.

E.     Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.

F.     The business license or permit history of the applicant: whether such person, in previously operating in this or another county, city or state, under license or permit, has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation.

G.    Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction and the circumstances surrounding the crime for which the person was convicted.

H.    Such other identification and information reasonably necessary for the City to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in this section.

I.      The Sheriff may take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, and may confirm the height and weight of the applicant.

J.     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of Incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to corporate applicant apply.

 

6.40.044 Processing an Application.
Upon receipt of the application, the issuing authority shall collect the authorized processing fee. The issuing authority shall retain one photograph of the applicant to be attached to the permit. Then, the issuing authority shall deliver a copy of the application to the following:

A.     To the Health Department to conduct an inspection of the premises of any proposed massage establishment and report on compliance with health related regulations.

B.     To the Planning Department:

1.     To determine the proposed activity’s conformance to the City’s land use regulations; and

2.     To conduct an inspection of the premises of any proposed massage establishment and report on compliance with the facilities requirements of this chapter and the Code.

C.    To the Sheriff’s Department to conduct a review and background check and report on the applicant’s suitability under this chapter. The issuing authority shall send one photograph of the permittee to the Sheriff.

 

6.40.046 Fees.
A.     The City Council, by resolution, shall establish application fees to cover the cost of processing applications and conducting pre-issuance inspections and investigations; and permit issuance fees for post-issuance inspections and the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The amount of the fees shall include the charges fixed by the Health Department and Sheriff’s Department for providing services to the City in the administration of this chapter.

 

6.40.048 Issuing of Operations Permit—Massage Business.
A.     The Operations Permit: Massage Business shall:

1.     Identify the permittee;

2.     Identify the place of business;

3.     Identify the massage establishment, if any, and state:

a.     The maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages,

b.     Whether the operations permit allows male and female patrons to be served simultaneously,

c.     The number of employees needed to serve the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, and

d.     Whether the operations permit allows for male and female employees to be on premises simultaneously;

4.     Specifically permit off-premises massage service, if appropriate;

5.     Impose conditions that are reasonably necessary to the business’s compliance with the regulations of this Code;

6.     Specify a permit expiration date, one year from the date of issuance; and

7.     Expressly state that while the Operations Permit: Massage Business authorizes the business to be conducted, each person who gives or administers a massage as part of that business is required to have an Operations Permit: Massage Technician.

B.     An Operations Permit: Massage Business shall not be issued until the issuing authority has been notified in writing by the Health Department, the Sheriff, and the Planning Department that the applicant has fulfilled the requirements of this title.

 

6.40.050 Denial of Application—Revocation of Permit.
A.     In addition to the other standards stated in this chapter and title, the issuing authority may deny the application for a permit or revoke an issued permit if it is found that:

1.     Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, the applicant, or when the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or other entity any of its officers, directors, holders of five percent or more of the corporation’s stock or partners has been, or during the term of an issued permit is:

a.     Adjudged to be a mentally disordered sex offender with a duty to register with the Sheriff or Chief of Police under Section 290 of the Penal Code,

b.     Convicted of a crime related to the conduct of a massage business or which is not consistent with satisfying the obligation of creating and maintaining a safe and healthy environment for administering massages;

2.     In applying for the permit, the applicant provided false or materially misleading information or concealed information relevant to the City’s decision to issue the permit; or

3.     The applicant or permittee is not in compliance with the regulations of this Code.

B.     An application for a permit may be denied if there is a criminal charge pending against the applicant, unless the applicant has been previously operating a massage business in accordance with a permit issued under this chapter and is applying for a subsequent permit to continue operating such business. (Ord. 96-13)

 

6.40.060 General Business Regulations.
It is unlawful for any massage business operator to be in violation of one or more of the following regulations:

A.     The massage business operator shall be in possession of and in full compliance with a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business.

B.     The massage business operator shall not allow the massage business or an employee or agent of the business to violate any provision of this Code.

C.    Within two business days of employing or terminating the employment of a person as a massage technician, the massage business operator shall report to the issuing authority, in writing, the name and address of the person.

D.    The massage business operator shall not involve a massage establishment in the business unless the massage establishment is identified in a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business and the massage establishment is in full compliance with the regulations contained in this Code.

E.     In the massage business, the massage business operator shall not employ or allow a person to give or administer a massage unless that person is in possession of a valid, unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Technician.

F.     The massage business operator shall make available for inspection by a City officer, on demand:

1.     The permit allowing the massage business and designating the massage establishment, if any; and

2.     The permit of each and every massage technician employed or working in the business.

G.    The massage business operator shall prepare or cause to be prepared a concurrent, written record of each massage given or administered in the massage business, to include, without limitation:

1.     The first and last name and the address of each patron;

2.     The date and hour when the massage was given or administered;

3.     The address of the premises where the massage was given or administered;

4.     The name of the person administering the massage;

5.     The type of massage given or administered; and

6.     The charge imposed for the service.

The massage business operator shall maintain such records for a period of no less than two years from the date of the entry; and shall make these records available for inspection, on demand, by City officials charged with enforcement of this chapter. The City shall keep the furnished information confidential for use only in enforcement. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such records is unlawful. It is unlawful to place false information into the records required to be kept by this subsection.

H.    It is unlawful for a massage business operator to operate a massage business under any name or designation not specified in the Operations Permit: Massage Business.

I.      It is unlawful for a massage business operator to allow any person to massage, or intentionally touch the specified anatomical areas of another person.

 

6.40.070 Massage Establishment Regulations.
It is unlawful for any person (including without limitation, a corporation, partnership, group or association) to commence, conduct, own, manage, operate, be in charge of, participate in, or sponsor a massage establishment which is not in full compliance with the following regulations:

A.     Permit.

1.     A massage business operator shall only operate a massage establishment that is identified in, and in full compliance with, the terms of a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business held by the massage business operator.

2.     No massage establishment shall be open for business without at least one massage technician holding a current, unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Technician being on the premises.

B.     Establishment Not a School. A massage establishment shall not be operated as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage.

C.    Alcohol or Drugs.

1.     No massage business operator shall permit a person to be or remain in any part of a massage establishment while such person is in the possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug, except pursuant to a doctor’s prescription.

2.     It is unlawful for any person to be or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in the possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug, except pursuant to a doctor’s prescription.

D.    Access to Establishment.

1.     Each entrance to the massage establishment, regularly used by the public for ingress or egress to such establishment, shall remain unlocked during business hours.

2.     The massage business operator shall allow City officials to enter the massage establishment from time to time for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with the applicable regulations, laws and the provisions of this chapter and Code.

E.     Facilities to Serve Patrons. Based upon the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can simultaneously render on-premises massages, there shall be:

1.     One or more dressing rooms for the exclusive use of patrons with sufficient capacity to serve the maximum number of patrons.

2.     A minimum of one separate locker available for each patron, capable of being locked by the patron, with sufficient size and strength to protect the clothing and valuables of the patron.

3.     A minimum of one shower or tub for each six patrons, or portion thereof.

4.     For every six patrons, or portion thereof: one toilet and one wash basin located together, within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to giving or administering the massage.

a.     The operator must control the toilet area to insure that it is not accessible by both sexual genders at the same time.

b.     The provision of each required wash basin shall include, at all times: (1) hot and cold running water provided through a mixing faucet; (2) hand washing soap or detergent immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser; and (3) sanitary towels immediately available in a permanent, wall mounted dispenser.

5.     A separate massage room for each patron.

6.     In those establishments where steam room or sauna baths are provided, if the Operations Permit allows male and female patrons to be served simultaneously, each steam room and sauna room shall be posted and directly controlled to insure that neither is accessible by both sexual genders at the same time.

F.     Facilities for Employees. Toilets, wash basins, steam rooms and sauna rooms shall be controlled to insure that no business patron is using a facility simultaneously with an owner, operator, employee, agent or contractor of the business.

G.    Lighting.

1.     At a minimum, lighting shall be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electric Code.

2.     During the operation of the massage business, a light level of no less than five foot candles shall be maintained at every point within each room or enclosure where massage services are given or administered.

3.     At least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure of the establishment capable of being occupied by a person.

H.    Maintenance.

1.     All walls, ceilings, floors and facilities for the establishment shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

2.     At least twice each day that the establishment is in operation, wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms, shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department.

3.     After each use, before the next use, showers and bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department.

4.     At least twice each day that the establishment is in operation, the entire premises shall be cleaned with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department.

5.     The massage business operator shall prepare or cause to be prepared a written record of the cleaning and disinfecting, using a form which has first been approved by the issuing authority. Entries shall be made into the record within five minutes of the completion of the cleaning or disinfecting event being recorded.

The massage business operator shall maintain such records for a period of no less than one year from the date of the entry; and shall make these records available for inspection, on demand, by City officials charged with enforcement of this chapter. The City shall keep the furnished information confidential for use only in enforcement. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such records is unlawful. It is unlawful to place false information into the records required to be kept by this subsection.

I.      Massage Service Area.

1.     No massage service shall be rendered within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is, at that point in time, capable of being shut off by a locked door.

2.     Surfaces upon which massage service is rendered shall be covered in a workmanlike manner with durable washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the Health Department as being safe for public use.

3.     No person other than the patron receiving a massage and a massage technician who possesses a current and unrevoked permit, shall be within a room wherein a massage is being given.

4.     Each wall facing a massage service area shall be colored so as to provide a light reflectance value of no less than 70%.

J.     Rooms Containing Steam Room, Tub, Shower, or Toilet. In rooms containing a steam room, tub, shower, or toilet:

1.     A waterproof floor covering shall be provided which extends up the walls at least six inches and shall be covered at the floor wall juncture with at least a 3/8 inch radius; and

2.     Walls shall be: (a) smooth; (b) waterproof; and (c) colored so as to provide a light reflectance value of no less than 70%.

K.     Signs.

1.     At the main entrance of the massage establishment, in compliance with the sign regulations of this Code, a recognizable and legible sign shall be posted which identifies the premises as a massage establishment.

2.     Within the massage establishment, in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises, the massage business operator shall post and at all times maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services. The services shall be described in readily understandable language.

L.     Towels.

1.     Based upon the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be, at all times of operation, five towels for each patron, available for the personal use of the patron. Such towels shall be clean, freshly laundered and disinfected.

2.     Upon request of the patron, the patron shall be provided with clean, sanitary, and disinfected towels and linen or other covering for the surface upon which the massage is given.

3.     Based upon the number of employees required to serve the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be, at all times of operation, five towels for each employee, available for the personal and exclusive use of the employee. Such towels shall be clean, freshly laundered and disinfected.

4.     Towels shall not be reused without first having been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be reused.

5.     Concurrent or consecutive use of a towel by two or more persons, without laundering and disinfecting between use, is prohibited.

M.    Linen or Other Coverings.

1.     Based upon one surface for rendering massage service to each patron for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be, at all times of operation, three sets of linen/other coverings for each such surface, available for use. Such items shall be clean and freshly laundered.

2.     Linen/other coverings shall not be reused without first having been laundered and disinfected. Disposable coverings shall not be reused.

3.     Heavy white paper may be used as “other coverings” provided that such paper is used only once and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle.

N.    Storage.

1.     Closed cabinets shall be provided with sufficient capacity to store all required clean linens, towels and coverings.

2.     All required clean linens, towels and coverings shall be stored in closed cabinets.

3.     Closed receptacles shall be provided with sufficient capacity to store used towels, linens and other coverings.

4.     All used towels, linens and other coverings on the premises shall be stored in closed receptacles.

O.    Ventilation. In addition to providing the ventilation required by the Uniform Building Code, to allow for adequate ventilation in cubicles, rooms and areas provided for patron’s use, which are not serviced directly by required window or mechanical systems of ventilation, partitions within the massage establishment shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed, at any point, 75% of the floor to ceiling height at the point of measurement.

P.     Employee Clothing.

1.     During business hours, each massage establishment employee on the premises shall, when located in an area used by the patrons or which can be viewed by patrons, be clothed so as to be fully covered from a point not to exceed four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck, excluding the arms. Except, shorts may be worn so long as the shorts extend down the leg a minimum of three inches from the crotch and the body above that point is fully covered to the base of the neck, excluding the arms.

2.     The covering, which includes trousers, pants or shorts, must be an opaque material and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

3.     During business hours, each massage establishment employee on the premises shall, when located in an area used by the patrons or which can be viewed by patrons, be clothed so that the employee’s specified anatomical areas are covered from view.

Q.    Instruments. Within the massage establishment:

1.     There shall be available a sufficient quantity of disinfecting agents and equipment, approved by the Health Department, for disinfecting instruments used in giving or administering a massage.

2.     No instrument shall be used in giving or administering a massage unless the instrument is first disinfected using methods, disinfecting agents and equipment approved by the Health Department.

R.    Control of Services. Within the massage establishment, the massage business operator shall not allow any person:

1.     To offer to perform, or perform any service other than those posted in accordance with this chapter;

2.     To give or administer, or offer to give or administer, a massage unless the person is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Technician; or

3.     To give or administer, or offer to give or administer, a massage in violation of one or more of the regulations of this title.

 

6.40.080 Off-Premises Regulations.
It is unlawful for a massage business operator to provide, or offer to provide an off-premises massage service unless:

A.     The massage technician is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Technician;

B.     The massage technician is working as part of a massage business which is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business;

C.    The massage is offered to be given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this title;

D.    The massage is given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this title; and

E.     Before the massage is given or administered, the massage technician presents to the patron a written document which lists the services available and the cost of such services. The services shall be described in readily understandable language.

Chapter 6.41 OPERATIONS PERMIT: MASSAGE TECHNICIAN
6.41.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage technicians.

B.     It is unlawful for any individual to give or administer, or offer to give or administer, a massage in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

 

6.41.012 Exemption for Individuals.
A.     An exempt individual may personally give or administer, or personally offer to give or administer, a massage without having an Operations Permit: Massage Technician and without complying with the regulations of the other sections of this chapter, so long as all massages that are part of the individual’s massage business are given or administered while engaging in practices within the scope of the exempted individual’s state license or holistic health practice.

B.     Exempt Individuals. So long as the requirements of subsection A of this section are being met, for purposes of this chapter, an “exempted individual” is one who is within one or more of the following categories:

1.     A physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, acupuncturist or physical therapist who is licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their license.

2.     A registered nurse, practical nurse or licensed vocational nurse who is licensed to practice under the laws of the State of California, while engaging in practices within the scope of their license.

3.     A barber or beautician who is licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their license.

4.     Massage technicians licensed by the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code Section 4600.

5.     Holistic health practitioners, while engaging in practices within the scope of their practice. A “holistic health practitioner” is a nonmedical health care therapist who uses massage in a therapeutic approach to caring for clients. The practice of such health care therapist may include other services such as nutritional assistance or counseling as long as all massage activities are directed toward health care. To qualify for this exemption, the person, prior to initiating the conduct of a massage business within the City, must first present themselves to the issuing authority to be registered and provide proof of:

a.     Satisfactory completion of no less than 1,000 hours of instruction in such specialty or therapeutic approach at a school whose curriculum is accredited by the State of California;

b.     Membership in a state or nationally chartered organization devoted to the specialty of therapeutic approach whose members are subject to a code of behavior that is effectively enforced against members by the organization and which requires participation in continuing education;

c.     Fingerprints. The applicant must allow the Sheriff to fingerprint the applicant for the purpose of allowing a search through the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the California State Division of Criminal Identification and Investigation;

d.     In addition to the above requirements, it is required that all holistic health practitioners submit annually, to the City of Encinitas, proof of continued membership in a state or nationally chartered organization as stated in Section 6.41.010B. (Ord. 2001-06; Ord. 2009-16)

 

6.41.020 Definitions.
The definitions used in administering Chapter 6.40, Operations Permit: Massage Business, of this Code are applicable to the administration of this chapter.

 

6.41.030 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Massage Technician. (Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.41.040 Application.
A.     An application shall be filed with the issuing authority no less than 45 days prior to the proposed date for the commencement of the giving or administering of massages.

B.     If, during the processing of the application, there is any change in information contained in the application, the applicant shall notify the issuing authority, in writing, within 10 working days of such change. (Ord. 2001-06)

 

6.41.042 Contents of Application.
The applicant for an Operations Permit: Massage Technician shall furnish the following information:

A.     Name, residence address and telephone number.

B.     The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the inclusive dates of residence at each.

C.    Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any.

D.    Applicant’s sex, weight, height, color of hair and eyes.

E.     Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.

F.     Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.

G.    Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If the applicant has been so convicted, a statement giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction, and the circumstances surrounding the crime for which convicted. (See Section 6.41.050.)

H.    The business license or permit history of the applicant; whether the applicant, in previously operating in this or another county, city or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit suspended or revoked, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such suspension or revocation.

I.      A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the State of California stating that the applicant has been examined and found free of any contagious or communicable disease. The examination must be conducted and the certificate executed within 20 days immediately preceding the submission of the certificate to the City.

J.     Four portrait photographs, at least two inches by two inches, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of application.

K.     The name and address of the massage establishment, if any, at which the applicant expects to be employed. (Ord. 2001-06)

 

6.41.044 Processing an Application.
Upon receipt of the application, the issuing authority shall collect the authorized processing fee. The issuing authority shall retain one photograph of the applicant to be attached to the permit. Then, the issuing authority shall deliver a copy of the application to the following:

A.     To the Health Department to coordinate the applicant’s taking of examinations, as required.

B.     To the Sheriff’s Department to conduct a review and background check and report on the applicant’s suitability under this chapter. The issuing authority shall send one photograph of the applicant to the Sheriff.

C.    Such other identification and information as the Sheriff may require in order to discover the truth of the matters presented by the applicant.

D.    Fingerprints. The applicant must allow the Sheriff to fingerprint the applicant for the purpose of allowing a search through the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the California State Division of Criminal Identification and Investigation. (Ord. 2001-06)

 

6.41.046 Fees.
A.     The City Council, by resolution, shall establish application fees to cover the cost of processing applications and conducting pre-issuance inspections, investigations and examinations; and permit issuance fees for post-issuance inspections and the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The amount of the fees shall include the charges fixed by the Health Department and Sheriff’s Department for providing services to the City in the administration of this chapter.

 

6.41.047 Qualifying Requirements.
In order to be entitled to the issuance of an Operations Permit: Massage Technician, the applicant must satisfy the following requirements:

A.     Ability to Massage. The applicant must present:

1.     A diploma or certificate of graduation from a state-approved school teaching a massage specialty and a therapeutic approach in caring for clients and in which the applicant has satisfactorily completed 500 hours of instruction; or

2.     Evidence of lawful employment as a massage technician for no less than 1,200 hours; and

3.     Evidence of passing a qualified written examination prepared by the Health Department and administered by the Sheriff establishing competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the practice of massage.

B.     Basic Knowledge. The applicant must pass an examination prepared and conducted by the Health Department wherein the applicant shall be required to demonstrate a basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene and manual and mechanical massage. These examinations shall be conducted at regular intervals. The Health Officer shall advise the City of the results of such examination. (Ord. 2001-06)

 

6.41.048 Issuing of Operations Permit: Massage Technician.
A.     The Operations Permit: Massage Technician shall:

1.     Identify the permittee;

2.     Identify the massage business for which the permittee will work;

3.     Identify the massage establishment, if any;

4.     Specifically permit off-premises massage service, if appropriate;

5.     Impose conditions that are reasonably necessary to the massage technician’s compliance with the regulations of this Code;

6.     Specify a permit expiration date, one year from the date of issuance;

7.     Expressly state that while the Operations Permit: Massage Technician authorizes the person to give or administer massages, each person who gives or administers a massage must be part of a massage business which possesses and is in full compliance with the terms of a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business;

8.     Have affixed to the permit a photograph of the permittee; and

9.     If appropriate, expressly note that the permittee is in a trainee status.

B.     An Operations Permit: Massage Technician shall not be issued until the issuing authority has been notified in writing by the Health Department and the Sheriff that the applicant has fulfilled the requirements of this title.

C.    Unless otherwise specified, any license or permit issued under this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed by filing a renewal application not less than 40 days prior to the expiration date. (Ord. 2001-06)

 

6.41.050 Denial of Application—Revocation of Permit.
A.     In addition to the other standards stated in this chapter and title, the issuing authority may deny the application for a permit or revoke an issued permit if it is found that:

1.     Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, the applicant has been, or during the term of an issued permit is:

a.     Adjudged to be a mentally disordered sex offender with a duty to register with the Sheriff or Chief of Police under Section 290 of the Penal Code; or

b.     Convicted of a violation of California Penal Code Section 266(h) (Pimping), 266(i) (Pandering), 314 (Indecent Exposure), 315 (Keeping or Residing in a House of Ill Fame), 316 (Keeping a Disorderly House Disturbing the Peace), 318 (Prevailing upon a Person to Visit Place for Gambling or Prostitution), 647(a) (Soliciting or Engaging in Lewd or Dissolute Conduct in a Public Place), 647(b) (Soliciting or Engaging in Prostitution), or 653.22 (Loitering with Intent to Commit Prostitution) of the Penal Code, or convicted in another state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or

c.     Any offense described in California Penal Code, Part One, Title 9, Chapters 7.5, Section 311 (Obscene Matter) and 7.6, Section 313 (Harmful Matter); or

d.     Any offense described in California Penal Code, Part One, Title 8, Chapter 4, Section 211 (Robbery), Title 13, Chapter 2, Section 459 (Burglary); Chapter 2, Section 487 (Grand Theft) and Chapter 2, Section 484 (Larceny [Theft]); or

e.     Any drug related felony convictions as identified in Sections 11054 and 11055 of the Health and Safety Code; or

f.      Has been convicted of a charge of violating any lesser included or lesser related offense, including California Penal Code Section 415, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, an original charge of any of the offenses listed in Section 6.41.050A1a through e;

g.     Any pending criminal charges listed in paragraphs 1a through f of this subsection A, upon conviction, subjects the license to denial or revocation.

h.     Shown, by a preponderance of the evidence, to have violated the elements of one or more of the crimes listed in the previous paragraphs 1a through g of this subsection A.

2.     In applying for the permit, the applicant provided false or materially misleading information or concealed information relevant to the City’s decision to issue the permit.

3.     The applicant or permittee is not in compliance with the regulations of this Code.

4.     Prior convictions for other offenses will be evaluated on a case by case basis and may be taken into consideration as a component of the denial.

B.     An application for a permit may be denied if there is a criminal charge pursuant to this section pending against the applicant, unless the applicant has been previously operating as a massage technician in accordance with a permit issued under this chapter and is applying for a subsequent permit to continue such operation.

C.    If an application is denied, the applicant shall not reapply for an operations permit under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of denial/revocation. (Ord. 2001-06)

 

6.41.080 Giving/Administering Massage Regulations.
A.     It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer, for commercial purposes, a massage unless such massage technician is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Technician.

B.     It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer, for commercial purposes, a massage unless such massage technician:

1.     Is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business; or

2.     Is a massage business employee of a person who is either: (a) in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business; or (b) is exempt from such requirement.

C.    It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer a massage unless the patron’s specified anatomical areas are fully covered.

D.    Technician’s Clothing. It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer a massage unless the technician is clothed so as to be fully covered from a point not to exceed four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck, excluding the arms. Except, shorts may be worn so long as the shorts extend down the leg a minimum of three inches from the crotch and the body above that point is fully covered to the base of the neck, excluding the arms. The covering, which includes trousers, pants or shorts, will be an opaque material and will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

E.     It is unlawful for a massage technician, while performing any task or service associated with the business of massage, to intentionally touch the specified anatomical areas of another person.

F.     Instruments.

1.     It is unlawful for a massage technician to commence the giving or administering of a massage unless there is, at the location of the massage, adequate equipment and agents, approved by the Health Department, for sterilizing and disinfecting any instruments to be used in giving or administering a massage.

2.     It is unlawful for a massage technician to use an instrument in giving or administering a massage unless the instrument is first sterilized and disinfected using sterilizing methods, disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment approved by the Health Department.

G.    Posted Massage Services. It is unlawful for a massage technician to give or administer, or offer to give or administer, a massage service in a massage establishment when the service is not posted as required by this chapter.

 

6.41.090 Technician Trainee.
A.     A individual may apply for a conditional Operations Permit: Massage Technician to operate as a technician trainee by submitting the following:

1.     Student Status. Proof from a recognized school of massage that the trainee applicant is currently enrolled, and has completed at least 25 hours of instruction in massage;

2.     Supervision. A letter signed by the massage business operator of a lawful massage establishment stating the immediate intent to employ the trainee applicant to do massage as a trainee working under the direct supervision and control of a lawful massage technician; and

3.     The other application information requirements imposed in this chapter.

B.     To obtain a permit under this section, the trainee applicant is not required to meet the qualifying requirements specified in subsections A and B of Section 6.41.047.

C.    The trainee permit shall allow the trainee to give or administer a massage subject to the following:

1.     The massage shall be given or administered only in a massage establishment identified in a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business;

2.     The massage shall be given or administered only under the supervision and direction of a massage technician who is in possession of a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Technician; and

3.     The massage shall be given or administered only in full compliance with the regulations of this chapter imposed on massages given or administered by a massage technician.

D.    The trainee permit shall expire nine months from the date of issuance and shall not be renewed unless good cause is shown by the applicant for such renewal.

E.     A massage technician shall not be designated as the supervisor of more than two trainees at any one time.

 

6.41.100 Off-Premises Regulations.
It is unlawful for a massage technician to provide, or offer to provide, an off-premises massage unless:

A.     The massage technician is working as part of a massage business which is in possession of, and is in full compliance with the terms of, a validly issued, unexpired, and unrevoked Operations Permit: Massage Business;

B.     The massage is offered to be given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this title;

C.    The massage is given or administered in full compliance with the regulations of this title; and

D.    Before the massage is given or administered, the massage technician presents to the patron a written document which lists the services available and the cost of such services. The services shall be described in readily understandable language.

 

6.41.110 Grandfather Clause.
All persons holding a valid massage technician permit, or an off-premises massage technician permit have four years from July 1, 2001, to meet the educational requirements contained in Section 6.41.047. Such persons must provide proof of compliance with the City Clerk by July 1, 2005, or their permit will be automatically revoked. (Ord. 2001-06)

 

6.41.120 Appeal Process.
If, after investigation, the issuing officer determines that the application should be denied, or the issued permit revoked, the issuing officer shall prepare a notice of denial or revocation of the application setting forth the reasons for such denial or revocation and an explanation of the process for appealing the decision. Such notice shall be sent by registered mail to the applicant’s last address provided in the application.

Any person who has had an application for a Sheriff-regulated license or permit denied or revoked may request, in writing, a hearing from the issuing officer within 10 days after receiving the denial or revocation. The request for appeal must briefly explain the reasons which such a denial or revocation is not proper.

Upon receipt of such written request for appeal, the City Manager shall assign the appeal to a hearing officer and within 10 days, the hearing officer will set a hearing not more than 30 days from time of assignment. At such hearing the issuing officer and the appellant and/or their representative may present evidence relevant to the denial or revocation. The hearing officer shall notify the appellant in writing of the findings, conclusions of law and the final decision within 10 days.

The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the City Council per Encinitas Code Chapter 1.12, and a hearing will be held in closed session. (Ord. 2001-06)

Chapter 6.52 NON-CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
6.52.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to subject non-charitable solicitation activity to reasonable regulations designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in, advertise or sponsor a non-charitable solicitation activity regulated by this chapter without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Non-Charitable Solicitations.

C.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, proposed activities shall be subject to Zoning Regulations and Coastal Development Requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 90-31; Ord. 94-06)

 

6.52.020 Definitions.
“House or dwelling” means any structure or building which has walls on all sides and is covered by a roof and which is intended for transient or permanent residential use.

“Interviewer” means any person who goes to a house or upon any public place for interviewing persons or soliciting answers to questions for marketing research, opinion, research, attitude surveys or any other pool of information gathering services for compensation or other business enterprise. Interviewer does not include persons representing governmental entities, political parties, newspapers, radio or television stations, or persons circulating petitions for an initiative, referendum or other political purpose.

“Public place” means any place to which a member of the public may have access without trespassing.

“Solicitor” includes a peddler, hawker, transient dealer, sales person or other itinerate vendor, or an interviewer as defined in this chapter; or any person who sets up a temporary stand or goes to a house or dwelling or upon any public place for the purpose of selling services, or offers to sell, or selling by sample or take orders for, giveaway or otherwise dispose of any goods or anything of value, or who offers to distribute or delivers any coupons, certificate, handbill, ticket, token card, papers, circulars, chance coupon, magazine or other item which in turn is redeemable for goods.

 

6.52.030 Issuing Authority.
The Development Services Director is the issuing authority for the Operations Permit: Non-Charitable Solicitations. (Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.52.040 Application.
A.     An application shall be filed with the City’s issuing authority not less than 30 working days prior to the proposed date for the commencement of the solicitation activity.

B.     Upon the filing of the complete application, the issuing authority shall refer the application to the Sheriff’s Department for the conduct of a background investigation.

 

6.52.050 Regulations.
A.     A permit may be requested and issued for a maximum term of one year.

B.     No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any occupant of any house or dwelling whereat the owner or occupant of the house or dwelling has posted at the front of the house or dwelling, printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at a location which is unobstructed and clearly visible from the normal entrance way to such house or dwelling, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting.

C.    No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any member of the public on any private, commercial property which is normally open to the general public whereat the owner or legal occupant thereof has posted at all entrances thereto, and printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at a location which is unobstructed and clearly visible by all persons entering such property, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting.

D.    No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any occupant of any house or dwelling except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

E.     No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any member of the public on the public right-of-way in nonresidential zones, or on any public park or beach, unless a sidewalk vending operations permit is obtained in accordance with Chapter 6.15, Operations Permit: Sidewalk Vending.

F.     Failure to adhere to the above regulations is cause for revocation of solicitor permit of the individual and/or organization, company, etc., which is represented by the solicitor.

G.    Exemption to Time Limit of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. “Seasonal” solicitors who have an established temporary seasonal business—i.e., pumpkin sales, Christmas tree sales—would be exempt from the time limits of operation, provided all conditions imposed by the Planning and Fire Departments have been met. (Ord. 2007-03; Ord. 2007-11; Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.52.060 Exemption from Permit Requirement.
This chapter shall not apply to:

A.     Students from an elementary school or a junior high school, or a high school, or public junior or community college, or public college or public university or any private educational institution listed in Education Code Section 29003 but only while such students are engaged in activity associated with academic or scholastic functions sponsored by and authorized by such schools;

B.     Wholesalers, their representatives, agents or employees calling upon retail businesses, nor to retail business when such sales are made in the regular course of business and at the established place of business;

C.    Sales by a farmer or rancher for products produced within San Diego County by such farmer or rancher at the established place of business of such farmer or rancher;

D.    An organization which is receiving governmental grant funds to be used for public or community purposes when holding an event less than four days in duration for the purpose of raising funds to supplement the governmental grant funds and to support the public or community purpose for which the grant funds were received;

E.     A newspaper or its employees; or

F.     A persons who sells only goods which he or she has personally handcrafted, provided:

1.     That such goods are offered for sale only at an event of less than four days in duration which is held for the purpose of raising funds to support public, or community purposes, and

2.     That person has not participated in such an event more than two times within that calendar year.

 

6.52.070 Exemptions from Fees.
The following applicants for a permit required by this chapter as described in this section shall be exempt from fees imposed pursuant to this chapter:

A.     Veterans of the Army, Navy, Marines or Air Force as defined in Section 16102 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California. Before any such veteran shall be issued a permit hereunder, such veteran shall submit to the issuing authority proof of release from active duty under honorable conditions or an honorable discharge, or a certified copy thereof.

B.     Solicitors who are engaged exclusively in soliciting orders as an agent or representative of any person or persons engaged in interstate commerce which have their place or places of business outside of the State of California. Before any such agent or representative shall be issued a permit, he or she shall submit to the issuing authority satisfactory identification and interstate commerce credentials from the person represented.

Chapter 6.56 CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
6.56.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to promote both legitimate solicitations for charitable purposes and sales solicitation for charitable purposes in accordance with the laws of California.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to commerce, conduct, manage, participate in, advertise or sponsor solicitations for charitable purposes or sales solicitations for charitable purposes activity regulated by this chapter without first having obtained an Operations Permit: Charitable Solicitation.

C.    This chapter shall take precedence over and supersede any other provisions of this title which appear to regulate charitable solicitations.

D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, proposed activities shall be subject to zoning regulations and coastal development requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 90-31; Ord. 94-06)

 

6.56.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, terms shall be defined in accordance with the provisions of Article 1.3 of Chapter 1 of Part 3, Division 6 of the Business and Professions Code. (See Section 17510, et seq.)

“House or dwelling” means any structure or building which has walls on all sides and is covered by a roof and which is intended for transient or permanent residential use.

“Interviewer” means any person who goes to a house or upon any public place for interviewing persons or soliciting answers to questions for marketing research, opinion, research, attitude surveys or any other pool of information gathering services for compensation or other business enterprise. Interviewer does not include persons representing governmental entities, political parties, newspapers, radio or television stations, or persons circulating petitions for an initiative, referendum or other political purpose.

“Public place” means any place to which a member of the public may have access without trespassing.

“Solicitor” includes a peddler, hawker, transient dealer, sales person or other itinerant vendor, or an interviewer as defined in this chapter; or any person who sets up a temporary stand or goes to a house or dwelling or upon any public place for the purpose of selling services, or offers to sell, or selling by sample or take orders for, give away or otherwise dispose of any goods or anything of value, or who offers to distribute or delivers any coupons, certificate, handbill, ticket, token card, papers, circulars, chance coupon, magazine or other item which in turn is redeemable for goods. (Ord. 2007-03)

 

6.56.030 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is authorized to issue the Operations Permit: Charitable Solicitation. (Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.56.040 Application.
The application shall be filed with the City’s issuing authority not less than 15 working days prior to commencement of the solicitation activity and the City shall render a final determination on the application within 15 working days of receipt of a complete application.

 

6.56.050 Regulations.
A.     The Operations Permit: Charitable Solicitation shall be issued, without the payment of a fee, upon delivery to the issuing authority of an example of the card or printed material the applicant intends to utilize in complying with Section 17510.3 of the Business and Professions Code.

B.     The permittee shall comply with the provisions of Section 17510, et seq. of the Business and Professions Code regulating charitable solicitations.

C.    No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any occupant of any house or dwelling whereat the owner or occupant of the house or dwelling has posted at the front of the house or dwelling, printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at a location which is unobstructed and clearly visible from the normal entrance way to such house or dwelling, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting.

D.    No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any member of the public on any private, commercial property which is normally open to the general public whereat the owner or legal occupant thereof has posted at all entrances thereto, and printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at a location which is unobstructed and clearly visible by all persons entering such property, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting.

E.     No solicitor shall contact or attempt to contact any occupant of any house or dwelling except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

F.     Failure to adhere to the above regulations is cause for revocation of solicitor permit of the individual and/or organization, company, etc., which is represented by the solicitor.

G.    Exemption to Time Limit of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. “Seasonal” solicitors who have an established temporary seasonal business—i.e., pumpkin sales, Christmas tree sales—would be exempt from the time limits of operation, provided all conditions imposed by the Planning and Fire Departments have been met. (Ord. 2007-03)

 

6.56.060 Exemptions from Permit Requirement.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.     Solicitations within the membership of a charitable or religious organization;

B.     Solicitations made upon the regularly occupied premises of a charitable or religious organization; or

C.    Bingo games conducted in accordance with Penal Code Section 326.5 and this Code. (Ord. 2007-03)

Chapter 6.60 BUSINESS REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE
6.60.010 Purpose.
A.     This chapter is enacted for the purpose of providing an inventory of commercial activities conducted within the City; a method of determining compliance with safety regulations imposed on commercial activities within the City; and a mechanism whereby owners of commercial activities can be identified and notified by City officials.

B.     Unless otherwise expressly exempted, it shall be unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, (participate in, advertise or sponsor) a commercial activity within the City without concurrently having a valid business registration certificate from the City.

C.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, proposed activities shall be subject to zoning regulations and coastal development requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 92-34; Ord. 94-06)

 

6.60.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth:

“Commercial activity” means all manner of commercial activity, to include without limitation, professions, trades, occupations and callings, whether or not carried on for profit.

“Commercial activity” does not include:

1.     Those activities which are not likely to exceed $1,500.00 in gross annual revenue and involve no more than a single or occasional act within the City.

2.     A single act.

“Notice” includes notice to a responsible employee or agent of the person conducting the activity.

“Person” includes, without limitation, an individual, association, domestic and foreign corporations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships, club, common law trust, or society.

 

6.60.030 Claim of Exemption.
A.     This chapter shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a business registration certificate prior to conducting a commercial activity within the City if the requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California.

B.     Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall file a signed statement with the City Clerk stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. In the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the obligations imposed by this chapter.

C.    Upon a proper showing contained in a signed statement, the City Clerk, or his/her designee, whether the person is entitled to the claimed exemption.

D.    Upon the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity to respond, the City Clerk may revoke an exemption granted in accordance with this chapter upon a finding that the activity is not entitled to the exemption. (Ord. 2003-04)

 

6.60.040 Fees.
Fees for this chapter may be imposed as follows:

A.     An application fee based upon the City’s costs in processing applications, to include required inspections; payable at the time of application.

B.     A certificate replacement fee based upon the City’s costs in replacing a lost or destroyed certificate; payable at the time of application.

C.    A certificate renewal fee based upon the City’s costs in processing the renewal application; payable at the time of the application.

 

6.60.050 Issuing Authority.
The City Manager or designee is the issuing authority for a business registration certificate. (Ord. 2003-04; Ord. 2020-15)

 

6.60.060 Application.
A.     The City Clerk shall prepare and have available application forms calling for such information as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

B.     A separate certificate shall be applied for and a separate fee shall be paid for each branch establishment or location of the commercial activity to be transacted or carried on.

C.    A separate certificate shall be applied for and a separate fee shall be paid for by each separate operator of each separate type of commercial activity to be transacted or carried on at the same location.

D.    Applications for an initial, renewal or replacement certificate shall be submitted under penalty of perjury to the Office of the City Clerk.

E.     If the application is submitted by an agent, then the agent shall file (with the application) written statement that the principal has authorized the agent to apply for the certificate on the principal’s behalf.

F.     In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the full name, phone number and place of residence of the principal owner of the business or persons responsible shall be provided.

G.    In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a certificate to a corporation, partnership, organization, association, syndicate or any other joint venture not identified in subsection E or F of this section, the full name, phone number and place of residence of the principal owner or responsible person shall be provided.

H.    The applicant shall furnish a signed statement setting forth, without limitation, the following information:

1.     The exact nature or kind of commercial activity for which a certificate is requested;

2.     The place where such commercial activity is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent site, then a description of the route or temporary location; and

3.     The full name, day and night phone number, and the place of residence of the principal owner, business owner or on-site manager of the commercial activity. (Ord. 2003-04)

 

6.60.070 Approval for Issuance.
The issuing authority shall issue a business registration certificate unless one or more of the following conditions is found to exist:

A.     A complete application has not been submitted;

B.     The fee has not been paid;

C.    The proposed commercial activity does not comply with applicable fire, building, other safety codes or with other applicable regulations imposed on commercial activities within the City.

 

6.60.080 Appeal on Denial.
If the issuing authority denies the issuance of the business registration certificate, the applicant shall be notified in writing and provided an opportunity to present further information to the issuing authority. (See Chapter 1.12.)

 

6.60.090 Term of Certificate.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, all business registration certificates issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire 365 days after issue.

 

6.60.100 Display of Certificate.
A.     Posting of Certificate. Every person carrying on a commercial activity at a fixed place of business within the City shall keep the certificate posted, while in force, in some conspicuous place upon the premises where the commercial activity is carried on.

B.     Carrying Certificate. Every person carrying on a commercial activity but not operating at a fixed place of business within the City shall keep the certificate or a copy thereof available at all times while carrying on the commercial activity for which it is issued.

C.    Exhibiting Certificate Upon Request. Every person carrying on a commercial activity within the City shall produce and exhibit the certificate whenever requested to do so by any officer or employee of the City. (Ord. 2003-04)

Title 7 EXPENDITURES
Chapter 7.08 PAYMENT OF DEMANDS
Chapter 7.18 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
Chapter 7.20 ALTERNATIVE BID PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS

Chapter 7.08 PAYMENT OF DEMANDS
7.08.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to describe procedures for the processing and payment of demands, bills and other claims against the City arising out of contract, including bills for labor, material and supplies furnished; not including payroll or claims for damages. (Ord. 96-04)

 

7.08.020 Submission of Demand.
A.     The demands shall contain a brief description of the labor, material or supplies furnished and the date and price.

B.     The demands shall be accompanied by a requisition/purchase order, approved by two City employees designated by the originating department director or City Manager ordering the labor, material or supplies, or shall be submitted via manual check request, signed by the department requester and approver and by the Director of Finance or his/her designee.

C.    Contracts executed by the City calling for specific payments on specified dates shall constitute a demand for payment on such dates.

D.    Demands shall be submitted to the Finance Department. (Ord. 2003-04; Ord. 2003-13)

 

7.08.030 Register of Demands.
A.     The Finance Department will prepare a weekly register of demands showing check number, vendor, purpose of check and amount. The register will be certified and signed by the Director of Finance or his/her designee.

B.     After the completion of all staff processing and approvals, warrants shall be released at the direction of the Director of Finance in accordance with scheduled payment dates and terms. The weekly registers will then be submitted to the City Clerk in time to permit the City Clerk to attach the registers to the next available Council agenda.

C.    Council Members shall review the register of checks as a part of the agenda packet. Questions can be directed to staff prior to the Council meeting or at the meeting. The register will become a register of audited demands. (Ord. 2003-13)

Chapter 7.18 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
7.18.010 Adoption of Purchasing System.
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, equipment and services; secure supplies, equipment and services at competitive cost commensurate with quality and quantity needed; exercise positive financial control over purchases; clearly define accountability and authority for the purchasing functions; and ensure against favoritism in awarding purchasing contracts; the purchasing system set forth in this chapter shall govern the procedure for all purchases except as otherwise required by law.

 

7.18.020 Authority and Responsibility.
For the purpose of this chapter, the definition of “purchasing authority” means the person(s) responsible for the procurement of supplies, equipment and services, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

As defined in Section 2.24.070 of this Code, authority and responsibility for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services is vested in the City Manager. The City Manager may designate a person or persons in writing to serve as purchasing authority and delegate to such person(s) the duties and responsibilities imposed by this chapter. Purchasing authorization thresholds shall be established by Council resolution.

The City Manager shall approve policies and procedures that are appropriate and necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. The policies and procedures shall be written in such a way to: (1) encourage open and competitive bidding; (2) provide equal opportunity based on merit; (3) ensure against favoritism in awarding purchasing contracts; (4) provide for efficient and timely acquisition of supplies, equipment, and services; and (5) provide effective fiscal controls.

 

7.18.030 Competitive Bidding Requirements and Exemptions.
Except where expressly exempted, all purchases and contracts governed by this chapter shall be by competitive bid. Purchases exempted from competitive bidding requirements set forth in this chapter include:

A.     Professional and consultant services.

B.     Information technology purchases and contracts.

C.    Emergency purchases and contracts.

D.    Cooperative purchases and contracts.

E.     Sole source purchases and contracts.

F.     Over-the-counter purchases and contracts.

G.    Certain purchases and contracts as determined by the City Manager where the competitive bid process is impracticable.

 

7.18.040 Professional and Consultant Services.
The competitive bidding provisions of this chapter shall not apply to contracts involving the acquisition of professional or specialized consultant services. Selection for such service shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence, the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the professional services required and a fair and reasonable price proposal.

The acquisition of professional services for architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, environmental services, land surveying, or construction project management is governed by California Government Code Sections 4525 through 4529.

 

7.18.050 Information Technology Purchases and Contracts.
The competitive bidding provisions of this chapter shall not apply to purchases and contracts involving the acquisition of information technology. Selection shall be on the basis of requirements and specific evaluation criteria which result in the best value to the City.

 

7.18.060 Emergency Purchases and Contracts.
In the event of an emergency as determined by the City Manager which requires immediate action to ensure public health, safety, welfare and continuity of operations, the City Manager may cause the purchase of necessary supplies, equipment and services without competitive bidding for the purpose of responding to the emergency with unencumbered money, irrespective of whether the money has been appropriated for such purpose.

A full report of the circumstances of any such emergency purchase shall be presented to the City Council at the next available regularly scheduled City Council meeting. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

7.18.070 Cooperative Purchases and Contracts.
The purchasing authority shall have the ability to join with other public or quasi-public agencies in cooperative purchasing plans or programs for the purchase of goods and/or services by contract, arrangement or agreement pursuant to law and as determined by the purchasing authority to be in the City’s best interest. The purchasing authority may buy directly from a vendor at a price established by another public agency when the other agency has made their purchase in a competitive manner.

 

7.18.080 Sole Source Purchases and Contracts.
If the City Manager determines that there is only one reasonably known capable supplier due to the unique nature of the requirements for the desired supplies, equipment or services, the City Manager may waive the competitive bidding requirements.

 

7.18.090 Over-the-Counter Purchases and Contracts.
The price threshold and award authority for over-the-counter purchases and contracts shall be set by Council resolution. Comparative pricing is not required but shall be used whenever practical.

 

7.18.100 Open Market Purchases and Contracts.
The price threshold and award authority for over-the-counter purchases and contracts shall be set by Council resolution. Open market purchases may be made without observing the formal contract procedures set forth in Section 7.18.110 of this chapter.

The purchasing authority shall solicit at least three written quotes from at least three prospective vendors.

 

7.18.110 Formal Bid Purchases and Contracts.
A.     Purchases and contracts of supplies, equipment and services having an estimated value equal to or greater than the price threshold specified by Council resolution for formal bid procedures shall be made by the purchasing authority in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter and any policies or procedures approved by the City Manager for the purpose of implementing this chapter.

B.     The purchasing authority shall develop specifications for the desired supplies, equipment or services.

C.    The purchasing authority shall issue a notice inviting bids which shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

1.     The requirement that bids be in writing and sealed.

2.     A general description of the item(s) or service(s) to be purchased.

3.     The location where bid forms and specifications may be obtained.

4.     The deadline and the time and place for opening bids.

5.     The type and character of bidder’s security required, if any.

D.    Notice inviting bids shall be published in accordance with all legal and City policy requirements.

E.     Sealed bids shall be opened at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids.

F.     The purchasing authority shall keep a record of all submitted bids in accordance with the City’s retention policy.

 

7.18.120 Purchase or Contract Award of Bid.
For purchases and contracts subject to the competitive bidding requirements, the purchase or contract shall be awarded to the lowest qualified bidder in conformity with the specifications except as described below.

When a bid is recommended to be awarded to other than the lowest qualified bidder, written justification is required. The written statement must be signed by the City Manager and retained with the contract.

 

7.18.130 No Bids.
If no bids are received, the purchase may be made through negotiated contract or other process approved by the City Manager.

 

7.18.140 Rejection of Bids.
The purchasing authority may reject:

A.     Any bid that fails to meet the bidding requirements in any respect.

B.     All bids, for any reasons, with or without cause, and submit the supplies, equipment or service involved to a new bidding process or abandon the purchase.

 

7.18.150 Securities and Bonds.
Bidder’s security may be required when deemed necessary by the purchasing authority. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security. However, a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her security upon refusal or failure to execute a contract within 15 days after notice of award of that contract, unless the City is responsible for the delay. The contract may be awarded to the next lowest qualified bidder upon the refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract within the time herein prescribed.

The purchasing authority may require as a condition to executing a contract on behalf of the City, a performance bond or a labor and material bond, or both, in such amounts as the purchasing authority shall determine appropriate to protect the best interests of the City. The form and amount of such bond(s) shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

 

7.18.160 Compliance Required—Effect of Noncompliance.
With the exception of emergency procedures, as defined in this chapter, no purchase shall be made without prior budget authority.

No obligation for the payment of supplies, equipment or services shall be incurred by the City except as defined by this chapter. Any agreement for the purchase of equipment, supplies or services made contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be void and any claim and demand against the City based thereon shall be invalid.

Chapter 7.20 ALTERNATIVE BID PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
7.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the following sections is to establish alternative bid procedures for public works projects (“Alternative procedures” or “Alternative bids”), as provided for by the California Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (the “Act”). (Ord. 2020-17)

 

7.20.020 Informal Bid Procedures.
Public projects, as defined by the Act and in accordance with the limits set forth in the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal procedures. The applicable thresholds shall be as provided in the Public Contract Code (including, but not limited to, Public Contract Code Section 22032) as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2020-17)

 

7.20.030 Contractors List.
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (the “Commission”). (Ord. 2020-17)

 

7.20.040 Notice Inviting Informal Bids.
A.     Where a public project is to be performed pursuant to Section 7.20.020, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed, faxed, or e-mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with Section 7.20.030, or mailed, faxed, or e-mailed to all construction trade journals as specified by the Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids, provided however:

1.     If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.

2.     If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting information bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

B.     All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to subsection A shall be completed not less than 10 calendar days before bids are due.

C.    The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and shall state the time and place for the submission of bids. (Ord. 2020-17)

 

7.20.050 Award of Contracts.
The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to award contracts pursuant to subsections A and B of Section 7.20.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-17)

Title 8 BEACHES, PARKS, AND WATERWAYS
Chapter 8.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 8.08 BEACHES

Chapter 8.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.04.010 Motor Vehicles.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to drive, park or allow to stand any self propelled vehicle on a public beach, public park, or recreational trail unless the operator has previously obtained express approval from the lifeguard captain, director, parks and recreation or other authorized City official.

B.     Approval required by this section shall be given only for a temporary period subject to such conditions as are necessary to protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.020 Fishing Spears.
A.     Within 100 feet of any person while upon any public property, it is unlawful for any person to possess a fishing spear gun or similar instrument in a cocked or armed position or to possess any unsheathed or uncovered spear, barb, prong or similar instrument.

B.     A spear gun or similar instrument shall be deemed cocked or armed unless it is in a condition incapable of projecting spears, barbs or prongs. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.030 Glass Containers Prohibited.
While upon any City beach, park, recreational trail, or waterway or a sidewalk adjacent to such area within the City, it is unlawful for any person to possess a container whose exterior surface is in any degree made of glass. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.040 Fires.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to ignite and/or maintain a fire on any public beach or recreational trail, or in any public park outside a designated fire ring or barbecue grill.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to relocate a fire ring or barbecue grill placed by the City. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.050 Horses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, bring, allow or permit a horse owned or controlled by such person upon a City beach, park, or recreational trail except in areas designated by resolution of the City Council for use by horses. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.060 Plants.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pick, dig up, cut, mutilate, destroy, injure, disturb, move, molest, burn or carry away any plant or vegetation, or portion thereof including aquatic plants located in a City beach, park, recreational trail, or waterway. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.070 Geological Features.
Within any City beach, park, recreational trail, or waterway, it shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, disturb, deface or remove earth, sand, gravel, oil, minerals, rocks or fossils, features of caves, archaeological artifacts or any parts thereof. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.080 Defacement.
Within any City beach, park, recreational trail or waterway, it shall be unlawful for any person, in any way, to intentionally damage, deface or mutilate any tree, fence, wall, building, railing, sign, playground or playground equipment, camp or picnic structure, monument or any other object or structure placed there by the City. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.090 Weapons.
Within any City beach, park, recreational trail or waterway, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, transport, carry, fire or discharge any firearm, airgun, paintball gun, archery device, slingshot, fireworks or explosive device of any kind. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.100 Fire Hazard.
Within any City beach, park, recreational trail or waterway, it shall be unlawful for any person to throw away any lighted tobacco product or any burning or combustible material or any other matter that could set fire to grass, shrubs, buildings or any other combustible substance. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.110 Barbecue Grill.
Within any City beach, park or waterway, it shall be unlawful for any person to use a City barbecue grill and allow such barbecue grill to remain in an untidy or unsanitary condition; nor shall any person fail to clear away therefrom all cooking and eating utensils and waste matter after use thereof; nor shall any person using a City barbecue grill fail, when such use is completed, to cover the fire therein. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.120 Washing or Repairing Cars.
Within any City beach, park, or recreational trail, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the washing, cleaning, polishing, repairing, renovating or painting of any vehicle; except that this section shall not prohibit the making of emergency repairs immediately necessary to render such vehicle safe. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.130 Walkways.
A.     Within any City beach, park, or recreational trail, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive a moped, motorcycle, automobile or any other vehicle other than on an authorized roadway.

B.     Within any City beach, park, or recreational trail, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the free travel of pedestrians on any walk, road or avenue, or vehicles on automobile roads. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.140 Supervision of Children.
Within any City beach, park, or recreational trail, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit a child under that person’s control and who is under the age of seven years, to be unattended. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.150 Hours of Operation.
Within any City beach, park, or recreational trail, it shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon such property or any part thereof, or use any of the facilities or equipment therein, or permit any vehicle to remain thereon, except between the posted hours of any day when such area is open for public use. (Ord. 2004-09)

 

8.04.160 Unleashed Dogs on Public Property.
A.     Other provisions of the Municipal Code notwithstanding, any person owning or having custody or control of a dog may allow the dog to be on public property, unrestrained by a leash, so long as each of the following conditions are met:

1.     The dog is within either Encinitas Viewpoint Park or Sun Vista Park (East), between the hours of either 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m., on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday and Orpheus Park between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Monday, Wednesday and Friday and 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday;

2.     The dog is within that portion of Trail Segment 72 between Encinitas Boulevard and Mountain Vista Drive;

3.     The dog is licensed and under direct and effective voice control sufficient to ensure that the dog is not involved in a violation of any other provision of law; and

4.     The dog is not:

a.     Biting or harassing a person or other animal,

b.     Interfering with another person’s lawful use of public property, or

c.     Urinating or defecating on public property unless the dog is curbed and any feces is immediately removed to a proper receptacle.

B.     An official of the City who has authority to enforce the City’s animal control regulations may order a person owning or having custody or control of the dog to physically restrain the dog by a leash while the dog is in Encinitas Viewpoint Park or Orpheus Park, or Sun Vista Park (East) and that portion of Trail Segment 72, in accordance with the following:

1.     The dog is unrestrained by a leash but is not in compliance with each of the conditions contained in subsection A of this section.

2.     The order shall be accompanied by a written notice that the order continues in effect until the City Manager revokes the order, in writing.

3.     A person subject to an order issued in accordance with this provision may apply to the City Manager for revocation of the order.

4.     The City Manager, or the Manager’s designee, shall conduct a hearing on the application. The order shall be revoked if the applicant demonstrates that, based upon a change in circumstance, the order is no longer required to accomplish the purposes of the Code. (Ord. 2003-16; Ord. 2004-09; Ord. 2009-14)

 

8.04.170 Golfing in Public Parks Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to play or practice golf or swing any golf club within any public park where posted. (Ord. 97-21)

Chapter 8.08 BEACHES
8.08.010 Activities.
A.     The senior lifeguard on duty is authorized to designate activity zones for the regulation of City beaches and waterways. Designations of zones shall be made in consideration of:

1.     The number of persons utilizing the area;

2.     The surf, wave and tide conditions; and

3.     The need to protect the public health and safety.

B.     To impose activity zone regulations, the zone must be marked to show the type of zone and its boundaries. Further, a notice must be posted at each lifeguard station indicating the permitted and prohibited uses for each zone. In addition, the lifeguard captain shall install signs at a designated zone that indicate the permitted and prohibited uses in that zone.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly violate the regulations of a posted activity zone. (Ord. 87-39)

 

8.08.020 False Drowning Alarm.
It is unlawful for any person to give or transmit a signal of false drowning alarm in any manner or mode.

 

8.08.030 Dogs and Cats.
With the exception of a dog accompanying an unsighted person or hearing impaired person there present, it is unlawful for any person to bring, allow or permit a dog or cat owned or controlled by such person upon a City beach. (Ord. 92-02)

 

8.08.040 Hang Gliding.
It is unlawful for any person to transport, assemble or use any aircraft including hot air balloons, hang gliders, kites or motorized crafts designed to support a person or persons in air flight or fly, launch or land over or upon any beach or shoreline within the City.

 

8.08.050 Traversing Public Coastal Bluffs.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to be upon the face of any public coastal bluff except upon a trail, stairway, ramp or similar facility designated by the City for such use.

B.     A “coastal bluff” means a bluff whose vertical elevation is 10 feet or more, and whose toe is or may be subject to marine erosion. (See Section 30.04.010, “Bluff, Coastal.”) (Ord. 92-25)

 

8.08.060 Jumping from Structures Prohibited.
A.     Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health and safety by prohibiting jumping and diving from public structures into the ocean and waterways.

B.     Definitions. Wherever the following words, terms or phrases are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as defined in the following subsections unless from the context in which the word, term, or phrase is used, a different meaning is specifically defined or intended.

1.     “Public property” means any bridge, road, crossing or stairway, which is owned by the City of Encinitas or any other public agency, within the City of Encinitas.

2.     “Structure” means a bridge or any portion of a public road or right-of-way which crosses water or land at an elevation higher than the water or land with a single span or multiple spans with a total length of 20 feet or more. “Structure” means any stairway accessing any beach in the City of Encinitas on public property.

C.    Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to jump or dive from any structure located on public property where prohibited by signs posted thereon.

D.    Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction except for the fourth or each additional violation of a provision within one year which shall be a misdemeanor. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as designated in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. (Ord. 2020-14)

Title 9 PUBLIC SAFETY, PEACE, AND WELFARE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-16 and 2020-18. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 9.01 GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter 9.04 TRANSPORTATION OF AVOCADOS
Chapter 9.08 CURFEW FOR MINORS
Chapter 9.12 GAMBLING
Chapter 9.20 DISPLAY AND DISTRIBUTION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Chapter 9.21 MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA-RELATED ACTIVITIES AND USES
Chapter 9.22 DISPLAY OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR AMUSEMENT
Chapter 9.23 RETAIL SALE OF DOGS AND CATS
Chapter 9.24 PUBLIC NUDITY
Chapter 9.26 REGULATION OF PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE AND SIMILAR SUBSTANCES
Chapter 9.27 DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SERVING ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 9.28 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL
Chapter 9.29 REGULATION OF CLONAZEPAM
Chapter 9.30 FIREARMS
Chapter 9.31 RESIDENTIAL SAFE STORAGE OF FIREARMS
Chapter 9.32 NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL
Chapter 9.36 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY—SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL
Chapter 9.38 REGULATING SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Chapter 9.40 DISTURBANCE ABATEMENT
Chapter 9.42 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY MINORS
Chapter 9.43 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES—RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVICE AND SALES TRAINING
Chapter 9.50 SKATEBOARDS, INLINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES, TOY VEHICLES, COASTERS, AND SIMILAR FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION
Chapter 9.55 PILOT BIKE SHARE PROGRAM
Chapter 9.60 GRAFFITI PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL
Chapter 9.65 REGULATION OF SALE AND DISPLAY OF GLASS ETCHING CREAM
Chapter 9.70 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Chapter 9.75 REGULATION OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES AND CITY VIDEO FRANCHISES
Chapter 9.80 SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED

Chapter 9.01 GENERAL OFFENSES
9.01.010 Camping on Private Property.
It is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, sleep or tarry at night in or upon any private property without the prior permission of the owner of such property. The owner may give permission through the owner’s lessee or agent. (Ord. 87-31)

 

9.01.020 Camping on Public Property.
A.     Unless otherwise permitted in accordance with the provisions of this Code, it is unlawful for any person to camp on public property, to include, without limitation, highways, streets, alleys, rights-of way, beaches and parks.

B.     “Camping” is evidenced by, among other things, the establishment of sleeping accommodations; the use of a bedroll or sleeping bag; the erection or maintenance of a shelter. (Ord. 2004-03)

 

9.01.025 Sleeping in Vehicles.
A.     No person shall sleep or lie down in a vehicle parked on a public street or public property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

B.     No person shall use a vehicle as a temporary or permanent living quarters, abode, or place of habitation, either overnight or day by day. (Ord. 2004-02)

 

9.01.030 Hunting Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to use any implement, for example, without limitation, firearms, a bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, spear, snare, net or trap on public property for the purpose of pursuing, with the intent to kill, injure or capture any mammal, bird or reptile.

 

9.01.040 Use of Toilets.
A.     It is unlawful for a male person to resort to any public toilet set apart for female persons.

B.     It is unlawful for any female person to resort to any public toilet set apart for male persons.

C.    This section does not prohibit a child under the age of six years from resorting to any public toilet while accompanied by that child’s father, mother or other responsible adult.

Chapter 9.04 TRANSPORTATION OF AVOCADOS
9.04.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a means of identifying the owner of each commercial quantity of avocados so as to provide a means of controlling thefts of avocados.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly provide false information for a statement of ownership, include false information in a statement of ownership or alter information contained in a statement of ownership or any copy thereof. (Ord. 87-32)

 

9.04.020 Definitions.
“Commercial quantity of avocados” means any quantity of avocados in excess of 40 pounds, exclusive of the container.

“Handler” means any person, or authorized agent thereof who grows, distributes or retails avocados, including, but not limited to the following: grower, packer and wholesale or retail fruit stand.

“Sheriff” means the Sheriff of the County of San Diego or any of his or her duly appointed deputies.

“To transport” means the movement or conveyance by means whatsoever of a commercial quantity of avocados over any road, street or highway within the City.

 

9.04.030 Statement of Ownership.
A.     Every person who transports a commercial quantity of avocados shall:

1.     Cause a statement of ownership to be prepared and retained in his or her personal possession at all times while transporting said avocados; and

2.     Deliver a copy of said statement to each handler of the avocados being transported.

B.     The statement of ownership shall contain the following information:

1.     The name, address and telephone number of each person who transports the avocados;

2.     The name, address and telephone number of each handler of the avocados;

3.     The date transportation of the avocados begins and estimated time of delivery;

4.     The kind and quantity of avocados being transported; and

5.     The points of origin and destination of the transportation route of the avocados.

 

9.04.040 Obtaining and Retaining the Statement of Ownership.
Every handler who delivers or receives a commercial quantity of avocados shall obtain a copy of the statement of ownership from the person transporting said avocados. The person transporting said avocados and each handler shall retain a copy of each statement of ownership for one year following the date the transportation of said avocados begins and shall maintain the same for inspection and review at any reasonable time by the Sheriff upon request.

 

9.04.050 Presentation of Statement of Ownership.
Any peace officer, upon probable cause to believe a person is transporting a commercial quantity of avocados, may stop such person and inspect such avocados, whereupon the statement of ownership required in this chapter shall be presented to said peace officer upon request.

 

9.04.060 Seizure and Impound.
Any peace officer, upon reasonable belief that a person is not in legal possession of a commercial quantity of avocados, may seize such avocados without warrant. Upon seizure, the peace officer shall take custody of the avocados and turn the same over to the custody of the Sheriff. The Sheriff shall receive and provide for the care and safe keeping of such avocados in a refrigerated storage facility at a temperature range of approximately 40 degrees Fahrenheit.

 

9.04.070 Investigation and Release to Rightful Owner.
The Sheriff shall make reasonable investigation to ascertain ownership of all commercial quantities of avocados seized pursuant to this chapter. The Sheriff shall release custody of said avocados to the rightful owner upon submission to the Sheriff of satisfactory proof of ownership and after payment of a reasonable charge sufficient to reimburse the Sheriff for costs incurred in storing said avocados.

 

9.04.080 Disposition by Sale.
If for any reason a commercial quantity of avocados is not released to its rightful owner after being in the custody of the Sheriff for five days, the Sheriff may sell said avocados by public auction, in the manner and upon the notice of sale as prescribed by law for the sale of perishable property under execution. All of said avocados remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Sheriff. All proceeds derived from the sale of said avocados shall be held by the Sheriff for a period of at least six months, during which time the rightful owner of said avocados may submit satisfactory proof of ownership and obtain possession of the proceeds after payment of a reasonable charge sufficient to reimburse the Sheriff for costs incurred in the storage and sale of said avocados. After retention of the proceeds for a period of at least six months, the Sheriff shall deposit such proceeds in the general fund of the City.

Chapter 9.08 CURFEW FOR MINORS
9.08.010 Definitions for Curfew Provisions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“Curfew hours” means the period from 10:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. the following day.

“Emergency” means the unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means (1) a person who, pursuant to court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

“Minor” means any person under 18 years of age.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent or adoptive parent of a minor.

“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of public has access to and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities and shops.

“Responsible adult” means a person at least 18 years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 2010-14)

 

9.08.020 Curfew Provisions.
A.     It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Encinitas during curfew hours unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or responsible adult.

B.     It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly or by insufficient control allow the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Encinitas during curfew hours unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or responsible adult.

C.    It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A or B of this section that the minor was:

1.     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent, guardian or responsible adult, without any detour or stop.

2.     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.

3.     Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop.

4.     Involved in an emergency.

5.     On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence.

6.     Attending an official school, religious or recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the City of Encinitas, a civic organization or other similar entity that assumes responsibility for the minor or going to or returning home from, without detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the City of Encinitas, a civic organization or another similar entity that assumes responsibility for the minor.

7.     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution.

8.     Emancipated pursuant to law.

D.    Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a deputy sheriff shall determine the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in a public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. If a minor is accompanied by an adult not the minor’s parent or guardian, the deputy shall verify whether or not the person has authority from the parent or guardian to have care and custody of the minor.

E.     Effective Date. The operative date of this chapter is October 20, 1997. (Ord. 97-23)

Chapter 9.12 GAMBLING
9.12.010 Gambling Prohibited.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to play any game of chance for money or tokens of value within the City.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, carry on or expose any gaming or gambling table, contrivance, instrument, equipment or device within the City. (Ord. 87-34)

 

9.12.020 Gambling Implements Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person within the City to exhibit or expose to view in any barred or barricaded house or room or in any place built or protected in a manner to make it difficult for access or ingress to police officers, when three or more persons are present, any cards, dice, dominoes, fan tan table or layout, or any part of such layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever; or for any person to visit or resort to any such barred or barricaded house or room or other place in said City built or protected in a manner to make it difficult for access or ingress to peace officers, where any cards, dice, gambling implements whatsoever are exhibited or exposed to view when three or more persons are present; or for any person in said City to become a visitor at any place for the practice of gambling in said City.

 

9.12.030 Letting Premises for Gambling Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise knowingly to let or underlet, or transfer the possession of any premises for use by any person, or to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or her or under his or her charge or control in the City to be used, in whole or in part, as a gambling house or place for playing, conducting, dealing, or carrying on any game, not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State of California, with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value.

 

9.12.040 Conducting Houses for Gambling Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain within the City any house, room, apartment, or place used in whole or in part as a gambling house or a place where any game, not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State of California, is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value.

 

9.12.050 Betting on Games Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person within the City to conduct, carry on, play at or bet upon any game known as peon, chuck a luck or any other game played with cards, dice or other instruments for money or for anything of value whatsoever, or to bet with money or anything of value whatsoever at or upon the result of any of said games or either of them.

 

9.12.060 Horserace Information.
No person shall sell or give away, whether from a fixed location or transiently, upon, over or across any street within the City any written, printed or duplicated form, chart, table, list, sheet, poster, paper dodger, handbill, circular, letter, booklet or any other printed, typewritten, mimeographed or written matter giving or purporting to give the entries or probable entries of contestants in any horse race or other contest concurrently taking place or thereafter to take place or which has taken place anywhere within the City or any such writing which gives or purports to give any tip, information, prediction or selection of, or advice as to the selection of, or advice as to the winner or probable winner or a loser or probable loser or of the standing or probable standing of any horse or other contestant therein or any writing which contains the actual, probable or possible state, past, present or future of the betting, wagering or odds upon or against any horse or other contestant in any such horse race or contest.

Chapter 9.20 DISPLAY AND DISTRIBUTION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
9.20.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of preserving the public health, safety, and welfare by providing control over the use, possession with intent to use and advertisement of drug paraphernalia as defined herein. (Ord. 87-36)

 

9.20.020 Definitions.
“Controlled substance” means those controlled substances set forth in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 and 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, identified as Schedules I through V, inclusive, as said sections now exist or may hereafter be amended.

“Drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are intended or designed by a person charged with a violation of this chapter for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repacking, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the State of California. “Drug paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:

1.     Kits intended or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

2.     Kits intended or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;

3.     Isomerization devices intended or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

4.     Testing equipment intended or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

5.     Scales or balances intended or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

6.     Dilutants and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, intended or designed for the use in cutting controlled substances;

7.     Separation gins and sifters intended or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;

8.     Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices intended or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;

9.     Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers intended or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

10.   Containers and other objects intended or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; and

11.   Objects intended or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

a.     Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;

b.     Water pipes;

c.     Carburetion tubes and devices;

d.     Smoking and carburetion masks;

e.     Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

f.      Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;

g.     Chamber pipes;

h.     Carburetor pipes;

i.      Air driven pipes; and

j.      Bongs.

12.   In determining whether an object is “drug paraphernalia,” a court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

a.     Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

b.     The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

c.     The existence of any residue of controlled substances in or on the object;

d.     Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the laws of the State of California relating to controlled substances;

e.     Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

f.      Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

g.     National and local advertising concerning its use;

h.     The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

i.      Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;

j.      The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the object in the community;

k.     Expert testimony concerning its use; and

l.      Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.

“Person” means a natural person or any firm, partnership, association, corporation or cooperative association.

 

9.20.030 Prohibition.
Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the State of California. This section does not prohibit any activity prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11364.

 

9.20.040 Prohibited Advertisement.
Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.

 

9.20.050 Nuisance.
The display or distribution of drug paraphernalia in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this Code.

Chapter 9.21 MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA-RELATED ACTIVITIES AND USES
9.21.010 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate commercial, medical and personal marijuana and marijuana-related activities and uses; and, expressly prohibit each and every marijuana and marijuana-related use and activity, including marijuana sales, cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, transportation (delivery), storage, and testing of marijuana, to the extent authorized by California law. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to preempt or render inapplicable any provision of federal or state law. (Ord. 2017-16)

 

9.21.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Commercial marijuana activity” includes the sale, cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation (delivery), distribution of marijuana and marijuana products.

“Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of marijuana.

“Delivery” means the commercial transport or transfer, by any means, of marijuana and marijuana-related products from any marijuana business (or otherwise commercial transport or transfer), regardless of where the marijuana business (or marijuana) is located, to any person or place within the city. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under California law, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer (or supplier) of marijuana or marijuana-related products.

“Distribution” means the procurement, sale and transport of marijuana and marijuana-related products between entities for commercial use purposes.

“Licensee” means the holder of any state issued license related to marijuana activities, including, but not limited to, licenses issued pursuant to the Business and Professions Code.

“Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.

“Marijuana” means any or all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin or separated resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including marijuana infused in foodstuff or any other ingestible or consumable product containing marijuana. The term “marijuana” shall also include “medical marijuana” as such phrase is used in the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the office of the Attorney General for the State of California or subject to the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996) or California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act).

“Marijuana accessories” means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana-related products into the human body.

“Marijuana business” means a medical or nonmedical marijuana business (whether undertaken for profit or not-for-profit), dispensary, association, collective, cooperative, provider, person, or similar individual, entity or organization which sells (whether wholesale or retail), provides, conveys, distributes, delivers, dispatches, cultivates, stores, processes or prepares medical marijuana (or otherwise engages in commercial cannabis activity).

“Mobile dispensary” means: (1) any conveyance, powered or unpowered, licensed or unlicensed, manned or unmanned, from which marijuana is offered for viewing; sampling; concurrent or subsequent sale; or is given away; provided; distributed or dispensed; and which (2) is owned, leased, operated, used, maintained or controlled by any person.

“Marijuana products” means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

“Operating a mobile dispensary” means parking, stopping, idling, or standing on public or private property for the purpose of permitting marijuana to be offered for viewing; sampling; concurrent or subsequent sale; or to be given away; provided; distributed or dispensed.

“Person” includes any individual, firm, company, organization, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

“Private residence” means residential unit such as a house, apartment unit, mobile home, or other similar dwelling.

“Qualified patient,” “primary caregiver” and “person with an identification card” have the same meanings as those terms are defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Sale” includes any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to marijuana is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of marijuana or marijuana-related products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same.

Any term defined in this section also means that same term as defined in the California Business and Professions Code or the California Health and Safety Code, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 2017-16)

 

9.21.030 Commercial Use.
A.     The establishment or operation of any business of commercial marijuana or marijuana-related activity or use shall be prohibited to the extent authorized by California law. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment or operation of any such business or operation. Such prohibited businesses or operations include, but are not limited to:

1.     The storage, distribution, or sale of marijuana, marijuana-related products, or marijuana accessories;

2.     The cultivation of marijuana and any related uses, processes or activities;

3.     The manufacture or testing of marijuana, marijuana-related products, or marijuana accessories;

4.     Any other marijuana or marijuana-related business, use or activity that may obtain a license from the State of California or any of its departments or subordinate entities; and

5.     Delivery (transport) and mobile dispensaries (see Sections 9.21.040 and 9.21.050 of this chapter). (Ord. 2017-16)

 

9.21.040 Delivery Businesses—Prohibited; Deliveries—Authorized Pursuant to State Law.
A.     The establishment or operation of any marijuana delivery business or other marijuana business providing delivery services shall be prohibited.

B.     Notwithstanding any provision in this Code, an employee of any marijuana delivery business or other marijuana business providing delivery services, duly licensed by the State of California, may deliver marijuana in the City provided that such delivery is conducted in compliance with all applicable State laws and regulations (Section 5416(d) of the California Bureau of Cannabis Control Regulations).

C.    This chapter does not prevent: (1) a primary caregiver from delivering medical marijuana for the personal medical purposes of that primary caregiver’s qualified patient; or (2) a qualified patient from transporting medical marijuana for personal use. (Ord. 2017-16; Ord. 2019-05)

 

9.21.050 Mobile Dispensaries—Prohibited.
Operating a mobile dispensary, or engaging in any action in furtherance of that purpose, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2017-16)

 

9.21.060 Carriage of Marijuana.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the carriage of medical marijuana or its derivative products on public roads in the city by a licensee pursuant to Section 19340(f) of the California Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 2017-16)

 

9.21.070 Medical Use.
Any medical marijuana-related activities and uses shall be prohibited to the extent authorized by California law. No other use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for medical marijuana-related activities and uses in the city, and no person shall otherwise engage in or establish such activity or use. (Ord. 2017-16)

 

9.21.080 Personal Use.
A.     For purposes of this section, personal use, possession, purchase, transport (delivery), or dissemination of marijuana shall be prohibited in the city to extent that such prohibition is authorized by California law.

B.     It is prohibited for any person to plant, cultivate, harvest, dry or process marijuana plants outdoors. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity.

C.    It is prohibited for any person to possess, smoke or ingest marijuana in public places (including places open to the general public) and in places where smoking (including vaping) is prohibited pursuant to this Code, to the extent authorized by California law.

D.    It is prohibited for any person to possess, smoke or ingest marijuana or marijuana related products in buildings owned, leased or occupied by the city, to the extent authorized by California law. (Ord. 2017-16)

 

9.21.090 Penalty for Violations.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory in this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor or infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in this Code and/or under California law. (Ord. 2017-16)

Chapter 9.22 DISPLAY OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR AMUSEMENT
9.22.010 Purpose and Intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Encinitas City Council to protect the public against hazards that wild and exotic animals used in entertainment pose to society and to protect wild and exotic animals from cruel and inhumane treatment.

 

9.22.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the following words and terms shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows:

“Companion animal” means any animal that is commonly kept by persons as a pet or for companionship and includes, but is not limited to: domesticated dogs; domesticated cats; ferrets; gerbils; guinea pigs; hamsters; horses; mice; rabbits; and rats.

“Display” means to undertake any exhibition, act, circus, ride, trade show, carnival, parade, race, photographic opportunity, performance or similar undertaking in which animals are required to perform tricks, fight, or participate as accompaniments in performances for the entertainment, amusement or benefit of an audience. “Display” shall not include the use or exhibition of animals for animal-related educational purposes by non-profit groups or institutions or individuals.

“Domestic animal” means any animal that is livestock, a companion animal, or both. Livestock includes, but is not limited to: poultry; cattle; swine; sheep; goats; and horses.

“Educational activities” means teaching and instructing with the intent and effect of imparting valuable knowledge to others through oral presentations and written materials.

“Exhibition” means a public showing, presentation, display, exposition, fair or similar activity.

“Person” means any individual, establishment, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, corporation or company.

“Wild and exotic animal” means a nondomestic animal and includes any or all of the following orders and families, or similar orders and families whether bred in the wild or in captivity, and any hybrid with domestic animals. The animals listed in parentheses are intended as examples and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group of animals listed, unless otherwise specified:

1.     Non-human primates and prosimians (chimpanzees, monkeys);

2.     Felidae (except domesticated cats);

3.     Canidae (except domesticated dogs);

4.     Ursidae (bears);

5.     Proboscidae (elephants);

6.     Cotacea (whales, dolphins, porpoises);

7.     Crocodilia (alligators, crocodiles);

8.     Marsupialia (kangaroos, opossums);

9.     Reptilia over eight feet in length and snakes and reptiles of venomous variety;

10.   Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, but not horses or donkeys or mules);

11.   Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, but not cattle, swine, sheep or goats);

12.   Hyaenidae;

13.   Mustelidae (skunks, weasels, otters, badgers);

14.   Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis);

15.   Edentata (anteaters, sloths, armadillos);

16.   Viverridae (mongooses, civets, and genets);

17.   Pimipedia (seals, sea lions, walruses);

18.   Struthioniformes (ostriches);

19.   Casuariiformes (emus).

 

9.22.030 Display of Wild or Exotic Animals—Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to display or sponsor a display of any wild and exotic animal for public entertainment, amusement or benefit on any public or private property within the City of Encinitas.

 

9.22.040 Enforcement.
City officials shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and seek all available remedies including recourse in civil court.

 

9.22.050 Penalty.
Any person who displays or sponsors a display of any wild and exotic animal for public entertainment, amusement or benefit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

9.22.060 Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.     Educational activities endorsed or accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association.

B.     Veterinarians in the ordinary course of a veterinarian’s practice of business.

C.    Educational activities endorsed or accredited by the Association of Sanctuaries and the American Sanctuary Association.

Chapter 9.23 RETAIL SALE OF DOGS AND CATS
9.23.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of the Encinitas City Council to promote animal welfare and encourage best practices in the breeding and purchasing of dogs and cats offered for retail sale in the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2015-10)

 

9.23.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the following words and terms shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows:

“Certificate of source” shall mean any document from the source city or county animal shelter or animal control agency, humane society, or non-profit rescue organization declaring the source of the dog or cat on the premises of the pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment.

“Commercial establishment” shall mean any for-profit business enterprise, including a sole proprietorship engaged in retail or wholesale commerce related to dogs and cats, including grooming parlors, canine day care, and boarding facilities.

“Non-profit rescue organization” shall mean any California non-profit corporation that is exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs and cats; or any non-profit organization that is not exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), but is currently an active rescue partner with City of Encinitas or County of San Diego shelter or humane society, whose mission is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of dogs and cats. (Ord. 2015-10)

 

9.23.030 Prohibition of the Sale of Dogs and Cats.
It is unlawful for any person to display, offer for sale, deliver, barter, auction, give away, transfer, or sell any live dog or cat in any pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment located in the City of Encinitas, unless the dog or cat was obtained from a city or county animal shelter or animal control agency, a humane society, or a non-profit rescue organization. All pet shops, retail businesses, or other commercial establishments selling dogs or cats shall maintain a certificate of source for each of the animals and make it available upon request to animal control officers, law enforcement, code enforcement officials, or any other City employee charged with enforcing the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2015-10)

 

9.23.040 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:

A.     The display, offer for sale, delivery, bartering, auction, giving away, transfer, or sale of dogs and cats from the premises on which they were born and reared.

B.     An animal control enforcement agency or animal shelter.

C.    A private, charitable, non-profit humane society or animal rescue organization.

D.    A publicly operated animal shelter, non-profit animal humane society, or non-profit animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet store. (Ord. 2015-10)

 

9.23.050 Adoption of Shelter and Rescue Animals.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the owner, operator, or employees of a pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment located in the City of Encinitas from providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by a city or county animal shelter or animal control agency, humane society, or non-profit rescue organization and maintaining those animals at the pet shop, retail business, or other commercial establishment for the purpose of public adoption. (Ord. 2015-10)

Chapter 9.24 PUBLIC NUDITY
9.24.010 Prohibition.
It is unlawful to appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be in any public place, which includes being on public or private property in a location open to public view from adjacent public or private property in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person is exposed to public view or is not covered by an opaque covering. (Ord. 87-52)

 

9.24.020 Exceptions.
A.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to children under the age of six years.

B.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to persons engaged in a live theatrical performance in a theater, concert hall, or other similar establishment located on public land.

C.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any act or acts which are expressly authorized by law.

D.    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to authorize an act or acts which are expressly prohibited by the penal code of the State of California.

Chapter 9.26 REGULATION OF PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS, PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE AND SIMILAR SUBSTANCES
9.26.010 Findings.
The City Council of the City of Encinitas finds and determines that:

A.     The chemical compounds defined in Section 9.26.030 and similar substances are intoxicating and/or hallucinogenic to humans upon ingestion, and are often used as alternatives to other drugs such as marijuana and methamphetamine; these chemical compounds are potentially dangerous to others; that their long term health effects are unknown; and that these intoxicating chemical compounds create a significant health and safety risk to the citizens of the City of Encinitas and others.

B.     While having similar or stronger physiological effects than high potency marijuana, these intoxicating chemical compounds do not show a positive reading in traditional law enforcement drug testing, which adds to the desirability and increased use among drug abusers and increases the threat to public health and safety by the avoidance of detection.

C.    The intoxicating chemical compounds described hereunder are not yet categorized as controlled substances under state and federal law. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.020 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to address the dangers that the distribution, purchase, use, or advertisement of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense and similar products pose to the community, and provide the City with reasonable measures to abate the public nuisance created by such conduct. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.030 Definitions.
A.     “Psychoactive bath salts” are defined as follows:

1.     Any substance that contains a synthetic chemical compound that elicits psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects including, but not limited to, the following substances:

 

3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (Methylone), 3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), 4-Methylmethcathinone (Mephedrone), 4-Methoxymethcathinone (Methedrone), 4-Fluoromethcathinone (Flephedone), 3-Fluoromethcathinone (3-FMC), naphthylpyrovalerone and 2-amino-1phenyl-1-propanone (cathinone) or any derivatives, synthetic substances and their isomers with similar chemical structure or any chemical alteration of these compounds which exhibit the same effect and/or any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound.

2.     Psychoactive bath salts are commonly marketed under the following trade or street names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night, and White Lightning but may be marketed under other trade or street names and contain a common disclaimer that these products are “Not safe for human consumption.”

3.     Psychoactive bath salts do not include normal, standard bath salts that do not contain synthetic chemical compounds such as those listed above that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. Standard bath salts primarily contain magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts), sodium chloride (table salt), sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), sodium hexametaphosphate (Calgon, amorphous/glassy sodium metaphosphate), sodium sesquicarbonate and Borax.

B.     “Psychoactive herbal incense” is defined as:

1.     Any organic or inorganic product consisting of a material that contains a synthetic chemical compound that elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects including but not limited to the following: any synthetic cannabinoid compound that contains 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-018), 1-butyl-3-(1-naphtoyl) indole (JWH-073), 1-2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl -3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-200), 5-(1,1-dimetheylheptyl)-2-(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-phenol, (CP-47,497), 5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-(1R,3S)3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-phenol, (cannabicyclohexanol:CP-47,497 C8 homologue) or any derivatives, synthetic substances and their isomers with similar chemical structure or any chemical alteration of these compounds which exhibit the same effects and/or any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound.

2.     Psychoactive herbal incense products are commonly marketed under the following trade or street names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, Pot-Pourri, Buzz, Spice99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, Fake Weed, but may be marketed under other trade or street names, and may contain a common disclaimer that these products are “Not safe for human consumption.”

3.     Psychoactive herbal incense does not include normal, standard incense that are sold as incense sticks, oils or cones that are commonly used for their aromatic qualities that do not contain any synthetic chemical compounds listed above that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects.

C.    “Distribute,” “distributing” or “distribution” means and covers the following activity: to offer for sale, distribute, furnish, gift, transfer, exchange or give, to any person and each transaction of those natures made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.

D.    “Person” means any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other entity responsible for “distributing” psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive herbal incense.

E.     “Advertising” means any printed material that calls the public’s attention to things for sale.

F.     “Possession” means having for use or sale in one’s actual or constructive custody and/or control, and/or under one’s authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority, and/or power be exercised solely or jointly with others. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.040 Sales and Distribution—Prohibited.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, deliver, trade, barter, or give away any psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive herbal incense or similar substance within the City of Encinitas.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, distribution, delivery, trade or barter any psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive herbal incense or similar substance within the City of Encinitas.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to advertise or display psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive incense or similar substance within the City of Encinitas.

D.    It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product or substance is a psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive incense or similar substance within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.050 Possession—Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to possess any psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive incense or similar substance within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.060 Exemptions.
A.     Exemption for Authorized Agents of the City. It is not an offense under this chapter if any person acting at the direction of an authorized agent of the City of Encinitas or of the local law enforcement agency or allied law enforcement agency enforces or ensures compliance with this chapter.

B.     Exemption for Approval by FDA or California Law. This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds which have been approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by California law. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.070 Confiscation and Destruction.
If any psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive incense or similar substances are found in the possession of any person or entity, they may be confiscated and destroyed by the local law enforcement authority or appropriate agency acting on behalf of the City. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.080 Nuisance and Injunction.
A.     It shall constitute a nuisance for any location, property or structure to contain, maintain, possess, or store any psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive incense or similar substances in the City of Encinitas. The City of Encinitas shall have the authority to secure an injunction to compel compliance with this chapter from any individual or entity which fails to or refuses to comply with the same.

B.     It shall constitute a nuisance for any person to allow the distribution of psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive herbal incense or similar substance on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the City of Encinitas.

C.    Disclaiming psychoactive bath salts or psychoactive herbal incense or similar substances as “Not safe for human consumption” shall not avoid the application of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.090 Enforcement.
A.     Violation of any provision of this chapter or failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter shall be punishable in accordance with the Encinitas Municipal Code. At the discretion of the prosecutor, a violation of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor.

B.     Civil Action. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the City pursuant to laws of the State of California and the Encinitas Municipal Code.

C.    Administrative Citation. Any violation of this chapter may be enforced by administrative citation and action brought by the City pursuant to the Encinitas Municipal Code, including civil fines not exceeding $1,000.00 per offense and per occurrence. (Ord. 2012-12)

 

9.26.100 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section or part of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional, void or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the part or section declared to be unconstitutional, void or invalid. (Ord. 2012-12)

Chapter 9.27 DEEMED APPROVED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SERVING ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
9.27.010 Title, Purpose and Applicability.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify the title, purpose and applicability of the deemed approved alcoholic beverage serving establishment regulations and to require conformity to require compliance with the same. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.020 Title of Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Serving Establishment Regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Serving Establishment Regulations.” (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.030 Purpose of Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Serving Establishment Regulations.
The purpose of the deemed approved alcoholic beverage serving establishment regulations is to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare by requiring that all alcoholic beverage serving establishments lawfully operating pursuant to a valid ABC license (that authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption) comply with the deemed approved performance standards of this chapter and achieve the following objectives:

A.     Protect residential, commercial, industrial, and civic areas and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses;

B.     Provide opportunities for businesses with retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption to operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other commercial and civic services;

C.    Provide mechanisms to address problems often associated with the public consumption of alcoholic beverages such as litter, loitering, graffiti, unruly behavior and escalated noise levels;

D.    Provide that alcoholic beverage serving establishment activities are not the source of undue public nuisances in the community;

E.     Provide for properly maintained alcoholic beverage serving establishments so that negative impacts generated by these activities are not harmful to the surrounding environment in any way; and

F.     Monitor deemed approved activities so that they do not substantially change in mode or character of operation. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.040 Applicability of Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale Regulations.
A.     Applicability. The deemed approved alcoholic beverage serving establishment regulations shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all alcoholic beverage serving establishments lawfully operating pursuant to a valid ABC license (that authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption) within the City as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B.     Duplicated Regulations. Whenever any provision of the deemed approved alcoholic beverage serving establishment regulations and any other provision of law, whether set forth in this Code, or in any other applicable law, ordinance, or resolution of any kind, imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided in the deemed approved alcoholic beverage serving establishment regulations.

C.    Relationship to State and Federal Regulations. The deemed approved alcoholic beverage serving establishment regulations shall be imposed as a matter of municipal law, and are in addition to any federal regulations or state alcoholic beverage regulations or license/permit conditions that may apply. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.050 Definitions.
The meaning and construction of words and phrases as hereinafter set forth shall apply throughout the deemed approved alcoholic serving establishment regulations, except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.

“Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances, and sales of which requires a State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license.

“Alcoholic beverage serving establishment” means any establishment engaged in the retail sale (pursuant to a valid State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) license) of any alcoholic beverage for on-site consumption. The term alcoholic beverage serving establishment shall include: (1) any alcoholic beverage serving establishment that is not in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but that is later permitted by the City and issued a valid ABC license; (2) any alcoholic beverage serving establishment engaged in the retail sale of any alcoholic beverage pursuant to a conditional use permit, adopted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and a valid ABC license; and (3) any legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage serving establishment activity operating pursuant to a valid ABC license.

“Alcoholic beverage serving establishment activity” means the lawful operation of retail sale, for on-site consumption, of liquor, beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages.

“Condition of approval” means a requirement which must be carried out by the activity in order to retain its deemed approved status.

“Deemed approved activity” means any alcoholic beverage serving establishment lawfully operating pursuant to a valid ABC license (that authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption) as long as it complies with the deemed approved performance standards as set forth in Section 9.27.070 of this chapter.

“Deemed approved performance standards” means regulations contained in Section 9.27.070 of this chapter.

“Deemed approved status” means the status conferred upon a deemed approved activity. Deemed approved status replaces legal nonconforming activity status.

“Illegal activity” means an activity which has been determined to be in violation with the deemed approved performance standards of this chapter (pursuant to this chapter, such an activity shall forfeit its deemed approved status and shall no longer be considered a deemed approved activity).

“Legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage serving establishment activity” means a commercial alcoholic beverage serving establishment activity which was a nonconforming use pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 30.76 of the Municipal Code and for which a valid State of California ABC license had been issued and used in the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the license at a time prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter (such an activity shall convert to a deemed approved activity and shall no longer be considered a legal nonconforming activity).

“Premises” means the actual space within a building or any area either directly or indirectly supporting alcoholic beverage sales. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.060 Administrative Hearing Officer.
The City Manager shall designate a fair and impartial Administrative Hearing Officer for administrative hearings (pursuant to law) necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall conduct public hearings for the purpose of achieving compliance with this chapter. This section is not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining to other City officers or bodies, related to monitoring and ensuring the harmony of alcoholic beverage serving establishment activities in the City. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.070 Deemed Approved Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Activities.
The provisions of this section shall be known as the deemed approved performance standards. The purpose of these standards is to control dangerous or objectionable environmental effects or potential effects of alcoholic beverage serving establishment activities. These standards shall apply, upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to all deemed approved alcoholic beverage serving establishment activities (i.e., possessing deemed approved status pursuant to this chapter).

Deemed approved status shall only be maintained if the activities of the alcoholic beverage serving establishment complies with all of the following deemed approved performance standards:

A.     Does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

B.     Does not result in jeopardizing or endangering the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.

C.    Does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including, but not limited to, disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises (especially in the late night or early morning hours) traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests.

D.    Does not result in violations to any applicable city, state or federal laws or regulations, ordinance or statute.

E.     Upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood.

F.     Personnel (such as managers or servers) do not sell, serve or deliver to a patron any alcoholic beverage unless he or she has completed the Responsible Beverage Service and Sales Training (RBSS) conducted by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control or by a certified RBSS Training Provider in accordance with City regulations. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.080 Automatic Deemed Approved Status.
All alcoholic beverage serving establishment activities, new or existing, including legal nonconforming activities established pursuant to Chapter 30.76 of the Municipal Code, shall automatically become deemed approved activities as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Each such deemed approved activity shall retain its deemed approved status as long as it complies with the deemed approved performance standards. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.090 Notification to Owners of Deemed Approved Activities.
The City or its designated enforcement authority shall:

A.     Provide a notice to the owner of each alcoholic beverage serving establishment with deemed approved status within the City, and also the property owner (if not the same), of the establishment’s deemed approved status authorizing the establishment to lawfully continue its operation in the manner required by this chapter.

B.     Provide the owner of any alcoholic beverage serving establishment with deemed approved status with a copy of Municipal Code Chapter 9.27 (Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Serving Establishment Regulations); inform the owner of the requirement that the establishment shall be operated in accordance with the deemed approved performance standards; and inform the owner of the requirement that the deemed approved performance standards shall be posted in a conspicuous and unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the establishment for public review.

C.    The notices shall be sent via first class and certified return receipt mail. Should the notice be returned, then the notice shall be sent via regular U.S. mail. Failure of any person to receive notice given pursuant to this chapter shall not affect the deemed approved status of the activity. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.100 Deemed Approved Use—Discontinuance.
Whenever an alcoholic beverage serving establishment activity discontinues active operation for more than 180 consecutive days, or ceases to be licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, the deemed approved status shall automatically be terminated.

This requirement shall not apply to a closure for restoration of premises rendered totally or partially inaccessible by an extraordinary natural event that cannot be reasonably foreseen or prevented (such as a flood or earthquake) or a toxic type of accident, provided that the restoration does not increase the square footage of the alcoholic beverage serving establishment. Nor shall this requirement apply to a closure for purposes of repair, if that repair does not change the nature of the premises and does not increase the square footage of the alcoholic beverage serving establishment. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.110 Procedure for Consideration of Violations to Deemed Approved Performance Standards and/or Conditions of Approval.
The provisions of this section shall outline the process by which deemed approved activities are required to be reviewed.

Upon the City receiving a complaint from the public, Sheriff’s Department, Code Enforcement Officer, or any other interested party that a deemed approved activity is in violation of the deemed approved performance standards or that there has been a failure to comply with any condition of approval, the following procedure shall be followed:

A.     A Code Enforcement Officer shall assess the nature of the complaint and its validity by conducting an on-site observation and inspection of the premises to assess the activity’s compliance with the deemed approved performance standards. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the deemed approved activity is in violation of the deemed approved performance standards, an administrative warning shall be issued.

B.     If upon reinspection or another similar complaint is filed that verifies that the violation is not corrected or appears to be continuing, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue administrative penalties by giving written notice of the violation to the owner and/or operator of the establishment. Penalties shall be as follows:

1.     For the first administrative penalty within any 12-month period following the administrative warning, the penalty shall be a fine of $500.00;

2.     For a second administrative penalty within any 12-month period following the administrative warning, the penalty shall be a fine of $1,000.00 and the owner and/or operator of the establishment shall be referred to an Administrative Hearing Officer for an administrative public hearing. Notification shall be in accordance with Section 30.01.070 of the Municipal Code.

C.    Any administrative penalty issued under this section shall be issued, processed, enforced, and appealable in compliance with all of the provisions of Chapter 1.08 of the Municipal Code, unless otherwise expressly addressed by this chapter.

D.    The purpose of the public hearing is to receive testimony and determine whether violations to the deemed approved performance standards and/or violations to any conditions of approval applicable to the premises have occurred. While the hearing is open, any interested party must enter into the record oral, written or documentary evidence to the Administrative Hearing Officer for his or her consideration; failure to do so shall preclude the party from introducing such evidence during the appeal hearing and/or in a court proceeding.

E.     At the public hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall determine whether: (1) the deemed approved activity conforms to the deemed approved performance standards and to any other conditions or requirements, and may maintain the deemed approved status for the activity in question; or (2) to require changes, or impose reasonable conditions of approval that in the judgment of the Administrative Hearing Officer, are necessary to ensure compliance with the deemed approved performance standards or other applicable conditions or requirements, and these conditions shall be based on the evidence presented; or (3) to revoke the activity’s deemed approved status. In reaching a determination as to the appropriateness of modifying or revoking an establishment’s deemed approved status, or imposing additional or amended conditions on the use, the Administrative Hearing Officer may consider:

1.     The length of time the deemed approved activity has been out of compliance with the deemed approved performance standard(s).

2.     The impact of the violation of the deemed approved performance standard(s) on the community.

3.     Any information regarding the owner of the deemed approved activity’s efforts to remedy the violation of the deemed approved performance standard(s).

“Efforts to remedy” shall include, but are not limited to:

a.     Timely calls to the police department that are placed by the owner and/or operator of the deemed approved activity, his or her employees, or agents.

b.     Requesting that those persons engaging in activities causing violations of the deemed approved performance standard(s) cease those activities, unless the owner of the deemed approved activity, or his or her employees or agents feel that their personal safety would be threatened in making that request.

c.     Making improvements to the deemed approved activity’s property or operations, including, but not limited to, the installation of security cameras, clear unobstructed windows, clean sidewalks and graffiti abated within three days.

F.     Any determination made by the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be supported by written findings that the establishment as operated or maintained constitutes a nuisance.

G.    New conditions of approval imposed as part of the administrative hearing process shall be made a part of the deemed approved status and the alcoholic beverage serving establishment shall be required to comply with these conditions of approval. The determination of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall become final 15 calendar days after the date of decision unless appealed to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of the Municipal Code.

H.    If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the violation is not capable of correction, presents a serious threat to public health or safety, or otherwise warrants expedited action, he or she may in lieu of issuing an administrative warning or an administrative penalty, refer the matter directly to an Administrative Hearing Officer for an administrative public hearing at which the establishment’s deemed approved status may be modified or revoked.

I.      Any party seeking to appeal the determination shall be limited to issues and/or evidence presented to the Administrative Hearing Officer prior to the close of the Administrative Hearing Officer’s public hearing on the matter, as the appeal is not de novo. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be final unless appealed to the City Council in accordance with Section 9.27.120 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.120 Appeal on the Revocation of a Deemed Approved Status to the City Council.
An appeal of a decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be filed pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code. In considering the appeal, the Council shall determine whether the deemed approved activity complies with the deemed approved performance standards, and may affirm or turn over, in whole or in part, the Administrative Hearing Officer’s determination and require changes thereto by imposing conditions of approval as it may determine in its reasonable discretion that are necessary to achieve compliance. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.130 Official Action.
All officials, departments, and employees of the City vested with the authority to issue permits, certificates, or licenses shall adhere to, and require compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.140 Violations and Penalties.
A.     Infractions. Any person who violates, causes, or permits another person to violate any provision of these regulations shall be guilty of an infraction unless otherwise provided.

B.     Separate Offenses for Each Day. Any violator shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of these regulations is committed, continued, permitted, or caused by such violator and shall be punishable accordingly.

C.    Any Violation Shall Constitute a Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the City pursuant to applicable law.

D.    Injunction as Additional Remedy. Any violation of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the City, create a cause of action for injunctive relief.

E.     Penalties. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Section shall be punishable by a fine to the maximum permitted under state law. Any violation beyond the second conviction within a one-year period may be charged by the City Attorney or District Attorney as a misdemeanor, and the penalty for conviction shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment to the maximum permitted under state law.

F.     Liability for Expenses. In addition to the punishment provided by law, a violator is liable for such costs, expenses, and disbursements paid or incurred by the City or any of its contractors in correction, abatement, and prosecution of the violation. Reinspection fees to ascertain compliance with previously noticed or cited violations shall be charged against the owner of the deemed approved activity. The inspection official shall give the owner or other responsible party of such affected premises a written notice showing the itemized cost of such chargeable service and requesting payment thereof. Should the violator fail to pay the fees due and owing in the required time, the charges shall be placed as a lien against the property pursuant to applicable law. (Ord. 2017-08)

 

9.27.150 Enforcement.
The City shall designate the appropriate personnel to enforce the provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 2017-08)

Chapter 9.28 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL
9.28.010 Prohibited Possession of Opened Container, Public Property.
Except as otherwise expressly allowed by the provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to enter upon, be, or remain upon, any public street, sidewalk, alley or public property when in possession of any receptacle which contains any alcoholic beverage and which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. (Ord. 90-19)

 

9.28.020 Prohibited Possession of Opened Container, Posted Private Property.
A.     Prohibition. Except as otherwise expressly allowed by the provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to enter upon, be, or remain on any posted premises when in possession of any receptacle which contains any alcoholic beverage and which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.

B.     Definition. “Posted premises” means any premises open to the public upon which the property owner has erected one or more signs clearly visible to persons upon the premises, which notify persons that it is unlawful for any person who has in his or her possession any receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, to enter upon, be, or remain on the premises designated in the sign.

C.    Discretionary Posting. Any property owner of property open to the public may post a sign in accordance with the provisions of this section.

D.    Mandatory Posting.

1.     It is unlawful for the owner of any retail, package off-sale alcoholic beverage activity, licensed pursuant to Subdivision 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the California Business and Professions Code to fail to post signs upon the licensed premises and in any parking lot immediately adjacent to the premises and under the control of such owner, clearly visible to persons within the premises and in any parking lot immediately adjacent to the premises, which notify persons that it is unlawful for any person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, to enter upon, be, or remain on the premises of any adjacent parking lot.

2.     The provisions of this subsection do not apply to a private parking lot used for residential purposes which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises.

 

9.28.030 Warning Regarding Alcohol Consumption.
A.     Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents premises offering wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or dispensing for consideration to the public, shall cause a sign or notice to be permanently posted or displayed on the premises which reads as follows: PREGNANCY AND ALCOHOL DO NOT MIX - DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INCLUDING WINE AND BEER DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS.

B.     The sign or notice shall be no smaller than eight and one-half inches wide by five and one-half inches long with lettering of no less than three-eighths inches in height.

C.    The sign shall be placed:

1.     Where the sale or dispensing of wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises, at least one sign shall be so placed as to assure that it is conspicuously displayed so as to be readable at all points of purchase.

2.     Where the sale of wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily intended for consumption on the premises, at least one sign shall be placed to ensure that it is conspicuously displayed so as to be readable in each public restroom.

D.    In the event a substantial number of the public patronizing a premises offering for sale or dispensing wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, an additional sign or notice as is required by this section shall be worded in the primary language or languages involved. (Ord. 87-53)

 

9.28.040 Beaches, Parks and Waterways.
A.     Prohibition—General. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, while upon any location specified below, it is unlawful for any person to possess a receptacle which contains an alcoholic beverage.

1.     A public City beach, including its related accesses and parking lots; or

2.     A public City beach overlook, including its related accesses and parking lots.

B.     Only Beer and Wine Permitted. Even when it is lawful to possess an alcoholic beverage on public property, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess on any park any alcoholic beverage, except for beer and wine.

C.    Prohibition—Ban at Specified Locations. While upon any location specified below, it is unlawful for any person to possess a receptacle which contains an alcoholic beverage.

1.     Cardiff by the Sea Sports Park, including its related parking lots.

2.     Ecke Sports Park, including its related parking lots.

3.     Glen Park, including its related parking lot.

4.     Encinitas Viewpoint Park.

5.     Leucadia Roadside Park. (Ord. 94-16; Ord. 98-20; Ord. 99-07; Ord. 2001-12)

 

9.28.050 Authority to Possess.
The prohibitions of this chapter shall not be applicable to persons transporting or possessing alcoholic beverages in a City beach, park or waterway in accordance with a lease, concession, permit or other contract approved by the City.

Chapter 9.29 REGULATION OF CLONAZEPAM
9.29.010 Purpose and Intent.
The City Council of the City of Encinitas finds and declares that:

A.     In addition to its legal uses, adults and juveniles are abusing clonazepam to become intoxicated and/or to facilitate sexual assault.

B.     There are reports of clonazepam being used to facilitate sexual assault.

C.    There is a current and immediate threat to the public safety and welfare in that the use of clonazepam by juveniles is increasing at an alarming rate in San Diego County due to its easy accessibility, low price and powerful effect.

D.    At the present time no law exists prohibiting the possession of clonazepam without a valid prescription. (Ord. 2000-02)

 

9.29.020 Definition.
“Clonazepam” means any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal containing clonazepam as described in California Health and Safety Code Section 11057(d)(6). (Ord. 2000-02)

 

9.29.030 Possession Prohibited.
Except as authorized by law and as otherwise provided in subdivision (b) of Article 7 (commencing with Section 4211) of Chapter 9 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess the drug clonazepam or any substance containing the same without a validly issued prescription. (Ord. 2000-02)

 

9.29.040 Enforcement Authority.
The City Attorney and the Chief of Police, or any designated representative of the City, shall be authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-02)

 

9.29.050 Enforcement Remedies.
Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted as misdemeanors subject to the maximum fines and jail time as prescribed by law. The City Attorney and the Chief of Police may also pursue injunctive relief, civil penalties or administrative remedies as may be authorized by law. (Ord. 2000-02)

 

9.29.060 Strict Liability Offense.
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as strict liability offenses irrespective of intent. (Ord. 2000-02)

Chapter 9.30 FIREARMS
9.30.010 Prohibition.
Other than in the defense of a person or property, it shall be an infraction for any person to shoot, fire or discharge any harmful projectile from any pistol, revolver, shotgun, rifle or any other firearm or device fired or discharged by explosives, or air gun or air rifle in any portion of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 91-14)

 

9.30.020 Exception.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following:

A.     The use of a starter pistol for or during an official sporting event.

B.     Weapons and firearms discharged on a firing range permitted to operate within the City limits.

Chapter 9.31 RESIDENTIAL SAFE STORAGE OF FIREARMS
9.31.010 Purpose and Intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter that the storage of firearms in residences within the City of Encinitas be regulated for the protection and health of the public and to prevent firearm access by a person who is not the authorized user of a firearm. (Ord. 2019-20)

 

9.31.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply in this section:

“Accessory structure” has the same meaning as “accessory structure, detached” in Encinitas Municipal Code Section 30.04.010.

“Authorized user” means a person who is not prohibited from owning or possessing a firearm.

“Firearm” means any device, designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used as a weapon, from. which a projectile is expelled through a barrel by the force of explosion or other form of combustion.

“Locked container” has the same meaning as in California Penal Code Section 16850.

“Mobilehome” has the same meaning as in Encinitas Municipal Code Section 30.04.010.

“Residence” means any structure intended or used for human habitation including, without limitation, houses, townhouses, condominiums, apartments, mobilehomes or other similar dwelling.

“Structure” has the same meaning as in Encinitas Municipal Code Section 30.04.010.

“Trigger lock” means a firearm safety device approved by the California Department of Justice Bureau of Firearms in accordance with California Penal Code Section 23635. (Ord. 2019-20)

 

9.31.030 Prohibition.
It is unlawful for any person to keep a firearm within any residence, including its accessory structures, unless the firearm is stored in a locked container or disabled with a trigger lock. (Ord. 2019-20)

 

9.31.040 Exceptions.
Section 9.31.030 shall not apply in the following circumstances:

A.     The firearm is carried on the body of a person who is an authorized user of the firearm; or

B.     The firearm is in the immediate control of the authorized user so that the person can readily retrieve and use the firearm as if carried on the person’s body. (Ord. 2019-20)

 

9.31.050 Reporting Lost or Stolen Firearms.
In order to encourage reports to law enforcement agencies of lost or stolen firearms, a person who files a report with a law enforcement agency notifying the agency that a firearm has been lost or stolen shall not be subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter for the firearm that is reported lost or stolen. (Ord. 2019-20)

Chapter 9.32 NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL
9.32.401 Purpose and Intent.
The City Council finds and declares that:

A.     Inadequately controlled noise presents a growing danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the City;

B.     The making and creating of disturbing, excessive, offensive or unusually loud noises within the jurisdictional limits of the City is a condition which has persisted and the level and frequency of occurrence of such noises continue to increase;

C.    The making, creation or continuance of such excessive noises which are prolonged or unusual in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the City of Encinitas;

D.    Every person is entitled to an environment in which the noise is not detrimental to his or her life, health and enjoyment of property;

E.     The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared to be a matter of legislative determination and public policy and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in the pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace and quiet of the City and its inhabitants;

F.     To administer the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager is authorized to appoint one or more noise control officers. (Ord. 90-22)

 

9.32.402 Definitions.
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, unless otherwise defined herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

“Aircraft” shall mean any powered vehicle which at any time of its operation is airborne, and is used to transport people or materials for whatever purpose.

“Ambient sound level” shall mean the composite noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes a normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location and time.

“Average sound level” shall mean a sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth in American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971. Average sound level is also called equivalent continuous sound level (Leq).

“Commercial purpose, loud speaking amplifiers for advertising” shall mean and include the use, operation or maintenance of any sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound equipment.

“Construction equipment” shall mean any tools, machinery or equipment used in connection with construction operations including all types of “special construction” equipment as defined in the pertinent sections of the California Vehicle Code when used in the construction process on any construction site, regardless of whether such construction site be located on-highway or off-highway.

“Container” shall mean any receptacle, regardless of contents, manufactured from wood, metal, plastic, paper, or any other material including but not limited to any barrel, basket, box, crate, tub, bottle, can or refuse container.

“Decibel” shall mean a unit for measuring the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.

“Disturbing, excessive or offensive noise” shall mean:

1.     Any sound or noise which constitutes a nuisance involving discomfort or annoyance to persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

2.     Any sound or noise exceeding criteria standards, or levels as set forth in this chapter.

“Emergency work” shall mean work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger or damage or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service.

“Motor vehicles” shall mean any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, “mini-bikes” and “go-carts.”

“Noise control officer” shall mean a person or organization appointed by the City Manager.

“Noise level” shall mean “sound level” and the terms may be used interchangeably herein.

“Noncommercial purpose, loud speaking amplifiers for advertising” shall mean the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a “commercial purpose.” Noncommercial purpose shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes.

“Person” shall mean a person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private.

“Powered model vehicles” shall mean, but shall not be limited to airborne, waterborne, or landborne vehicles such as model airplanes, model boats and model vehicles of any type or size which are not designed for carrying persons or property and which can be propelled in any form other than manpower or windpower.

“Sound amplifying equipment” shall mean any machine or device, mobile or stationary used to amplify music, the human voice, or any sound.

“Sound level” (noise level) shall mean the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighing network as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest revision thereof). If the frequency weighing employed is not indicated, the A-weighing is implied.

“Sound level meter” shall mean an instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, readout and frequency weighing networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S2A meters in the American National Standards Institute Specifications for Sound Level Meters, S1.4-1971 or the latest revision thereof.

“Sound truck” shall mean any motor vehicle or other vehicle regardless of motive power whether in motion or stationary having mounted thereon, built-in, or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment other than a car radio or television.

“Watercraft” shall mean any boat, ship, barge, craft or floating thing designed for navigation in the water which is propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion, but shall not include a vessel possessing a valid marine document issued by the United States Bureau of Customs or any federal agency successor thereto.

Supplementary Definitions of Technical Terms. Definitions of technical terms not defined herein shall be obtained from the American National Standard, “Acoustical Terminology” S1.1-1961 (R-1971) or the latest revision thereof.

 

9.32.403 Sound Level Measurement.
A.     Any sound or noise level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighing and “slow” response pursuant to applicable manufacturer’s instructions.

B.     The sound level meter shall be appropriately calibrated and adjusted as necessary by means of an acoustical calibrator of the coupler-type to assure meter accuracy within the tolerances set forth in American National Standards ANSI-S1.4-1971.

C.    For outside measurements, the microphone shall be not less than four feet above the ground, at least four feet distant from walls or other large reflecting surfaces and shall be protected from the effects of wind noises by the use of appropriate wind screens and the location selected shall be at any point on the affected property. In cases when the microphone must be located within 10 feet of walls or similar large reflecting surfaces, the actual measured distances and orientation of sources, microphone and reflecting surfaces shall be noted and recorded. In no case shall a noise measurement be taken within five feet of the noise source.

D.    For inside measurements, the microphone shall be at least three feet distant from any wall, ceiling or partition, and the average measurement of at least three microphone positions throughout the room shall be determined.

 

9.32.404 Sound Level Limits.
See Section 30.40.010 of the Municipal Code for level limits.

 

9.32.405 Motor Vehicles.
A.     Repairs of Motor Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause disturbing, excessive or offensive noise.

B.     On-Highway. Violations for exceeding applicable noise level limits as to persons operating motor vehicles on a public street or highway in the City shall be prosecuted under applicable California Vehicle Code provisions and under federal regulation adopted pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Sections 4905(a)(1) (A), (B) and (C)(ii), (iii) for which enforcement responsibility is delegated to local governmental agencies.

C.    Off-Highway. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle of any type on any site other than on a public street or highway as defined in the California Vehicle Code in a manner so as to cause noise in excess of those noise levels permitted for on-highway motor vehicles as specified in the table “35 miles per hour or less speed limits” contained in Section 23130 of the California Vehicle Code.

D.    Emergency Vehicles. Nothing in this section shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles when being used in emergency situations.

E.     Urban Transit Buses. Buses as defined in the California Vehicle Code shall at all times comply with the requirements of this section.

 

9.32.406 Powered Model Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any powered model vehicle except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and then only in such a manner so as not to emit noise in excess of those levels set forth in Section 9.32.404; however, if powered model vehicles are operated in public parks at a point more than 100 feet from the property line, the noise level shall be determined at a distance of 100 feet from the noise source instead of at the property line, and noises from powered model vehicles measured at that distance in excess of the noise limits specified in Section 9.32.404 are prohibited.

 

9.32.407 Solid Waste Management Vehicles and Parking Lot Cleaning Devices.
A.     Solid Waste Management Vehicles. No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a refuse compacting, processing, or collection vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. in or adjacent to any residential zone unless a variance has been applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Parking Lot and Sidewalk Cleaning Devices.

1.     No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, an engine-powered parking lot or sidewalk sweeper or blower or high pressure cleaning devices between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in or adjacent to any residential zone unless a variance has been applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter; and

2.     No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, an engine-powered parking lot and sidewalk sweeper or blower or high pressure cleaning devices on a Sunday or on a federal holiday in or adjacent to any residential zone unless a variance has been applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter.

 

9.32.408 Watercraft.
Violations for excessive noise of watercraft operating in waters under the jurisdiction of the City shall be prosecuted under applicable provisions of the California Harbors and Navigation Code.

 

9.32.409 Airports.
All noise emanating from airport activities other than that produced by aircraft shall be subject to all of the regulations contained in this chapter.

 

9.32.410 Construction Equipment.
Except for emergency work, it shall be unlawful for any person, including the City, to operate construction equipment at any construction site, except as outlined in subsections A and B of this section:

A.     It shall be unlawful for any person, including the City, to operate construction equipment at any construction site on Sundays, and days appointed by the President, Governor or the City Council for a public fast, thanksgiving or holiday. Notwithstanding the above, a person may operate construction equipment on the above-specified days between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. in compliance with the requirements of subsection B of this section at his or her residence or for the purpose of constructing a residence for him or herself, provided such operation of construction equipment is not carried on for profit or livelihood. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate construction equipment at any construction site on Mondays through Saturdays except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

B.     No such equipment, or combination of equipment regardless of age or date of acquisition, shall be operated so as to cause noise at a level in excess of 75 decibels for more than eight hours during any 24-hour period when measured at or within the property lines of any property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes.

In the event that lower noise limit standards are established for construction equipment pursuant to state or federal law, said lower limits shall be used as a basis for revising and amending the noise level limits specified in this subsection.

 

9.32.411 Containers and Construction Material.
It shall be unlawful for any person to handle or transport or cause to be handled or transported in any public place, any container or any construction material in such a way as to create a disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise.

 

9.32.412 Signal Device for Food Trucks.
No person shall operate or cause to have operated or used any sound signal device other than sound-amplification equipment attached to a motor vehicle wagon or manually propelled cart from which food or any other items are sold which emits a sound signal more frequently than once every 10 minutes in any one street block and with a duration of more than 10 seconds for any single emission. The sound level of this sound signal shall not exceed 90 decibels at 50 feet.

 

9.32.413 Multiple Family Dwelling Units.
See Section 30.40.010A for allowable interior noise levels for multiple family dwelling units.

 

9.32.414 General Noise Regulations.
A.     General Prohibitions. In the absence of objective measurement by use of a sound level meter, additionally it shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of the City, any disturbing, excessive or offensive noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

The characteristics and conditions which should be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists, include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     The level of noise;

2.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

3.     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

4.     The level of the background noise;

5.     The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;

6.     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

7.     The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

8.     The time of the day or night the noise occurs;

9.     The duration of the noise;

10.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and

11.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.

B.     Disturbing, Excessive or Offensive Noises. The following acts, among others, are declared to be disturbing, excessive and offensive noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:

1.     Horns, Signaling Devices, etc. Violations for disturbing, excessive or offensive noises associated with the use or operation of horns, signaling devices, etc., on automobiles, motorcycles, or any other vehicle, except as provided in Section 9.32.412, shall be prosecuted under applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

2.     Radios, Television Sets, Phonographs and Similar Devices.

a.     Uses Restricted. The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area; or in a manner to exceed those levels set forth in Section 9.32.404 when measured at a distance of 25 feet from such device operating in a public right-of-way or public space; except that, subject to a noise permit (issued by the Director of Parks and Recreation who shall serve as the noise control officer in this regard) specifying time, location and other conditions, amplified sound may be permitted within City parks provided that said sound does not exceed a level of 90 decibels 50 feet from the source or exceed those levels set forth in Section 9.32.404 at the park boundary.

b.     Prima Facie Violations. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, television set, machine or similar device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.

3.     Loud Speaking Amplifiers for Advertising. The use, operation, or the permitting to be played, used or operated of any sound production or reproduction device or machine including, but not limited to, radio receiving sets, phonographs, musical instruments, loudspeakers, and sound amplifiers, for commercial or business advertising purposes in, upon, over or across any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or public property in such a manner as to violate the provisions of this chapter is prohibited. The provisions shall not be applicable to sound amplifying equipment mounted on any sound truck or vehicle for commercial or noncommercial purposes where the owner or operator complies with the following requirements:

a.     The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.

b.     Operations are permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or after 9:00 p.m. during public events and affairs of interest to the general public.

c.     Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least 10 miles per hour, except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic the said sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop.

d.     Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools, courthouses or places of worship.

e.     The volume of sound shall be controlled so that said volume is not raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility and so that the volume of sound shall not exceed a sound level of 65 decibels (on the “A” scale) at a distance of 50 feet from the sound amplifying equipment as measured by a sound level meter which meets the American National Standard ANSI S1.4-1971 or the latest revision thereof.

f.      No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated unless the axis of the center of any sound reproducing equipment used shall be parallel to the direction of travel of the sound truck; provided, however, that any sound reproducing equipment may be so placed upon said sound truck as to not vary more than 15 degrees either side of the axis of the center of the direction of travel.

g.     No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be driven on the same street past the same point more than twice in a period of one hour.

4.     Yelling, Shouting, etc. Disturbing or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of neighborhood residents or persons of normal sensitivity within the area for whatever reason, is prohibited.

5.     Hawkers and Peddlers. The shouting or crying out of any peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or persons of normal sensitivity is prohibited. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at sporting events, parades, fairs, celebrations, festivals, circuses, carnivals, and other similar special events for public entertainment.

6.     Drums, Other Instruments. The use of any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the County is prohibited. This provision shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or legally authorized parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized by the City to engage in such conduct.

7.     Animals. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person of any animal which by any frequent or long continued noise shall cause annoyance or discomfort to persons of normal sensitivity in the vicinity; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to apply to occasional noises emanating from legally operated dog and cat hospitals, humane societies, pounds, farm and/or agricultural facilities, or areas where keeping of animals are permitted. The written affirmation by two persons having separate residences that violation of the section disturbs the peace and quiet of said persons shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.

8.     Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals. The creation of any noise on any street, sidewalk, or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning (except recreational schools), church, court or library, while the same are in use; or adjacent to a hospital, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility which noise interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalks, or public places indicating the presence of a school, institution of learning, church, court, library, rest home or long-term medical or metal care facility, is prohibited.

9.     Steam Whistles. The operation, use or causing to be operated or used of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler is prohibited except to give notice of the time to start or stop work or as a sound signal of imminent danger.

10.   Engines and Motor Vehicles. Any disturbing or raucous noises caused off streets or highways by racing or accelerating the engine of any motor vehicle while moving or not moving, by the willful backfiring of any engine and exhaust from the engine tailpipe or muffler, or from the screeching of tires, is prohibited. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

9.32.415 Burglar Alarms.
Any building burglar alarm must have an automatic cutoff, capable of terminating its operation within 15 minutes of the time it is activated. Notwithstanding the requirements of the provision, any law enforcement official of the City shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm during the period of its activation.

No owner of a motor vehicle shall have in operation audible burglar alarm therein unless such burglar alarm shall be capable of terminating its operation within 15 minutes of the time it is activated. Notwithstanding the requirements of this provision, any law enforcement official of the City shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm installed on a motor vehicle at any time during the period of its activation.

 

9.32.416 Aircraft.
Violations for exceeding applicable noise level limits as to persons operating aircraft shall be prosecuted under applicable law.

 

9.32.417 Exemptions.
A.     Emergency Work. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any emergency work as defined herein, provided that (1) the noise control officer has been notified in advance, if possible, or as soon as practical after said emergency, and (2) any vehicle device, apparatus, or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency work is designed, modified, or equipped to reduce sounds produced to the lowest possible level consistent with effective operation of such vehicle, device, apparatus, or equipment.

B.     Sporting, Entertainment, Public Events. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

1.     Those reasonable sounds emanating from authorized school bands, school athletic and school entertainment events.

2.     Sporting, entertainment and public events which are conducted pursuant to a license or permit issued by the County of San Diego for noise exceeding criteria, standards or levels as set forth in the chapter.

3.     Those reasonable sounds emanating from a sporting, entertainment, or public event; provided, however, it shall be unlawful to exceed those levels set forth in Section 9.32.404 when measured at or within the property lines of any property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes unless a variance has been granted allowing sounds in excess of said levels.

C.    Federal or State Preempted Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to an activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law.

D.    Minor Maintenance to Residential Property. The provisions of Section 9.32.404 shall not apply to noise sources associated with minor maintenance to property used either in part or in whole for residential purposes provided said activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday, or between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday.

E.     Agricultural Operations. The provisions of Section 9.32.404 shall not apply to equipment associated with agricultural operations, provided that, all equipment and machinery powered and air intake silencer in good working order, and provided further that:

1.     Operations do not take place between 7:00 p.m. and the following 7:00 a.m.; or

2.     Such operations and equipment are utilized for the preparation, planting, harvesting, protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions; or

3.     Such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest control, provided the application is made in accordance with regulations or procedures administered by the County Department of Agriculture; or

4.     Such operations and equipment are associated with the application of agricultural chemicals provided the application is made in accordance with acceptable agricultural practices or upon the recommendation of an agricultural specialist.

 

9.32.424 Variances.
The noise control officer shall evaluate all applications for variances from the requirements of this chapter and may grant said variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms, conditions, and requirements as he or she may deem reasonable to achieving compliance with the provisions of the chapter. Each such variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment. If in the judgment of the noise control officer the time for compliance cannot be reasonably determined, a variance to cause the noise may be issued for a specified period of time, subject to revocation or modification after review by the noise control officer at interim times to be designated by the noise control officer in the variance. In determining the reasonableness of the terms of any proposed variance, the noise control officer shall consider the magnitude caused by the offensive noise, the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise, operations carried under existing nonconforming rights or conditional use permits or zone variances, the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work, the economic factors related to age and useful life of the equipment and general public interest and welfare.

 

9.32.425 Application for Permits and Variances.
Every applicant for a permit or variance required by this chapter shall file with the noise control officer a written application on a form prescribed by said officer. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the noise source involved, and such other information as the noise control officer may require. The City shall be notified of any application.

 

9.32.426 Application Fees.
Every applicant, except any state or local government agency or public district, shall pay a fee of $25.00 for each application for variance.

A request for a duplicate permit or variance shall be made in writing to the noise control officer within 10 days after the destruction, loss, or defacement of a permit or variance. A fee of $5.00 shall be charged, except to any state or local government agency or public district, for issuing a duplicate permit or variance.

 

9.32.427 Extension Fees.
If a permit or variance is to be extended beyond the original use termination on date of permit or variance, the extension fee shall be $25.00.

 

9.32.428 Actions on Applications.
The noise control officer shall act, within 30 days, if possible, on an application for a permit or variance and shall notify the applicant in writing by mail or in person of the action taken, namely, approval, conditional approval, or denial.

Notice of the action taken shall be deemed to have been given when the written notification has been deposited in the mail, postpaid, addressed to the address shown on the application to furnish further information or further plans or specifications. Failure of the applicant to provide such further information or further plans or specifications within 10 days shall be grounds for denial of the permit or variance.

In the event of denial of an application for a permit or variance, the noise control officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefor. Service of the notification may be made in person or by mail, and such service may be proved by the written acknowledgment of the persons served or affidavit of the person making the service. The noise control officer shall not accept a further application unless the applicant has complied with the objections specified by the noise control officer as the reasons for denial.

 

9.32.429 Applications Deemed Denied.
The applicant may deem the application for permit or variance denied if the noise control officer fails to act on the application within 30 days after filing, or within 10 days after applicant furnishes the further information, plans and specifications requested by the noise control officer, whichever is later.

 

9.32.430 Provision of Sampling and Testing Facilities.
A person operating under a permit or variance shall provide and maintain such sampling and testing facilities as specified in the permit or variance.

 

9.32.431 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a final determination made under the authority of this chapter may seek review by filing an appeal pursuant to the procedures within the Municipal Code. A final determination by the noise control officer shall be appealed to the City Council. (See Chapter 1.12.)

Chapter 9.36 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY—SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL
9.36.010 Definitions.
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

“Nudity” shall mean the showing with less than a fully opaque covering of the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, or anal region of any person, other than a child under the age of puberty, or any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof of any female person, other than a child under the age of puberty.

“Pictorial material” shall mean any material suggesting or conveying a visual image, and includes, but is not limited to, a photograph, painting, or drawing.

“Public right-of-way” shall mean any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and includes, but is not limited to, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, park, square, and any other similar public way.

“Sexual conduct” shall mean an act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, homosexuality, sodomy, bestiality, anal intercourse, oral copulation, flagellation, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus or anal region, or, if such person be a female, breast. (Ord. 87-77)

 

9.36.020 Prohibition.
No person shall knowingly place in or adjacent to a public right-of-way pictorial material depicting nudity or sexual conduct unless such pictorial material is positioned, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a public view of such pictorial material by a person upon the public right-of-way.

Chapter 9.38 REGULATING SHORT-TERM RENTALS
9.38.010 Purpose—Findings and Determinations.
The City Council finds and determines that the City has received numerous complaints related to short-term rentals, including, but not limited to, excessive noise, disorderly conduct, illegal parking, vandalism, overcrowding, traffic congestion and excessive accumulation of refuse. The City Council further finds and determines that these adverse impacts are related to the transitory nature of the occupants of short-term rentals. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations to address and mitigate these adverse impacts. This chapter is not intended to regulate non-vacation type rental arrangements not generally characterized by the adverse impacts referenced in this section. (Ord. 2006-05)

 

9.38.020 Definition.
“Short-term rental” means the rental of any structure or any portion of any structure for occupancy for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes of 30 consecutive days or less in the City, including single-family or duplex units. (Ord. 2006-05)

 

9.38.030 Permit Required/Penalty.
Any short-term rental shall obtain a short-term rental permit pursuant this chapter. Any person operating a short-term rental without a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2006-05)

 

9.38.040 Permit Requirements.
Short-term rentals shall be regulated in all residential zones including residential developments in PRDs (planned residential districts), as follows:

A.     Application Requirements.

1.     Applicants shall submit an application for a short-term rental permit to the City of Encinitas each year for each unit. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as established by the City Manager; however, the fee shall be no greater than necessary to defer the cost incurred by the City in administering the provisions of this chapter. Although the applicant may be the property owner or the property owner’s agent, the property owner shall be the party responsible for compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all of the laws regulating short-term rentals.

2.     Upon change of property ownership or material fact, a new application for a short-term rental permit shall be required to continue operation of the short-term rental and within 14 days of said change the property owner or his/her agent shall submit the required application and fee.

3.     Granting or Denial of Application. The application shall be granted unless the applicant does not meet the conditions and requirements of the permit, or fails to demonstrate the ability to comply with the Encinitas Municipal Code and other applicable law.

4.     Any false statements or information provided in the application are grounds for revocation and/or imposition of penalties, as outlined within this chapter.

B.     Operational Requirements.

1.     Applicants shall use “best efforts” to insure that the occupants and/or guests of the short-term rental unit do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate provisions of the Encinitas Municipal Code or any applicable law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding, the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.

2.     Applicants shall, upon receiving notification that occupants or tenants of his or her short-term rental unit have created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed violations of the Encinitas Municipal Code or applicable law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding, the consumption of alcohol or the use of illegal drugs, respond in a timely manner within two hours of the time the initial call (complaint) was made, and within 24 hours of the initial call use best efforts to prevent the recurrence of such conduct by the occupants and to take corrective action to address any violation. Failure to respond timely to two or more complaints regarding tenant violations is grounds for penalties as set forth in this chapter. It is not intended that the property owner, local agent or contact person act as a peace officer or place himself or herself in an at-risk situation.

3.     The property owner or agent shall limit overnight occupancy of the short-term rental unit to a specific number of occupants not to exceed two persons per bedroom plus one additional person per dwelling. All other applicable occupancy laws shall apply.

4.     The property owner shall limit the number of vehicles of overnight occupants to the number designated in the permit which shall not exceed the number of designated on-site parking spaces. All designated on-site parking spaces shall be made available for the vehicles of occupants.

5.     The property owner or agent of a short-term rental unit shall comply with all the provisions of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

6.     Trash and refuse shall not be left or stored within public view except from sunset of the day prior to trash pick-up until up to midnight on the day designated for trash pick-up. All trash will be in approved receptacles pursuant to Section 11.20.090 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

7.     The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to impose additional standards and/or conditions to short-term rental permits as necessary to achieve the objectives of this chapter.

8.     Interior Display of Short-Term Rental Permit. Applicants shall affix the short-term rental permit on the inside of the main entry door of each short-term rental unit to which it applies. The interior display will also contain the maximum number of overnight occupants permitted to stay in the unit, the maximum number of vehicles for overnight occupants, and a 24-hour, seven-day phone number of the private party responsible for the facility.

9.     Exterior Display of Short-Term Rental Unit. Applicants shall display on the exterior of a short-term rental unit, a notice provided by the City containing a 24-hour, seven-day phone number for a private party responsible for the facility to take complaints regarding its operation. The exterior display will also contain the number of bedrooms, maximum number of overnight occupants permitted to stay in the unit, and the maximum number of vehicles for overnight occupants. The notice shall be in plain view of the general public and/or common areas and shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

10.   Adjacent Property Owners Notified. Applicants are also required to provide adjacent property owners with the 24-hour, seven-day phone number for a private party responsible for the facility.

11.   Rental Agreements. Information on the permitted occupancy of the dwelling, parking capacity for each unit, and trash disposal requirements shall be stated in the rental information and agreement provided to prospective renters, prior to their occupancy of the unit.

12.   The operational requirements may be modified by the City Manager based on site-specific circumstances for the purpose of allowing reasonable accommodation of a short-term rental. All requests must be in writing and shall identify how the strict application of the operational requirements creates an unreasonable hardship to a property, and if the requirement is not modified, reasonable use of the property for a short-term rental would not be allowed. Any hardships identified must relate to physical constraints to the subject site. Such hardships cannot be self-induced or economic. In addition, any modification to the operational requirements cannot further exacerbate an already existing problem.

 

9.38.050 Violations and Penalties.
A.     Violations. The following conduct shall constitute a violation for which the penalties specified in subsection B of this section may be imposed, or the penalties imposed and permit suspended:

1.     The property owner has failed to comply with the standard conditions pursuant to this chapter; or

2.     The property owner has failed to comply with additional conditions imposed by the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.38.040B7; or

3.     The property owner has violated any provision of this chapter; or

4.     The property owner has failed to pay applicable taxes or fees.

B.     Penalties. The penalties specified in subsection A of this section shall be as follows:

1.     For the first violation within any 24-month period, the penalty shall be a fine of $250.00;

2.     For a second violation within any 24-month period, the penalty shall be a fine of $500.00;

3.     For a third violation within any 24-month period, the penalty shall be a fine of $750.00;

4.     For a fourth violation within any 24-month period, the penalty shall be a fine of $1,000.00 and suspension of the permit.

 

9.38.060 Imposition of Penalties/Suspension—Procedure.
Penalties, including a notice of violation, shall be imposed, and permits shall be suspended, only in the manner provided in this section.

A.     The City Manager shall cause an investigation to be conducted whenever there is reason to believe that a property owner has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Should the investigation reveal substantial evidence to support a finding that a violation occurred, the investigator shall issue written notice of the violation and intention to impose a penalty, or penalty and suspend the permit. The written notice shall be served on the property owner and operator or agent and shall specify the facts which in the opinion of the investigator, constitute substantial evidence to establish grounds for imposition of the penalties, or penalties and suspension, and specify that the penalties will be imposed and/or that the permit will be suspended and penalties imposed within 15 days from the date the notice is given unless the owner and/or operator files with the City Clerk the fine amount and a request for a hearing before the City Manager.

B.     If the owner requests a hearing within the time specified in subsection A of this section, the City Clerk shall serve written notice on the owner and operator, by mail, of the date, time and place for the hearing which shall be scheduled not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days of receipt of request for a hearing. The City Manager or his/her designee shall preside over the hearing. The City Manager or his/her designee shall impose the penalties, or penalties and suspend the permit only upon a finding that a violation has been proven by a preponderance of the evidence, and that the penalty, or penalty and suspension are consistent with this chapter. The hearing shall be conducted according to the rules normally applicable to administrative hearings. A decision shall be rendered within 30 days of the hearing and the decision shall be appealable to the City Council if filed with the City Clerk no later than 15 days thereafter, pursuant to Chapter 1.12.

 

9.38.070 Permits and Fees Not Exclusive.
Permits and fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. The issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the property owner of the obligation to comply with all other provisions of this Code pertaining to the use and occupancy of their property.

 

9.38.100 Private Actions to Enforce.
Any person who has suffered, or alleges to have suffered, damage to person or property because of a violation of this chapter may bring an action for money damages and any other appropriate relief in a court of competent jurisdiction against the party alleged to have violated this chapter.

Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to create any right of action against the City or any of its officers, employees, or agents. The sole purpose and intent of this section is to create a right of action between private parties, entities and interests, which are or may be impacted or affected by various aspects of short-term rentals within the City.

Chapter 9.40 DISTURBANCE ABATEMENT
9.40.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a source of recovery for the costs incurred by the City in returning a second or subsequent time to the scene of a disturbance of the peace. (Ord. 89-23)

 

9.40.020 Definitions.
“Costs of a second and subsequent responses” means the full compensation of the City employees, officials, agents and contract officers for the amount of time actually expended in responding to or in remaining at the disturbance of the peace at a rate established by the City Council; together with the actual costs of any medical treatment to injured City employees; and the costs of repairing or replacing any damaged or destroyed City equipment or property.

 “Responsible person” means the person who owns the property where the disturbance of the peace is occurring, the person in charge of the premises where the disturbance of the peace is occurring or the person who organized the event which is causing the disturbance of the peace. If the “responsible person” is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for the second and subsequent City responses.

 

9.40.030 First Response.
A.     During a first response to a disturbance of the peace occurring on private property, the responding officer may, among other things, deliver to the responsible person or persons a “Notice of Violation: First Response” which shall contain a message substantially as follows:

“This notice of violation is given to you as a result of a first response of the City of Encinitas to a disturbance of the peace occurring in violation of Penal Code Section 415. You will be charged all City personnel and equipment expenses incurred as a result of any second or subsequent response to this location.”

B.     The “Notice of Violation: First Response” may contain such other information as deemed necessary by the City Manager to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

 

9.40.040 Subsequent Responses.
A.     If the City is required to respond a second or subsequent time to a disturbance of the peace and a “Notice of Violation: First Response” has been delivered to the responsible person or persons, then the City shall commence computing the response costs.

B.     A statement of the charges incurred by the City in its second and subsequent responses shall be prepared and delivered to the responsible person or persons.

C.    The amount of the charge shall be deemed a debt to the City of the responsible person or persons who shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney’s fees.

 

9.40.050 Confidentiality.
Information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter or pursuant to a Court Order.

Chapter 9.42 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY MINORS
9.42.010 Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter have the meanings set forth in this section.

“Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

“Alcoholic beverage” has the same meaning as that set forth in the California Business and Professions Code Section 23004.

“Enforcement services” includes the salaries and benefits of police officers or other code enforcement personnel for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at, the party, gathering, or event and the administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured police officers or other code enforcement personnel; the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property; and, the cost arising from the use of any damaged city equipment in responding to or remaining at the party, gathering, or event.

“Guardian” means: (1) a person, who under court order, is the guardian of a person of minority age; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

“Minor” means any person under 21 years of age.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step parent of another person.

“Party, gathering, or event” means a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. (Ord. 2003-14)

 

9.42.020 Consumption of Alcohol by Minor Prohibited in Public Place, Place Open to Public, or Place Not Open to Public.
Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to:

A.     Consume at any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage; or

B.     Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 2003-14)

 

9.42.030 Hosting, Allowing a Party, Gathering, or Event Where Minors Consuming Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited.
A.     Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution, it is unlawful for any person to allow or host a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place, or premises under his or her control where three or more minors are present and alcoholic beverages are being consumed by any minor.

B.     This section does not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages (i.e., religious rituals) which occurs exclusively between a minor child and his or her parent or legal guardian.

C.    This section does not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. (Ord. 2003-14)

 

9.42.040 Reservation of Legal Options.
The City of Encinitas does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services associated with the enforcement of this chapter through other legal remedies or procedures.

The procedures provided for in this chapter are in addition to any other statute, ordinance, or law. Sections 9.42.020 and 9.42.030 in no way limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by those same sections, nor do they limit in any way the prosecution’s ability to initiate and prosecute a criminal prosecution for any violation of a criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of those same sections. (Ord. 2003-14)

 

9.42.050 Violation—Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable to the fullest extent of the law up to and including a $1,000.00 fine and/or six months in jail. (Ord. 2003-14)

Chapter 9.43 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES—RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVICE AND SALES TRAINING
9.43.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth in this section:

“Alcoholic beverage” shall have the same meaning as in the California Business and Professions Code Section 23004 or any successor section.

“Alcohol outlet” means any physical location or structure from which any alcoholic beverage may be sold, delivered, or served at retail pursuant to a license granted by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

“Business certificate” means a certificate or license authorizing a business to operate within the City of Encinitas, California.

“Licensee” means any person or entity that has a license for the retail sale, delivery, or service of alcoholic beverages from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

“Manager” means the person, regardless of job title or description, who has discretionary powers to organize, direct, carry on, control or direct the operation of an alcohol outlet.

“Patron” means a customer who purchases alcohol through a sale, service or delivery.

“Responsible beverage service and sales training” or “RBSS training” means a training program to train alcohol licensees, their managers and servers in responsible alcoholic beverage service, sales, methods and practices, conducted by either: (1) the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC); (2) an RBSS training provider listed on the ABC website (that has agreed to implement ABC best practices for responsible beverage service education); or (3) an RBSS training provider that meets equivalent criteria as determined by the City Manager, or designee.

“Server” means any person who, as part of his or her employment, sells, serves or delivers any alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 2009-13; Ord. 2017-06)

 

9.43.020 Responsible Beverage Service and Sales Training Required—Proof.
A.     No alcohol outlet may serve, sell, or arrange delivery to a patron any alcoholic beverages unless a manager, assistant manager or lead employee who has completed a responsible beverage service and sales training course is on the premises.

B.     No licensee, manager or server shall sell, serve or deliver to a patron any alcoholic beverage unless he or she has completed RBSS training. However, licensees, their managers and servers shall have 90 days from the date of beginning of such activities or the effective dates of this chapter, whichever is later, to complete RBSS training. Businesses existing as of the effective date of this chapter shall have 180 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to comply. Thereafter, all said businesses shall have 90 days from the date of the beginning of such activities to comply with this chapter.

C.    Certification received from an RBSS training program will be considered valid for a period of two years from the date of certification.

D.    Licensees shall be responsible for ensuring that all managers and servers they employ comply with this section.

E.     Licensees shall maintain on the premises a file of proof of completion of the RBSS training by the licensee, managers and servers that shall be available for inspection by any peace officer or other enforcement officer during regular business hours. The proof of completion shall include: (1) the effective date of hire; (2) course completion date and, if applicable, the course renewal date; (3) the name of the certified RBSS training completed; (4) a copy of each training certificate, if available; and (5) identifying information of the licensee, managers and servers, including the name, address, phone number and California driver’s license number, if applicable.

F.     The City shall provide to all applicants for a business certificate that are alcohol licensees, as defined in this chapter, a summary of the requirements of this chapter together with its penalties for violation prior to issuing a business certificate or renewal. (Ord. 2009-13)

 

9.43.030 Violation—Penalty.
A.     Violation of any provision of this chapter or failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter is an infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.08.050 of the Encinitas Municipal Code. At the discretion of the prosecutor, a violation of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor.

B.     Civil Action. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the City pursuant to Section 1.08.060 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

C.    Administrative Citation. Alternatively, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by administrative action brought by the City pursuant to Section 1.08.070 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, to include civil fines not exceeding $1,000.00 per offense occurrence. (Ord. 2009-13)

Chapter 9.50 SKATEBOARDS, INLINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES, TOY VEHICLES, COASTERS, AND SIMILAR FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION
9.50.010 Certain Uses Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, inline skates, roller skates, toy vehicle, coaster or any other similar form of transportation on:

A.     Private property open to public in a general commercial zone, a neighborhood commercial zone, or in a tourist commercial zone where signs prohibiting such activity are posted by the owner of the property.

B.     Public real property where such prohibition is posted by signs. A list of locations where skateboarding, inline skates, roller skates, toy vehicles, coaster or any other similar form of transportation is posted prohibited shall be on file in the City Clerk’s office. The list may be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

C.    Public school property located within the City of Encinitas when the school district has enacted a policy prohibiting such activities and posted signs on school grounds.

D.    At the Encinitas Civic Center, Encinitas Community Center, fire stations, libraries and their adjacent sidewalks, landscape barriers and parking lots.

E.     Any public drainage facility, culvert, ditch, or channel; or any other athletic/sports courts or gymnasiums. (Ord. 2013-06)

 

9.50.020 Interference With Pedestrians and Traffic.
A.     Any person upon a skateboard, inline skates, roller skates, toy vehicle, coaster or any other similar form of transportation or device shall exercise due caution and shall yield the right-of-way to and not interfere with pedestrians on any sidewalk or public right-of-way.

B.     No person shall ride a skateboard, inline skates, roller skates, toy vehicle, coaster, or similar form of transportation on any public right-of-way in such a manner as to interfere with or prevent the lawful use of a public right-of-way by vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2013-06; Ord. 2015-02)

 

9.50.030 Safety Equipment Required in Skateboard Parks.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to ride or use anything other than a skateboard, roller skates or inline skates in a city-owned skateboard park. It is unlawful for any person to ride or use a skateboard, roller skates or inline skates in a city-owned skateboard park unless that person is wearing elbow pads, knee pads and a helmet that appropriately fits and that meets the standards of either the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) or standards subsequently established by these entities. (Ord. 2013-06; Ord. 2015-02)

Chapter 9.55 PILOT BIKE SHARE PROGRAM
9.55.010 Purpose.
Consistent with the City’s goals of enhancing mobility and access, easing traffic congestion, promoting sustainability and achieving its Climate Action Plan goals, this chapter initiates a pilot bike share program to evaluate the impact of shared mobility alternatives within the City while ensuring the protection of the City and public health and safety, including evaluating the safety of the public traveling by foot, bicycle or any vehicle on public sidewalks, streets, other public rights-of-way and adjacent private property. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.020 Definitions.
“Abandoned” means leaving any item unattended for any length of time.

“Bike” means a pedaled bicycle that is rented, used, located, displayed, offered or placed for rent in any public area or public right-of-way by an operator under a City Council approved operator license agreement. A bike shall meet the safety standards outlined in the International Standardization Organization (ISO) 43.150 – Cycles; the standards outlined in the Code of Federal Regulations Title 16, Chapter II, Subchapter C, Part 1512 - Requirements for Bicycles; and the standards established in California Vehicle Code (CVC) Section 21201, including for lighting during operation, or equivalent recognized standards and requirements. If powered, a shared mobility device shall be limited to “Class 1” or “Class 2” electric bicycles, as defined in California Vehicle Code (CVC) Section 312.5.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or designee.

“Operator” means the person or business entity licensed by the City to operate the pilot bike share program pursuant to this chapter.

“Pilot bike share program” means a pilot program establishing a single licensee under a license agreement to rent, use, locate, display, offer or place for rent unpowered bicycles and/or “Class 1” or “Class 2” electric bicycles within City boundaries. The pilot bike share program requires the City Manager or delegated staff to monitor and assess the overall performance, safety and benefits of the pilot program and provide City Council with a report.

“Prohibited mobility device” means any device other than a bike by which a person can be transported, propelled, moved or drawn, that is rented, used, located, displayed, offered or placed for rent or use in any public area or public right-of-way, except that a prohibited mobility device does not include a rental car, taxi cab or car matched through a peer-to-peer ridesharing application.

“Public area” means any outdoor area that is open to the public for public use, whether owned or operated by the City or a private party.

“Public right-of-way” means any public alley, parkway, public transportation path, roadway, sidewalk, trails, pathways or street that is owned, granted by easement, operated or controlled by the City. This includes, but is not limited to, those private areas adjacent to public property and any area established under the City “Sidewalk Café Policy”, established by City Resolution 2011-56 and related zoning and specific plan amendments. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.030 Administrative Regulations.
A.     The City may at its discretion develop administrative regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter, which may include regulations relating to lawful conduct, prohibited conduct, public safety, data sharing, data privacy and/or the timely removal of hazards.

B.     No person shall fail to comply with the City’s administrative regulations, if adopted. Any violation of any administrative regulation issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in this Code. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.040 Prohibited Conduct.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no person, including an operator, may:

A.     Deploy, drop, abandon, leave, dock or otherwise place or encourage the use of any prohibited mobility device within City boundaries;

B.     Abandon or temporarily park any pilot bike share program bike or prohibited mobility device, in the City public right-of-way or a City public area in a manner that: (1) obstructs travel upon or blocks access to a public area or public right-of-way; (2) violates ADA or any other disability access and path of travel laws, requirements and/or regulations; (3) poses an immediate public safety hazard or nuisance; or (4) is otherwise prohibited by applicable local, state or federal laws or administrative regulations; or

C.    Use or aid, abet or encourage the use of any prohibited mobility device in violation of this Code or impair any license, permit, applicable law or administrative regulation.

D.    This chapter is not intended to prohibit or limit the lawful private non-commercial use, ownership or operation of a mobility device within City limits. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.050 Pilot Bike Share Program Operator License.
A.     Under this pilot bike share program, the City Manager is authorized to negotiate one shared pilot bike share program operator license authorizing a single operator to deploy bikes within designated City locations.

B.     The City Manager may impose, as part of the pilot bike share program operator license issued, any and all conditions that are determined necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, consider accessibility of any public area, public right-of-way and the availability of public space for shared use by all, and to protect the City and the health, welfare, and safety of the public.

C.    When presenting the negotiated pilot bike share operator license agreement to City Council for approval, the City Manager shall report, in writing, the reasons supporting the operator license agreement terms, conditions and operator selection.

D.    The number, location, technical requirements and mode(s) of pilot bike share program bikes and related applications shall be set forth in the negotiated license agreement approved by City Council.

E.     At any time, in the City Council’s discretion, the City Council may reassess the approved operator license agreement and its terms, consistent with the approved agreement.

F.     The City Council approved pilot bike share program operator license agreement and its determinations under this section shall constitute the final decision of the City and shall not be subject to further administrative review.

G.    Before bike deployment, the operator must execute a license agreement in a final form approved by City Council, comply with all license agreement conditions, provide evidence of insurance as required by this chapter and license agreement and obtain a City business license. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.060 Operator Indemnity and Insurance Requirements.
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a pilot bike share program operator license or otherwise approving the operation of any bike or other shared mobility device. As a condition to the issuance of any pilot bike share program operator license or any bike or other shared mobility device, the operator shall at a minimum be required to meet all of the following conditions:

A.     The operator shall, in language approved by the City Risk Manager, agree to indemnify, defend (at operator’s sole cost and expense), and hold harmless the City, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, and agents from any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to, the City’s issuance of or decision to enter into a pilot bike share program operator license agreement, the process used by the City in making its decision, any alleged violation of any federal, state or local laws by operator, and for any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses to any bike user or any third party, arising out of, or which are in any way related to, operator activities and operations, including, but not limited to, under the pilot bike share program operator license agreement.

B.     Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon, as determined by the City Risk Manager as necessary and appropriate, including naming City of Encinitas as an additional insured. The operator’s insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be cancelled except after 30 days’ prior written notice has been given to the City. If any insurance policy issued to an operator is cancelled for any reason, the license issued under this chapter is automatically suspended and all operator operations shall cease. In order to reinstate the license, the licensee shall provide a new certificate and policy of insurance to the City. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.070 Grounds for Termination, Revocation or Suspension of Operator License.
A pilot bike share program operator license agreement may be revoked, suspended, or denied by the City Manager consistent with the terms of the license agreement approved by City Council or for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.080 Pilot Bike Share Program Assessment.
The City shall monitor and assess the overall performance, safety and benefits of the pilot program and provide City Council with a report approximately one year after bike deployment. The report shall include, but is not limited to, recommendations whether to maintain, modify, eliminate the program or modify the program to expand City authorization of the use of other shared mobility devices or other developing clean modes of transportation. The report shall also address and recommend revisions to this chapter, if applicable. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.090 Impoundment of Devices.
A.     Except for any bike authorized by the City Council under a City pilot bike share program license agreement, prohibited shared mobility devices that are rented, used, dropped, left, located, displayed, offered or made available for rent, or abandoned, in the public right-of-way, public area or is otherwise determined to constitute a public nuisance shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City.

B.     The City Council may adopt impound fees by resolution, which shall reflect the City’s enforcement, investigation, administration, storage and impound costs.

C.    No person shall retrieve any impounded prohibited shared mobility device except upon demonstrating proper proof of ownership of the device and payment of applicable impound fees.

D.    Any prohibited shared mobility device not retrieved from impound for more than 30 calendar days shall be deemed abandoned and may, in the City Manager’s discretion, be destroyed or auctioned in accordance with applicable state law. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.100 Enforcement.
A.     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code.

B.     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, including any permit condition, shall be subject to administrative fines and administrative penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this Code.

C.    Any person convicted of violating this chapter in a criminal case, or found to be in violation of this chapter in a civil or administrative case brought by a law enforcement agency, shall be ordered to reimburse the City and other participating law enforcement agencies their full investigative costs. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.110 Severability.
In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction holds any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter to be unconstitutional, preempted or otherwise invalid, the invalid portion shall be severed from this chapter and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter irrespective of whether any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases in this chapter might be declared unconstitutional, preempted or otherwise invalid. (Ord. 2019-02)

 

9.55.120 Conflicts with Prior Ordinances.
In the event that any City ordinance or regulation, in whole or in part, adopted

Chapter 9.60 GRAFFITI PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL
9.60.010 Purpose and Intent.
A.     The City Council of Encinitas specifically finds that graffiti on public or private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of property which has been the target of such vandalism but also depreciates the value of adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact upon the entire City.

B.     The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance.

C.    It is the purpose and intent of the City Council, through adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement from the application of graffiti to privately and publicly owned property. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.020 Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meaning:

“Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting, or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, stuck-on, engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component, to the extent the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or despite advance authorization, is deemed by the City Council to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.030 Graffiti Prohibited.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to paint, spray, chalk, etch, or otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned buildings, signs, walls, permanent structures, or places or other surfaces located on public or privately owned property within the City.

B.     It is unlawful for any person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the City to permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or to remain on any permanent structure located on the property when graffiti is visible from the street or public or private property. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.040 Declaration of Nuisance.
The existence of graffiti within the City limits of the City is a public nuisance, and may be abated according to the provisions and procedures herein contained, or by any other method established by law for the abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.050 Right of City to Require Removal.
It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or who has primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property (“responsible party”) to permit property which is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of seven days after notice of same, unless (1) said person shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that they do not have the financial or physical ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or (2) unless it can be demonstrated that the responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of 15 days after notice of same. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.060 Graffiti Attracting Surface as a Nuisance.
The existence of any surface of a structure on a parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in 12 months is a public and private nuisance, and may, in addition to any other available remedy, be abated at the expense of the property owner upon order by the City Council by minor modifications thereto, or to the immediate area surrounding same, or by retrofitting said surface or surfaces with a graffiti resistant surface, or with such other features or qualities as may be established by the City Council as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal thereof. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.070 Right of City to Remove.
A.     Use of Public Funds. Whenever the City becomes aware, or is notified and determines that graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place within the City, the City shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the City Manager, or his/her designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. This section shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty of the City.

B.     Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity or other than the City, for the purpose of removal of graffiti, the City shall attempt to secure the consent of the responsible party, and a release of the City from liability for private or public property or liability damage.

C.    Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. If a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time herein specified, or if the City shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused consent for entry on terms of this section, the City shall commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti according to the following procedure.

D.    Abatement and Cost Recovery Proceedings.

1.     Notice and Conduct of Due Process Hearing. The City Manager, or his/her designee, (“hearing officer”) shall give not less than 48 hours notice, served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (if the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to Section 6062) to the responsible party or parties who are responsible for the maintenance of a parcel of property containing graffiti (“property”), and, if a different person is the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, then to said owner (“owner”) also, of a “due process” hearing at which said responsible party and owner shall be entitled to present evidence and argue that his or her property does not contain graffiti. The determination of the hearing officer may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the Encinitas Municipal Code. If, after the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the responsible party, owner, or their respective agents, the hearing officer determines that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the hearing officer shall give written notice (“eradication order”) that, unless the graffiti is removed within five days thereafter, the City shall enter upon the property, cause the removal, painting over (in such color as shall meet with the approval of the hearing officer) or such other eradication thereof (“eradication effort”) as the hearing officer determines appropriate, and shall provide the responsible party and owner thereafter with an accounting of the costs of such eradication effort on a “full cost recovery basis.”

2.     Eradication Effort. Not sooner than the time specified in the order of the hearing officer, the City Manager, or his/her designee, shall implement the eradication order, and shall provide an accounting to the responsible party, and as appropriate, the owner, of the costs thereof (“eradication accounting”).

3.     Cost Hearing. If the responsible party or owner fails to request a hearing before the hearing officer on the eradication accounting (“cost hearing”), or if requested, a cost hearing is conducted after extending due process to the responsible party and, as appropriate, the owner, after such a cost hearing, the hearing officer determines that all or a portion of the costs are appropriately chargeable to the eradication effort, the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting, or such amount thereof determined as appropriate by the hearing officer (“assessed eradication charges”) shall be due and payable by the responsible party within 30 days. Any amount of assessed eradication charges assessed by the hearing officer which are less than the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting shall be explained by written letter from the hearing officer to the City Council Members.

4.     Lien. As to such property where the responsible party is the owner, if all or any portion of the assessed eradication charges remain unpaid after 30 days, pursuant to the authority created by law, including Government Code Section 38773, et seq., such portion thereof as shall remain unpaid shall constitute and is hereby declared to constitute a lien on the property which was the subject matter of the eradication effort. A resolution of lien by the City Council shall upon adoption, cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the San Diego County Recorder’s Office. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.080 Penalties for Violation.
Any and all violations of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the City, and, by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti cleanup to the maximum extent permitted by California Penal Code Section 594.6 and/or other provision of law. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.090 Civil Liability of Parents.
Any parent or legal guardian, whose child under the age of 18 unlawfully applies graffiti, shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any person incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said child, and for all attorney’s fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.110 Civil Remedies Available.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the City through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. (Ord. 97-20)

 

9.60.120 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 97-20)

Chapter 9.65 REGULATION OF SALE AND DISPLAY OF GLASS ETCHING CREAM
9.65.010 Display of Glass Etching Cream and Other Products.
Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a commercial establishment selling glass etching cream, or any commercially available glass etching product (functional equivalent), whether sold separately or in a kit, shall store or cause it to be stored under lock and key in an area that may be viewable by but not accessible to the general public in the regular course of business without employee assistance pending sale or disposition. (Ord. 2003-05)

 

9.65.020 Sale of Glass Etching Prohibited to Anyone Under 18 Years Old.
No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a commercial establishment selling glass etching cream or any commercially available glass etching product (functional equivalent), whether sold separately or in a kit, shall sell or cause to be sold any such glass etching cream or glass etching product to any person who has not yet attained the age of 18 years. (Ord. 2003-05)

 

9.65.030 Penalties for Violation.
Any and all violations of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the City, and by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti cleanup to the maximum extent permitted by the California Penal Code or any other applicable law. (Ord. 2003-05)

Chapter 9.70 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
9.70.010 Title and Purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance.

The purposes of this chapter are to assure that wireless communications networks are completed with the fewest possible facilities, in the least visible fashion, and with the least disruptive impact on the neighborhoods and the communities within the City of Encinitas. The regulations set forth in this chapter are adopted to serve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare, and to preserve and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the City of Encinitas, as set forth in the Goals, Objectives and Policies of the General Plan, while concurrently allowing for the orderly and efficient development of a wireless communications infrastructure in accordance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. (Ord. 2001-11)

 

9.70.020 Applicability.
A.     This chapter applies to all wireless communications facilities existing and proposed to be located within the corporate limits of the City of Encinitas, California, including personal wireless services as defined by the TCA and licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, including, but not limited to, the types commonly known as cellular, personal communications services (“PCS”), specialized mobile radio (“SMR”), enhanced specialized mobile radio (“ESMR”), paging, land based repeaters for satellite broadcast services, micro-cell antennae and similar systems which exist now or may be developed in the future and exhibit technological characteristics similar to them.

B.     Wireless communications facilities proposed to be located in Encinitas may be constructed only pursuant to a permit issued by the City in accordance with this chapter and shall comply with Municipal Code Title 30 “Zoning” and all other applicable laws and regulations.

C.    This chapter does not apply to hand held mobile phones, satellite dishes, amateur radio facilities, receiving antennae for AM and FM radio and television, which may be governed by other law, including, but not limited to, Encinitas Municipal Code Chapters 28.08, 30.16 and 30.48.

 

D.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all “small wireless facilities” as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(l), as may be amended or superseded, are subject to a permit as specified in a City Council Policy, which may be adopted, amended and/or repealed by a resolution of the City Council. All small wireless facilities shall comply with the City Council’s policy. If the City Council policy is repealed and not replaced, an application for a small wireless facility shall be processed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2001-11; Ord. 2019-12)

 

9.70.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply. These definitions shall be adapted to the context for appropriate grammatical tense, number, case and gender.

“Antenna” means a device or system of wires, poles, rods, dishes or other devices of similar function, used for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals for wireless communications, as described in the Telecommunications Act of 1996. It may include an omni-directional antenna (“whip”), a directional antenna (“panel”) and parabolic antenna (“disc”). It does not include the support structure.

“Antenna array” means a set of one or more antennas.

“Applicant/permittee” means the person or firm applying for the permit and also refers to the wireless communication facility service provider.

“Co-location” means the use of a common wireless communications facility or common site by two or more service applicant/permittees, or use by one applicant/permittee of a single site for two or more technologies. It is also called “site sharing.”

“Director” means the Director of Planning and Building, City of Encinitas.

“Facility” means any component of the wireless communication installation including any towers, antennae, antenna array, and any structure or device used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless communications facility, such as cabinets, shelters, additions to existing structures, pedestals, and other devices serving similar purposes. Typically it includes an air conditioning unit, a heating unit, electrical supply, telephone hookup and back-up power supply and may include any service roads or other access accommodations used to service the facility.

“Historic site” means a site or location identified as of “historical significance” in the Resource Management Element of the Encinitas General Plan.

“PCS” means personal communications service, as defined in the TCA and Federal Communications Commission regulations.

“Sensitive habitat area” means an area identified as “high sensitivity” in the Resource Management Element of the Encinitas General Plan.

“TCA” means the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

“Wireless communication” means any personal wireless services as defined by the TCA and licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, including, but not limited to, the types commonly known as cellular, personal communications services (“PCS”), specialized mobile radio (“SMR”), enhanced specialized mobile radio (“ESMR”), paging, ground based repeaters for satellite radio services, micro-cell antennae and similar systems which exist now or may be developed in the future and exhibit technological characteristics similar to them. (Ord. 2001-11; Ord. 2003-08)

 

9.70.040 Preferred Locations.
Wireless communications facilities are encouraged to be located in commercial, industrial and public/semi-public zoning districts whenever feasible. Applicant/permittees are encouraged to site facilities on existing nonresidential buildings and existing utility poles or towers. Antenna arrays are encouraged to be located at least 100 feet from elementary schools, middle schools, child day care centers, hospitals, and residential dwellings. Where facilities can be consolidated onto a site and meet the standards of this chapter, such co-location is encouraged. (Ord. 2001-11)

 

9.70.050 Administrative Design Review Permit Required.
All applications in commercial, industrial and public/semi-public zoning districts for a wireless communications facility with antenna array located 100 feet or greater from elementary schools, middle schools, child day care centers, hospitals, and residential dwellings require an administrative application for an administrative design review, which shall include all items listed in the permit application checklist and all information required by Section 9.70.080. (Ord. 2001-11)

 

9.70.060 Major Use Permit Required.
Wireless communication facilities proposed in commercial, industrial and public/semi-public zoning districts with antenna array located within 100 feet of elementary schools, middle schools, child day care centers, hospitals, and residential dwellings require a discretionary application for a major use permit and all information required by Section 9.70.080, Supplementary Materials. (Ord. 2001-11)

 

9.70.070 Major Use Permit Application Permitted.
Wireless communication facilities proposed in certain locations may submit an application for a major use permit, which shall contain all information required by Section 9.70.080, Supplementary Materials. Such application may be granted only if the applicant/permittee submits evidence demonstrating that there is no other feasible alternative to the proposed location. The locations to which this provision applies are:

A.     Residential zoning districts.

B.     Open Space Zoning District.

C.    Floodplain Overlay Zone.

D.    Cultural/Natural Resources Overlay Zone.

E.     Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone.

F.     Historic sites.

G.    Sensitive habitat areas (where not otherwise prohibited). (Ord. 2001-11)

 

9.70.080 Supplementary Materials.
A.     Description of Services. A description of the services the applicant/permittee proposes to offer at the proposed site, including:

1.     A description of the location, type, capacity, field strength or power density, and calculated geographic service area of the proposed antenna or antenna array. In instances of applications that generate public controversy, the City retains the right to retain experts, at the applicant’s expense, to review and assess the technical data.

2.     Documentation that the applicant/permittee has obtained and is in compliance with all applicable licenses, permits or authorizations required by the Federal Communications Commission.

3.     Location of all existing, proposed and anticipated wireless communications facilities in the applicant/permittee’s network located in the City, or within one-half mile of the City’s corporate limit in any direction.

4.     A description of how the proposed facility fits into, and is a necessary part of, the applicant/permittee’s network.

5.     If the proposal does not include co-location, written documentation of all efforts made to co-locate at another site, and a justification for the decision not to co-locate.

6.     In the instance where a facility is proposed within 100 feet of elementary schools, middle schools, child day care centers, hospitals and residential dwellings, the applicant/permittee shall submit a narrative description of alternative sites considered, if any, and include specific reasons these alternative sites were not chosen.

B.     Design. All project applications shall adhere to the following criteria:

1.     Location Relative to Elementary Schools, Middle Schools, Child Day Care Centers, Hospitals, and Residential Dwellings. Drawings shall include the location of all elementary schools, middle schools, child day care centers, hospitals, and residential dwellings within 100 feet of the antenna array.

2.     Height. With the exception of installations on pre-existing structures, the installation shall not exceed the height limitations for the zoning district or specific plan.

3.     Minimal Visual Impact. All wireless communications applicant/permittees shall utilize all practical means to conceal or minimize the number of facilities and reduce their visual impact, including:

a.     Most Diminutive Technology. Use of the smallest components necessary to provide service that are in use or proposed for use within San Diego County.

b.     Most Efficient Technology. Use of the most efficient components to serve the City of Encinitas. In this context, “most efficient” technology is that which allows the applicant/permittee to use the fewest number of wireless communications installations to serve the City of Encinitas.

c.     Stealth Design. The facility shall be designed to visually and operationally blend into the surrounding area, in a manner compatible with the local community character. The facility shall use the most quiet cooling equipment and “whisper” emergency generating apparatus. Artificial “trees” may be permitted in exceptional circumstances but are generally disfavored. When artificial trees are proposed, all paint, materials and colors shall be listed by manufacturer and color number. When an artificial tree is proposed, the applicant/permittee shall provide sufficient samples, models or other information to demonstrate that alternative designs have been considered and rejected, and the reasons for the rejections.

d.     Landscaping. In the event portions of the facility will be exposed to public view, and if additional plantings would further minimize the visual impact of the facility, the applicant/permittee shall provide a landscape plan, with an emphasis on native plants. When trees with a trunk width of four inches or more (measured by caliper, four feet above grade) are proposed to be removed or trimmed for the installation or operation of a wireless communications facility, the applicant/permittee shall identify the location of said trees by species and size. In such an instance, trimming shall be minimal and subject to approval by the City, plus, when trees are proposed to be removed, replacement trees shall be shown in the landscape plan to the satisfaction of the Director.

e.     Setbacks. The applicant may propose to locate any wireless communications facility component within a required setback if the proposed location would reduce visual impact, improve safety or otherwise exhibit superior design attributes.

C.    Operational Plan. All applications for wireless communications facilities shall include written assurances that the facilities shall be operated in accordance with the following:

1.     Security Lighting. Security lighting shall be kept to a minimum in every instance and should only be triggered by a motion detector where practical. The negative effects of security lighting into residential districts shall be minimized.

2.     Maintenance. All facilities, landscaping, and related equipment shall be maintained in good working order and free from trash, debris, graffiti and designed to discourage vandalism. Any damaged equipment shall be repaired or replaced within 30 calendar days. Damaged, dead or decaying plant materials shall be removed and replaced within 30 calendar days.

3.     Maintenance Hours. Routine maintenance of equipment located in residential zones or within 100 feet of a residential district shall be conducted only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, not including holidays. In other areas, routine maintenance may be conducted at any time. Emergency repairs and maintenance shall be conducted only in the cases of power outages and equipment failure or malfunction. Equipment “change out” and overhaul can occur any time with 30 days notice to the Director to allow notice to property owners and residents within 300 feet of the facility.

4.     Monitoring. Once the wireless communications facility is operating, the City may require the applicant/permittee to submit documentation that the facility is operating within the technical standards as described in the application and the Federal Communications Commission permit. Independent field strength or power density measurements shall be provided to the Director within 30 days of written request to the applicant/permittee.

Within 30 days before or after the first annual anniversary of when the City issues any permit authorized by this chapter, and thereafter at five year intervals, the applicant/permittee shall submit the following information, in writing, to the Director:

a.     Confirmation that the facility continues to operate in compliance with all terms and conditions of approval by the City.

b.     Independent field strength or power density measurements taken within the past 30 days that verify that the facility continues to operate in compliance with all terms and conditions and emissions standards imposed by the Federal Communications Commission.

c.     Confirmation that there is no equipment available that would enhance the safety, efficiency or visibility of the facility or reduce the size of the facility.

d.     Confirmation that there are not more appropriate locations available for the facility.

e.     Confirmation that the facility continues to function as an essential element of the applicant/permittee’s network.

f.      Documentation of any complaints received by the applicant/permittee since the inception of operations regarding the operation and maintenance of the facility, including the applicant/permittee’s actions to address the complaints.

5.     Construction Time, Abandonment and Decommissioning. All wireless communications facilities which receive a permit under this chapter shall be completed and operational within 180 calendar days of the issuance of the permit and all related permits or licenses. The construction time may be extended for an additional 180 calendar days upon a showing of good faith efforts to complete the facility, which shall take into account complications beyond the control of applicant/permittee. If the facility is not completed and operational by the end of the extension period, then the permit shall expire, and the applicant/permittee must reapply for the permit; however, this provision shall not apply when the applicant/permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that the operational delay is due entirely to factors beyond the control of the applicant/permittee, in which event the Director may extend the construction time in his or her discretion.

Any facility that ceases operating for more than 90 consecutive days shall be considered abandoned. In such an event the applicant/permittee must either (1) apply for all permits required at the time of expiration to reactivate the operation, or (2) remove all elements of the facility and restore the site. In the event the applicant/permittee fails to apply for permits or perform the removal and restoration within these 90 days, the property owner shall have the facility removed.

 

Zoning District/Site

Permit Required

Industrial Zones

MUP

(Major Use Permit and Supplementary Materials)

 

For antenna within 100 feet of elementary school, middle school, child day care center, hospital or residential dwelling

ADR

(Administrative Design Review Permit and Supplementary Materials)

 

For antenna no closer than 100 feet from elementary school, middle school, child day care center, hospital or residential dwelling

L1

BP

Commercial Zones

OP

L-LC

LC

GC

L-VSC

VSC

Public/Semi-Public Zones

P/SP

Residential Zones

MUP

(Major Use Permit and Supplementary Materials)

 

Such application may be granted only if the applicant/permittee submits evidence demonstrating that there is no other feasible alternative to the proposed location.

RR

RR-1

RR-2

R-3

R-5

R-8

R-15

RS-11

R-11

R-20

R-25

MHP

Open Space Zones

ER/OS/PK

Overlay Zones

MUP

(Major Use Permit and Supplementary Materials)

 

Such application may be granted only if the applicant/permittee submits evidence demonstrating that there is no other feasible alternative to the proposed location.

Coastal Bluff

Cultural/Natural Resources

Floodplain

Hillside/Inland Bluff

Agricultural

As per underlying zoning

Public Facilities

Scenic Viewshed Corridor

Special Sites

MUP

(Major Use Permit and Supplementary Materials)

 

Such application may be granted only if the applicant/permittee submits evidence demonstrating that there is no other feasible alternative to the proposed location.

Historic Sites

Sensitive Habitat Areas (where not otherwise prohibited)

(Ord. 2001-11)

Chapter 9.75 REGULATION OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES AND CITY VIDEO FRANCHISES
9.75.010 Title and Purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the Video Franchise Regulations Ordinance. Under state law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) will have the authority to grant state video franchises (“state franchises”). The City of Encinitas (the “City”) will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state video franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and governmental (“PEG”) purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of state franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. (Ord. 2007-07)

 

9.75.020 Video Franchise Fees.
A.     Any state video franchise holder (“state franchisee”) operating within the boundaries of the City of Encinitas shall pay a fee to the City equal to five percent of the gross revenue of the state franchisee.

B.     Any state franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City of Encinitas shall pay an additional fee to the City equal to two percent of the gross revenue of the state franchisee, which fee shall be used by the City for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law.

C.    Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections A and B of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 2007-07)

 

9.75.030 Audit Authority.
Not more than once annually, the City may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a state franchisee to ensure compliance with Section 9.75.020. (Ord. 2007-07)

 

9.75.040 Customer Service Penalties Under State Franchises.
A.     The holder of a state franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B.     The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor the compliance of state franchisee(s) with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall provide the state franchisee(s) written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and shall allow the state franchisee(s) 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period shall be subject to the following penalties by the City Manager, or his/her designee:

1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation.

2.     For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation.

C.    A state franchisee may appeal a penalty assessed to the City Council within 60 days. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, the City Council will vote to either uphold or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 2007-07)

 

9.75.050 City Response to State Franchise Applications.
A.     Applicants for state franchises within the boundaries of the City of Encinitas must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the City Manager, and one complete copy to the Finance Department Franchise Administrator.

B.     The City Manager may provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding the application or an amendment to an application for a state franchise.

Chapter 9.80 SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED
9.80.010 Purpose.
The Council for the City of Encinitas finds and declares that pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 23109, motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and highways are illegal. Motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed are commonly known as street races or drag races.

Streets within the County of San Diego have been the site of continuing and escalating illegal street racing over the past several years. Such street racing threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance, and interferes with the right of private business owners to enjoy the use of their property.

Illegal street racers accelerate to high speeds without regard to oncoming traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles parked or moving nearby. Traffic accidents, property crimes, and calls for police service have increased dramatically where these illegal activities occur.

In most cases, illegal street races attract hundreds of spectators. The mere presence of spectators at these events fuels the illegal street racing and creates an environment in which these activities can flourish. Specifically, racers and spectators gather late at night and in the early morning hours, blocking the streets and sidewalks to traffic, forming a racetrack area, placing bets, and otherwise encouraging, aiding and abetting the racing process.

This chapter makes evidence of specified prior acts admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend illegal street races, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense.

This chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races with the aim of significantly curbing this criminal activity. The chapter targets a very clear, limited population and gives proper notice to citizens as to what activities are lawful and what activities are unlawful. In discouraging spectators, the act of organizing and participating in illegal street races will be discouraged. (Ord. 2003-15)

 

9.80.020 Definitions.
“Illegal motor vehicle speed contest” or “illegal exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed which is commonly known as drag racing and referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

“Preparations for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed” include, but are not limited to, situations in which: (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (4) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; (5) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (6) one or more drivers is revving his or her engine or spinning his or her tires in preparation for the event; (7) an individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter.

“Spectator” means any individual who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, or at a location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. Spectator includes any individual at the location of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. (Ord. 2003-15)

 

9.80.030 Spectator at Illegal Speed Contest or Exhibition of Speed—Violation.
A.     Any individual who is knowingly present as spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, where preparations are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor.

C.    An individual is present at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed if that individual is within 200 feet of the location of the event, or within 200 feet of the location where preparations are being made for the event.

D.    Exemption. Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers or their agents from being spectators at illegal motor vehicle speed contests or exhibitions of speed in the course of their official duties. (Ord. 2003-15)

 

9.80.040 Relevant Circumstances to Prove a Violation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of Section 9.80.030, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

A.     The time of day;

B.     The nature and description of the scene;

C.    The number of people at the scene;

D.    The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene;

E.     The number and description of motor vehicles at the scene;

F.     That the individual charged drove or was transported to the scene;

G.    That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;

H.    That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;

I.      That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;

J.     That the individual charged previously was present where preparations were being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed or where an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed was in progress. (Ord. 2003-15)

 

9.80.050 Admissibility of Prior Acts.
The list set forth in Section 9.80.040 is not exclusive. Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that a speed contest or exhibition of speed was taking place at the time of the presently charged offense. Prior acts are not limited to those that occurred within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2003-15)

 

9.80.060 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2003-15)

Title 10 FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 10.02 FIRE MAP
Chapter 10.04 2018 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE AND 2019 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
Chapter 10.08 REIMBURSEMENT FOR PROTECTIVE SERVICES

Chapter 10.02 FIRE MAP
10.02.010 Fire Map.

Chapter 10.04 2018 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE AND 2019 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
10.04.010 Adopted.
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City of Encinitas Fire Department being marked and designated as the 2018 International Fire Code and 2019 California Fire Code, including, Appendices B & I, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Encinitas, in the State of California regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, equipment use, and maintenance of buildings and structures, including that providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City of Encinitas Fire Department are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 10.04.020. (Ord. 2019-27)

 

10.04.020 Amendments.
That the following sections are hereby revised:

 

Chapter 1 Administration

 

Section 101.5 City of Encinitas Validity. This section is revised to read:

 

The City Council of the City of Encinitas hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence or word of this ordinance or of the code hereby adopted be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the City Council of the City of Encinitas that it would have passed all other portions of this ordinance independently of the elimination here from of any such portion as may be declared invalid.

 

Section 102.13 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances, Resolutions or Motions. This section is added to read:

 

All former ordinances, resolutions or motions, or parts thereof, including 2016-11, which conflict or are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or of the Code or standards hereby adopted are hereby repealed.

 

Chapter 2 Definitions

 

Section 202 General Definitions. This section is added or revised to read:

 

Fire Hazard - is any condition or conduct which: (a) increases or may increase the threat of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or (b) may obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in the event of fire.

 

Fireworks - is any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky-rockets, roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, snap caps, poppers or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance, except that the term “fireworks” shall not include any auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. “Fireworks” shall include snap caps and poppers, regardless of the amount of explosive content included in each device.

 

Hazardous Fire Area - Any geographic area mapped by the State or designated by the local jurisdiction as a moderate, high or very high fire hazard area, or which the FAHJ has determined is a hazardous fire area; the type and condition of vegetation, topography, weather, or structure density which may increase the possibility of the area being susceptible to wildfire.

 

Mid-Rise Building - A building not defined as a high-rise building by Section 202 of the California Building Code and four stories or more in height. Measurements shall be made from the underside of the roof or floor above the topmost space that may be occupied to the lowest fire apparatus access road level. Nothing in Section 321 shall imply or allow a building height in excess of current City of Encinitas planning and zoning requirements.

 

Level - An area, above or below grade, including but not limited to; basements, garages, cellars, mezzanines or similar structures or uses. Separate contiguous levels of a building will be considered separate stories.

 

Whenever the terms - “This Code” and “2018 International Fire Code” are used they shall mean the 2019 California Fire Code as modified by the City of Encinitas with the deletions, revisions and additions set forth in the amendments.

 

Chapter 3 General Requirements

 

Section 308.1.6.3. Sky Lanterns. This section is revised to read:

 

Sky lanterns, floating luminary, and similar devices propelled by open flame are prohibited for sale or use.

 

Section 321 Mid-Rise Buildings Section 321.1 General. This section is added to read:

 

All newly constructed mid-rise buildings or any mid-rise building which undergoes a complete structural or non-structural renovation, that requires the complete vacancy of the building to complete the renovation shall, comply with Sections 321.2 through 321.3.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Buildings used exclusively as open parking garages.

2.     Buildings where all floors above the fourth-floor level are used exclusively as an open parking garage.

3.     Buildings such as a power plant, lookout tower, steeple, grain house, or other similar structures with intermittent human occupancy.

 

Section 321.2 Fire Equipment Control Room. This section is added to read:

 

A fire equipment control room for fire department operations shall be provided. The location and accessibility of the room shall be approved by the fire department. The room shall be separated from the remainder of the building by not less than a 1-hour fire barrier. The room shall contain the following facilities at minimum:

1.     Voice alarm and public address panels

2.     Fire alarm control panel

3.     Status indicators and controls for air-handling systems

4.     Fire pump status indicators (if required)

5.     Set of complete building plans

 

Section 321.3 Road Dimensions. This section is added to read:

 

Fire apparatus access roads serving buildings, portions of buildings, or facilities that exceed 30 feet in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 26 feet.

 

Chapter 5 Fire Service Features

 

Section 503.2.1 Dimensions. This section is revised to read:

 

Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet, exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and have an unobstructed vertical clearance of 13 feet 6 inches.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Fire access roadways, gated entrances with card readers, guard stations or center medians, which have separated lanes of one-way traffic, shall be not less than 14 feet wide per lane.

2.     Residential driveways serving no more than two single-family dwellings shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 16 feet.

3.     Roads serving only residential dwellings, that are not within the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone, shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet.

 

Section 503.2.3 Surface. This section is revised to read:

 

Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus not less than 75,000 lbs. and shall be provided with an approved paved surface to provide all-weather driving capabilities.

 

Section 503.2.7 Grade. This section is revised to read:

 

Grades exceeding 15.0% (incline or decline) on fire apparatus access roads shall not be permitted without mitigation. Minimal mitigation shall be a surface of Portland cement concrete (PCC), with a deep broom finish perpendicular to the entire direction of travel, or equivalent, to enhance traction the entire length of the grade. The maximum grade shall not exceed 20%.

 

Section 503.2.8 Angles of Approach and Departure. This section is revised to read:

 

The angle of approach and angle of departure of a fire access roadway shall not exceed seven degrees (12 percent) or as approved by the fire code official.

 

Section 503.2.9 Roadway Turnouts. This section is added to read:

 

Turnouts shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and 30 feet long with a minimum 25-foot taper on each end.

 

Section 503.3 Marking. This section is revised to read:

 

When required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices or markings shall be provided for all public and private fire apparatus access roads, to identify such roads or prohibit obstruction thereof. Signs, notices, or markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. All new public roads, all private roads within major subdivisions and all private roads serving four or more parcels shall be named. Road name signs shall comply with City of Encinitas standards.

 

Section 503.4.2 Width of a Parking Space. This section is added to read:

 

The width of a parking space shall be a minimum of eight feet wide.

 

Section 503.6 Security Gates.

 

No person shall install a security gate or security device across a fire access roadway without the fire code official’s approval.

1.     An automatic gate across a fire access roadway or driveway shall be equipped with an approved emergency key-operated switch overriding all command functions to ensure access and shall be provided with a battery back-up and manual mechanical disconnect in case of power failure.

2.     An automatic gate accessing more than four residences or a gate accessing hazardous, institutional, educational or assembly occupancy group structures, shall also be equipped with an approved emergency traffic control-activating strobe light sensor or other device approved by the fire code official, which will activate the gate on the approach of emergency apparatus. The automatic gate shall also be equipped with a battery back-up and manual mechanical disconnect in case of power failure.

3.     When required by the fire code official, an automatic gate in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter is required to install an approved emergency key-operated switch or other mechanism approved by the fire code official, at an approved location, which overrides all command functions and opens the gate. When required by the fire code official, an automatic gate in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter may be required to install a battery back-up system for life-safety reasons. A property owner shall comply with these requirements within 90 days of receiving written notice to comply.

4.     A gate across a fire access roadway or driveway, public or private, shall be maintained in an operative condition which provides rapid, reliable access at all times.

5.     Where this section requires an approved key-operated switch, it may be dual-keyed or equipped with dual switches provided to facilitate access by law enforcement personnel.

6.     Electric gate openers, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F2200.Section 507 Fire Protection Water Supplies

 

Section 507 Fire Protection Water Supplies

 

Section 507.2.2 Water Tanks. This section is revised to read:

 

Water storage tanks, when permitted by the fire code official, shall comply with Table No. 507.2.2A.

 

WATER STORAGE TANKS

Table No. 507.2.2A

 

Building Square Feet

Gallons Per Minute Water Flow

Capacity Gallons

Duration Minutes

Up to 1,500

250

5,000

20

Over 1,500

250

10,000

40

When exposure distance is one hundred feet (100′) or less from adjacent property or where additional hazards or higher fire flow exists, the required water storage may be modified by the fire code official.

 

1.     Tank elevation shall be equal to or higher than the fire department connection on the premises. Regardless of domestic use, all tanks shall be equipped with a device that will ensure that the tank contains the designated amount of water for fire flow duration as determined by the fire department. Tank size may be increased to serve multiple structures on a single parcel.

2.     Supply outlet shall be at least 4 inches in diameter from the base of the tank to the point of outlet at the fire department connection. The fire department connection shall provide an approved means of controlling water flow.

3.     The outlet shall be located along an access roadway and shall not be closer than 50 feet or further than 150 feet from the structure.

4.     All exposed tanks and exposed supply pipes shall be of an alloy or other material listed for above ground use. Adequate support shall be provided.

 

Section 507.5.1 Where Required. This section is revised to read:

 

The location, type and number of fire hydrants connected to a water supply capable of delivering the required fire flow shall be provided on the public or private street, or on the site of the premises to be protected or both. Fire hydrants shall be accessible to the fire department apparatus by roads meeting the requirements of Section 503.

 

Section 507.5.1 01 Requirements for Single-Family Dwellings. This section is added to read:

 

In zones other than industrial, commercial and multi-family, fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with Table No. 507.5.1.01A.

 

Table No. 507.5.1.01A

 

Parcels 1/2 acre and larger:

Every 500 feet to the structure

Parcels less than 1/2 acre:

Every 350 feet

 

Section 507.5.1.02 Requirements for Multi-Family, Commercial and Industrial Zones. This section is added to read:

 

In multi-family zones and in commercial and industrial zones, fire hydrants shall be installed at intersections, at the beginning radius of cul-de-sacs, and every 300 feet of fire access roadways, regardless of parcel size.

 

Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems

 

Section 903.2 Where Required. This section is revised to read:

 

Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 and may be required in additions and remodels of existing structures as described in Section 903.2.01.

 

Section 903.3 Installation Requirements. This section is revised to read:

 

Automatic sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Sections 903.3.1 through 903.3.8 and the City of Encinitas installation policies, as appropriate.

 

Section 903.2.01 Group R Additions, Remodels, and Reconstruction. This section is added to read:

 

An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 may be required to be installed throughout structures when the addition is more than 50% of the existing building, or where the scope of work includes significant modification to the interior and/or the roof of the building.

 

Exceptions:

1.     If the cost of the installation exceeds 15 percent of the valuation of the project. Formal bids shall be provided to the Encinitas Fire Department for review.

2.     If the addition to the existing structure is strictly for the creation of a new Accessory Dwelling Unit; no additions or remodels to the existing building is permitted.

 

Section 903.2.02 Commercial and Group U.

 

An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be required in buildings and structures when the square footage of a new commercial building exceeds 5,000 square feet.

 

Exception:

1.     Agricultural buildings constructed of wood or metal frame, over which fabric or similar material is stretched, which are specifically used as green houses are exempt from the automatic sprinkler requirements unless physically connected to other structures.

 

Section 905 Standpipe Systems

 

Section 905.3 Required Installations. This section is revised to read:

 

Standpipe systems shall be installed where required by Sections 905.3.01 through 905.3.11.1. Standpipe systems are allowed to be combined with automatic sprinkler systems.

 

Exception: Standpipe systems are not required in Group R-3 occupancies.

 

Section 905.3.01 Standpipes. This section is added to read:

 

A Class 1 standpipe with 2.5-inch hose valves shall be provided for all commercial buildings three levels or more in height, regardless of occupancy type. Hose valves shall be located in each stair enclosure and on each floor level, including the roof. For single story buildings or parking structures with large floor areas, class 1 standpipes may be required.

 

Chapter 56 Explosives and Fireworks

 

Section 5608.2 Fireworks. This section is added to read:

 

Fireworks shall not be sold, manufactured, disposed or discharged within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Encinitas, except when a permit is issued for public display, theatrical purposes and/or group entertainment by the fire department to a California State Fire Marshal licensed pyro-technician and the minimum requirements of Title 19, California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6, fireworks are met. The San Diego County Regulatory Ordinance, Title 3, Division 2, Chapter 1, Sections 32.101 through 32.108 may be used as a guide when enforcing these requirements.

 

Section 5608.3 Fireworks Penalty. This section is added to read:

 

Any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with this Chapter or the requirements of Title 19 California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6, and/or San Diego County Regulatory Ordinance,Title 3, Division 2, Chapter 1, Sections 32.101 through 32.108, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed One Thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. 2019-27; Ord.2020-03)

 

10.04.030 Geographic Limits.
That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2019 California Fire Code are hereby established as follows:

 

Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids

 

Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where Above-Ground Tanks are Prohibited. This section is revised to read:

 

In the City of Encinitas, (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 of the 2019 California Fire Code and the 2018 International Fire Code in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as the jurisdictional limits of the City of Encinitas.

 

Exceptions:

1.     2,000 gallons maximum temporary (six months maximum) above ground tanks meeting UL 2085 for private use on farms, agricultural and rural property, remote construction sites, earth moving projects, gravel pits or borrow pits. Such tanks shall be specially designed, approved and listed, and have features incorporated into their design which mitigates concerns for exposure to heat (two-hour fire resistance), ignition sources and mechanical damage. A fire department permit will be required.

2.     Crankcase draining may be stored in specially constructed above ground storage tanks, approved by the fire code official, with a maximum capacity of 550 gallons. Such tanks may be located within a building when the fire code official deems appropriate, and the container meets the following: specially designed, approved and listed containers which have features incorporated into their design which mitigates concerns for exposure to heat, ignition sources and mechanical damage. Containers must be installed and used in accordance with their listing, and provisions must be made for leak and spill containment. In no case shall such storage be permitted in residential or institutional property. All installations require a fire department permit.

3.     With the fire code official’s approval, Class I and II liquids may be stored in aboveground tanks inside or outside of buildings in specially designed, approved and listed containers which have features incorporated into their design which mitigates concerns for exposure to heat, ignition sources and mechanical damage. Class I liquids will be limited to 550 gallons and class II liquids will be limited to 1,100 gallons.

        Containers must be installed and used in accordance with their listing, and provisions must be made for leak and spill containment. The fire code official may disapprove the installation of such containers when, in his opinion, their use presents a risk to life or property.

4.     With the fire code official’s approval, temporary storage of a maximum 10,000 gallons of Class II liquids may be permitted for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days at remote construction sites, earth moving projects, gravel pits or borrow pits, consistent with Sections 5704 and 5706.

 

Section 5705.2.4 Class I, II and Ill Liquids. This section is revised to delete Exception 4.

 

Section 5706 Special Operations

 

Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where Above-ground Tanks are Prohibited. This section is revised to read:

 

Within the geographic limits of the City of Encinitas, the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tank is prohibited in residential areas.

 

Section 5706.4 Bulk Plants or Terminals. This section is revised to read:

 

The geographic limits in which bulk plants and terminals of flammable and combustible liquids are received are prohibited for the protection of heavily populated and congested areas and are hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of Encinitas.

 

Chapter 58 Flammable Cryogenic Fluids

 

Section 5806.2 Limitations. This section revised to read:

 

Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within the geographic limits of the City of Encinitas.

 

Chapter 61 Liquefied Petroleum Gases

 

Section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity within Established Limits. This section is revised to read:

 

Within the geographic limits of the City of Encinitas, the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons.

(Ord. 2019-27)

Chapter 10.08 REIMBURSEMENT FOR PROTECTIVE SERVICES
10.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a procedure for obtaining reimbursement from responsible individuals for the expenses of any emergency response by the City to protect the public from fire or hazardous substances. (Ord. 87-16)

 

10.08.020 Definitions.
The meaning of the terms used herein shall be as set forth in the Uniform Fire Code, then adopted and in use in the City, and such terms as are included in Chapter 1, Part 1 of Division 12 of the Health and Safety Code commencing at Section 13000 relating to liability for fires and hazardous substances. (Ord. 87-16)

 

10.08.030 Reimbursement Required.
In accordance with the Health and Safety Code Section 13000 et seq., an individual who acts negligently or in violation of the law and thereby requires the City to provide an emergency response to a danger posed by a fire or hazardous substance shall reimburse the City for the costs incurred. (Ord. 87-16)

 

10.08.040 Report.
A City department involved in an emergency response may submit a report to the City Manager indicating:

A.     The costs incurred.

B.     The person or entity apparently responsible for reimbursing the City.

C.    The basis of the determination regarding responsibility. (Ord. 87-16)

 

10.08.050 Notice to Responsible Party.
A.     If it is reasonably likely that the party identified in the report is responsible for reimbursing the City, the City Manager may submit a demand to the identified party. The City Manager is authorized to accept a reasonable offer of reimbursement.

B.     The City Manager may set the matter for administrative hearing by the City Council. Notice of the date set for hearing and the department report shall be sent to the person or entity to be charged together with a copy of the administrative hearing procedures contained in the Municipal Code. (Ord. 87-16)

 

10.08.060 Action by City Council.
If the matter is referred to the City Council for administrative hearing, the City Council shall, by resolution:

A.     Confirm or disallow the charge, in full or in part;

B.     Determine the amount of reimbursement owed by the party to the City; and

C.    Direct that the City commence collection proceedings against the party. (Ord. 87-16)

Title 11 HEALTH
Chapter 11.04 HEALTH REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Chapter 11.05 URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC
Chapter 11.08 SMOKING
Chapter 11.09 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN BEACHES, PARKS, TRAILS AND OUTDOOR/PATIO DINING AREAS OF EATING ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 11.10 SALE, DISPLAY AND PROMOTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Chapter 11.11 SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Chapter 11.12 REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS RUBBISH AND WEEDS
Chapter 11.20 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 11.21 PROHIBITION OF SCAVENGING
Chapter 11.22 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING
Chapter 11.24 LITTER CONTROL
Chapter 11.26 SINGLE-USE DISPOSABLE BAG REDUCTION
Chapter 11.27 PROHIBITION ON THE USE, DISTRIBUTION, AND SALE OF EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE FOOD SERVICE WARE, PLASTIC UTENSILS, AND BEVERAGE STRAWS MADE OF PLASTIC
Chapter 11.28 LEAF BLOWER ORDINANCE
Chapter 11.29 PLASTIC BOTTLED BEVERAGE ORDINANCE

Chapter 11.04 HEALTH REGULATED ACTIVITIES
11.04.010 Purpose.
Any person who conducts a business or activity which is described in this chapter shall first obtain a health permit, together with any other licenses and permits required by this Code. (Ord. 86-17)

 

11.04.020 Adoption of Code by Reference.
There is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Encinitas, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, the following portions of the San Diego County Code together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in Section 11.04.030 of this chapter. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Encinitas to include, without limitation, the fees, regulatory provisions, and definitions, but excluding the procedural provisions beyond those specified for processing and applications, conducting investigations, issuing permits and enforcing regulatory provisions:

A.     Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 1, regulating the preparation and distribution of food.

B.     Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 2, regulating food handlers.

C.    Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 3, providing for the destruction of spoiled food.

D.    Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 1, regarding applications, permits and fees.

E.     Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 4, regulating refrigeration plants.

F.     Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 8, regulating reduction plants.

G.    Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 9, providing for the enforcement of the State housing law.

H.    Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 10, regulating apartments and hotels.

I.      Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 1, regulating waste of water.

J.     Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 2, regarding the pollution of waters.

K.     Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 3, regarding public swimming pools.

L.     Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 3.5, regarding swimming pool fencing.

M.    Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 4, regulating wells.

N.    Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 3, regarding septic tanks and seepage pits.

O.    Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 6, regarding septic tank and cesspool cleaners.

P.     Title 6, Division 9, Chapter 1, regarding condemnation of buildings.

Q.    Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 8, regarding disclosure of hazardous materials.

R.    Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 9, regarding hazardous waste establishments.

S.     Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 10, regarding underground storage of hazardous substances.

T.     Title 6, Division 4, regarding disease control.

U.    Title 6, Division 5, regarding procedures.

V.     Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 12, regarding medical waste.

W.    Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 3, regarding tattoo parlors and mobile tattoo vehicles.

X.     Title 61.211 through Title 61.256, regarding the regulation of wholesale food warehouses. (Ord. 86-17; Ord. 87-21; Ord. 89-33; Ord. 94-05; Ord. 2003-11)

 

11.04.030 Effective Date.
The operative date of this chapter is May 23, 2003. (Ord. 2003-11)

 

11.04.040 Issuing Authority.
The San Diego County Health Officer, together with the Department of Health Services for the County of San Diego, is hereby designated as the Health Officer for the City of Encinitas with authority to enforce and observe within the City of Encinitas the following:

A.     All orders, quarantine regulations, and rules and regulations issued by the State Department of Health Services under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

B.     All statutes of the State of California relating to public health.

C.    Those portions of the San Diego County Code pertaining to public health and sanitation as are set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 86-17)

 

11.04.050 Regulations.
A.     Each applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall apply to the Department of Health Services, County of San Diego.

B.     The Department of Health Services of the County of San Diego shall collect and retain for the benefit of the County of San Diego the fees and delinquent payment penalties imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 86-17)

Chapter 11.05 URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC
11.05.010 Purpose.
Because of the potential of urine or feces to spread disease if not disposed of in a sanitary manner, and because of the negative esthetic impact of public urination or defecation either by sight or by smell, the declared purpose of this chapter is to prohibit public urination or defecation in the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2009-06)

 

11.05.020 Urinating or Defecating in Public.
No person shall urinate or defecate in or on any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, beach, public building or publicly maintained facility, or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation which is done in any fixture provided for such purposes in any restroom or other public facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2009-06)

Chapter 11.08 SMOKING
11.08.010 Purpose.
Because the smoking of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, or any other weed or plant, is a positive danger to health and a cause of material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort and a health hazard to those who are present in confined places, and in order to preserve public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the smoking of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, or any other weed or plant by person in a public place or places of employment, except in designated smoking areas. (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.08.020 Definitions.
“Place of employment” shall mean any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas and employee lounges.

“Public place” means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to retail stores, retail service establishments, retail food production and marketing establishments, restaurants, theaters, waiting rooms, reception areas, educational facilities, health facilities and public transportation facilities. A private residence is not a “public place.”

“Smoke” or “smoking” means and includes (1) the carrying of a lighted pipe, lighted cigar or lighted cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind; (2) the use of electronic cigarettes as defined in the California Health and Safety Code Section 119405 (“e-cigarette”) or a similar device intended to emulate smoking, which permits a person to inhale vapors or mists that may or may not contain nicotine. Smoking includes emitting or exhaling the vapor of any e-cigarette or other electronic smoking device; or the fumes of any pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted smoking equipment used for burning any tobacco product, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance. (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.08.030 Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in a public place or place of employment, except in a designated smoking area. The provisions of this chapter do not apply in any circumstance where federal or state law regulates smoking or use of e-cigarettes if the federal or state law preempts local regulation or if the federal and state law is more restrictive. (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.08.040 Designation of Smoking Areas.
A.     Smoking areas may be designated in public places and places of employment by proprietors or other persons in charge except in retail stores, retail service establishments, food markets, public conveyances, theaters, auditoriums, public assembly rooms, meeting rooms, rest rooms, elevators, pharmacies, libraries, museums or galleries which are open to the public, or any other place where smoking is prohibited by law, ordinance or regulation. Where smoking areas are designated, existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the toxic effect of smoke in adjacent, non-smoking areas.

B.     It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke free areas for non-smoker employees to the maximum extent possible within existing facilities.

C.    A building or establishment may be designated entirely as a “smoking prohibited” area. However, in no case may an entire building or establishment be designated as a “smoking permitted” area.

D.    Smoking areas may not be designated in a shared, work area of a place of employment. A shared, work area is any room in which more than one employee is assigned to perform work during the course of a work day. Each employer shall provide written information to employees concerning smoking at the place of employment, including the location of designated smoking and non-smoking areas.

E.     No ashtrays or other ash receptacles shall be placed in areas where smoking is prohibited. (89-14)

 

11.08.050 Additional Prohibition.
All managers and owners of any establishments serving or doing business with the public may at their discretion post “no smoking” signs within the various areas of their businesses and utilize the full right of the provisions of this chapter. No public place other than the ones enumerated in this chapter shall be designated as a smoking area in its entirety.

 

11.08.060 Posting of Signs.
Signs which designate smoking or no smoking areas established by this chapter shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every room, building or other place so covered by this chapter. No smoking signs shall be specifically placed in retail food production and marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets open to the public so they are clearly visible to persons entering the store, clearly visible to persons in check out lines, and clearly visible to persons at meat and produce counters. The manner of such posting, including the wording, size, color, design and place of posting, whether on the walls, doors, tables, counters, stands or elsewhere shall be at the discretion of the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such room, building, or other place so long as clarity, sufficiency and conspicuousness are apparent in communicating the intent of this chapter.

 

11.08.070 Exceptions.
A.     Individual private offices, hotel and motel meeting and assembly rooms rented to guests, areas in rooms while in use for private social functions, private hospital rooms, psychiatric facilities, jails, and stores that deal exclusively in tobacco products and accessories, and other places of employment as defined by Section 6400 et seq. of the Labor Code are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Any owner or manager of a business or other establishment subject to this chapter may apply to the City Manager for an exemption or modification of the provisions of this chapter due to unique or unusual circumstances or conditions. (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.08.080 Employer Responsibility.
A.     The owner, operator or manager of any facility or business or agency within the purview of this chapter shall comply with the provisions hereof. Such owner, operator or manager shall post or cause to be posted all “no smoking” signs required by this chapter. Such owner, operator or manager shall not allow service to any person who violates the provisions of this chapter by smoking in a posted “no smoking” area.

B.     It shall be the responsibility of employers to disseminate information concerning the provisions of this chapter to employees.

C.    An employer may not knowingly or intentionally permit smoking in any enclosed workplace and must take reasonable steps to prevent nonemployees from smoking. (Ord. 2014-02)

Chapter 11.09 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN BEACHES, PARKS, TRAILS AND OUTDOOR/PATIO DINING AREAS OF EATING ESTABLISHMENTS
11.09.010 Purpose and Intent.
Because the smoking of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, or any other weed or plant, is a danger to health and cigarette/cigar smoke, discarded cigarette/cigar butts, and used matches, and electronic cigarette waste (e.g., disposable electronic cigarettes, or batteries and cartridges) dropped in public spaces have negative environmental impacts and degrade the aesthetic quality of the City’s owned and/or maintained and operated beaches, parks, trails; and in outdoor/patio dining areas of eating establishments (and are the most common type of litter found in the City’s beaches), the purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and welfare by banning smoking in all City owned and/or maintained and operated beaches, parks and trails as well as in outdoor/patio dining areas of eating establishments as set forth herein. (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.09.020 Definitions.
“City beach” means City-owned, and/or maintained and operated beaches, accesses and overlooks/viewpoints (with or without beach access) located within the City of Encinitas and all land, water, road improvements, parking lots and facilities related thereto, including:

1.     Grandview Beach (Leucadia State Beach), 1700 Neptune Avenue;

2.     Beacon’s Beach (Leucadia State Beach), 948 Neptune Avenue;

3.     Stone Steps Beach, 350 El Portal;

4.     Moonlight State Beach, 400 B Street (including existing undeveloped parcels on B Street);

5.     D Street Viewpoint/Access, 450 D Street;

6.     Swami’s Beach, 1298 South Coast Highway 101 (including existing undeveloped parcels south of entrance on South Coast Highway 101);

7.     H Street Viewpoint, 498 H Street;

8.     I Street Viewpoint, 498 I Street;

9.     J Street Viewpoint, 398 J Street;

10.   North El Portal Viewpoint;

11.   Roseta Street Viewpoint;

12.   B Street cul-de-sac west of Fourth Street;

13.   C Street cul-de-sac west of Moonlight Lane;

14.   E Street Viewpoint.

“Eating establishment” means a coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order café, luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, restaurant or similar establishment serving food to the public. This definition does not include bar establishments principally devoted to serving alcoholic beverages and in which serving food is incidental to the consumption of such beverages.

“Outdoor/patio dining area” means any contiguous portion of an eating establishment that contains seating for members of the public to consume food or drink in an area which is out-of-doors, covered or otherwise outside the confines of the interior premises.

“Public park” means City owned, and/or maintained and operated parks, recreational areas and reserves located within the City of Encinitas and all land, water, road improvements, parking lots and facilities related thereto, including:

1.     Cottonwood Creek Park, 95 North Vulcan Avenue;

2.     Leucadia Roadside Park, 860 North Coast Highway 101;

3.     Orpheus Park, 482 Orpheus Avenue;

4.     Encinitas Viewpoint Park, Cornish Drive & D Street;

5.     Oakcrest Park, 1219 Encinitas Boulevard;

6.     Glen Park, 2149 Orinda Drive;

7.     Cardiff Sports Park, 1661 Lake Drive;

8.     Wiro Park, 2232 El Camino Del Norte;

9.     Mildred MacPherson Park, 1045 South Vulcan Avenue;

10.   Paul Ecke Sports Park, 278 Saxony Road;

11.   Scott Valley Park, 1602 Willowhaven Road;

12.   Leo Mullen Sports Park, 951 Via Cantebria;

13.   Little Oaks Equestrian Park, 2879 Lone Jack Road;

14.   Hawk View Park, 1309 Heron Drive;

15.   Sun Vista Park, 2011 Avenida La Posta;

16.   Leucadia Oaks Park, 1511 North Vulcan Avenue;

17.   Las Verdes Park, 1390 Paseo de Las Verdes;

18.   Encinitas Community Park, 425 Santa Fe Drive.

“Public trail” means City trails (both developed and undeveloped as identified in the City of Encinitas Recreational Trails Master Plan) located in the City of Encinitas and all land, water, road improvements, parking lots and facilities related thereto, including:

1.     Indian Head Canyon Trails;

2.     Encinitas Ranch Trails;

3.     Olivenhain Trails;

4.     Village Park Trails and Off-Leash Dog Area;

5.     Manchester Preserve Trails.

“Smoke” or “smoking” means (1) the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance; (2) the use of electronic cigarettes as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 119405 (“e-cigarette”) or a similar device intended to emulate smoking, which permits a person to inhale vapors or mists that may or may not contain nicotine. Smoking includes emitting or exhaling the vapor of any e-cigarette or other electronic smoking device; or the fumes of any pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted smoking equipment used for burning any tobacco product, weed, plant or any other combustible substance. (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.09.030 Prohibitions.
A.     No person shall smoke at, or within 20 feet of any City-owned and/or maintained and operated beach, park or trail.

B.     No person shall smoke in, or within 20 feet of any outdoor/patio dining area of an eating establishment.

C.    The 20-foot smoking buffer ban listed in this chapter will not apply to an individual smoking in a vehicle being driven on a public street, alley, or in a parking lot.

D.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply in any circumstance where federal or state law regulates smoking or the use of e-cigarettes if the federal or state law preempts local regulation or if the federal or state law is more restrictive. (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.09.040 Posting of Signs.
Permanent signs shall be installed at City-owned and/or maintained and operated beaches, parks and trails indicating the following: “This Beach/Park/Trail Is a Smoke Free Zone.” (Ord. 2014-02)

 

11.09.100 Violations—Enforcement and Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable pursuant to Section 1.08.050 of the Encinitas Municipal Code. This chapter is not exclusive, and is not intended to preclude enforcement pursuant to any other applicable law, including laws prohibiting the act of littering or improper disposal of a cigarette or lighted substance. Nothing in this section shall preclude any person from seeking any other remedies, penalties or procedures by law. (Ord. 2014-02)

Chapter 11.10 SALE, DISPLAY AND PROMOTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
11.10.010 Purpose and Intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to enact regulations governing the sale or display of tobacco products in the City to prevent adverse impacts affecting the public health and welfare of its citizens, and particularly minors. Accordingly, pursuant to the recitals contained in Ordinance No. 2000-10, the City Council has adopted the regulations contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2000-10)

 

11.10.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, terms shall be defined by their ordinary meaning unless specified below:

“Advertising display” means a sign, sign board, bill board, poster or banner that is temporarily or permanently placed within a building, or is displayed in the window(s) of a commercial establishment, and is used to advertise or promote products. It does not include printed material on the container of a product offered for sale at a retail establishment.

“Playground” means any outdoor premises or grounds owned or operated by the City, a public or private school, childcare center, or youth or recreational center, containing any play or athletic equipment used or intended to be used by minors.

“Recreation center or facility” means any center or facility owned, operated or controlled by the City and designated for continual recreational uses which shall include but not be limited to a teen center and similar uses.

“School” means any public or private elementary or secondary school attendance at which satisfies the compulsory education laws of the State of California.

“Self service display” means an open display of tobacco products that the public has access to without the assistance of a store employee.

“Tobacco advertising display” means an advertising display concerning tobacco products.

“Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf in any form, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco and dipping tobacco.

“Vendor assisted” means the provision of tobacco products for sale which are dispensed only with the assistance of a store employee and the customer does not take possession of the product until the point of sale. (Ord. 2000-10)

 

11.10.030 Measure of Distance.
The distance between any store or business selling tobacco products and any school, playground, recreational center or facility, childcare center or library, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the entrance or entrances of the store or business to the nearest property line of the school, playground, recreational center or facility, childcare center or library. (Ord. 2000-10)

 

11.10.040 Location of Tobacco Products and Advertising Displays Inside Retail Establishments.
A.     It is prohibited for any person or business to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, any advertising display containing tobacco products within two feet of any candy, snack or non-alcoholic beverage display inside any store or business which is located within 1,000 feet of the premises of any school, playground, recreation center or facility, childcare center or library.

B.     It is prohibited for any person or business to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, any tobacco advertising display within two feet of candy, snack or non-alcoholic beverage displays inside any store or business that sells tobacco products and which is located within 1,000 feet of the premises of any school, playground, recreation center or facility, childcare center or library.

C.    It is prohibited for any person or business to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, any advertising display containing tobacco products or tobacco advertising display below four feet from the floor. (Ord. 2000-10)

 

11.10.050 Exceptions to Location of Tobacco Products and Advertising Displays Inside Retail Establishments.
A.     Section 11.10.040 shall not apply to commercial establishments where access to the premises by persons under 21 years of age is prohibited by law.

B.     Section 11.10.040 shall not apply to: (1) any displays containing tobacco products which are not accessible and not visible to patrons; or (2) displays located above, behind or below a sales counter and are not accessible to patrons. (Ord. 2000-10; Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.10.060 Self Service Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products—Prohibited.
It is prohibited for any person, business or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for purposes of sale, by means of self service displays or by any means other than vendor assisted. (Ord. 2000-10)

 

11.10.070 Distribution of Free Tobacco Samples or Promotional Items—Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to distribute free tobacco products or promotional items except in enclosed area where minors are prohibited. (Ord. 2000-10)

 

11.10.080 Posting of Signs Regarding Tobacco Sales to Minors.
A.     Any person or business selling or otherwise distributing tobacco products shall post conspicuously a notice in their place of business at each point of purchase stating that the sale of tobacco products to persons under 21 years of age is prohibited by law. The notice shall also state that photo identification is required to purchase tobacco products. The character depicting the notice shall be at least one-half inch in height.

B.     Any sign in compliance with the content requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 22952(B) and regulations promulgated thereto, and the posting requirements of California Penal Code Section 308(c), shall satisfy the requirements in subsection A of this section.

C.    It is unlawful for any person or business that sells or distributes tobacco products to fail to post a sign pursuant to this section. (Ord. 2000-10; Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.10.090 Advertisement and Promotional Materials Placed on City Property—Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person or business to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, any advertisement or promotional material for tobacco products on any property, whether real or personal, owned by the City. (Ord. 2000-10)

 

11.10.100 Tobacco Store Location.
No retail establishment in which 33% or more of its floor display area is dedicated to the sale of tobacco products shall be located within 1,000 feet of any school, playground, recreation center or facility, childcare center or library. (Ord. 2000-10)

Chapter 11.11 SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCTS
11.11.010 Purpose and Intent.
The City Council recognizes the inherent danger of tobacco products and that the use of tobacco products has devastating health and economic consequences. The City Council further recognizes that tobacco use is the leading cause of preventable illness and death in the United States, and that tobacco product use is started and established primarily during adolescence.

Allowing flavored tobacco products to be sold in the City increases access to these harmful and dangerous products. To that end, no flavored tobacco products shall be sold in the City except as specifically enumerated in this chapter. (Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.11.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Characterizing flavor” means a distinguishable taste or aroma or both, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted by a tobacco product or any byproduct produced by the tobacco product. Characterizing flavors include, but are not limited to, tastes or aromas relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, menthol, mint, wintergreen, herb, or spice. A tobacco product shall not be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because of the use of additives or flavorings or the provision of ingredient information. Rather, it is the presence of a distinguishable taste or aroma or both, as described in the first sentence of this definition, that constitutes a characterizing flavor.

“Distinguishable” means perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.

“Distribute” or “distribution” means the transfer, by any person other than a common carrier, of a tobacco product at any point from the place of manufacture or thereafter to the person who sells the tobacco product to an individual for personal consumption.

“Electronic cigarette” has the meaning set forth in Section 30121 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, as may be amended from time to time.

“Flavored shisha tobacco product” means any shisha tobacco product that contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor.

“Flavored tobacco product” means any tobacco product that imparts a characterizing flavor. A public statement or claim made or disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.

“Hookah” means a type of waterpipe, used to smoke shisha or other tobacco products, with a long flexible tube for drawing aerosol through water. Components of a hookah may include heads, stems, bowls, and hoses.

“Hookah tobacco retailer” means a tobacco retailer that is engaged in the retail sale of shisha tobacco products, hookah, and hookah smoking accessories.

“Sell,” “sale,” and “to sell” mean any transaction where, for any consideration, ownership of a tobacco product is transferred from one person to another, including, but not limited to, any transfer or title or possession for consideration, exchange, or barter, in any manner or by any means.

“Shisha tobacco product” means a tobacco product smoked or intended to be smoked in a hookah. “Shisha tobacco product” includes, and may be referred to as, hookah tobacco, waterpipe tobacco, maassel, narghile, and argileh. “Shisha tobacco product” does not include any electronic devices, such as an electronic hookah, electronic cigarette, or electronic tobacco product.

“Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, electronic cigarette cartridge, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling, vaping or other manner of ingestion. (Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.11.030 Prohibition on Sale or Distribution of Flavored Tobacco Products.
A.     It is unlawful to sell or distribute any flavored tobacco product to a person in the City of Encinitas.

B.     There shall be a rebuttal presumption that a tobacco product, other than a cigarette, is a flavored tobacco product if a manufacturer or any of the manufacturer’s agents or employees, in the course of their agency or employment, has made a statement or claim directed to consumers or to the public that the tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor, including, but not limited to, text, color, and/or images on the product’s labeling or packaging that are used to explicitly or implicitly communicate that the tobacco product has a characterizing flavor.

C.    This section shall not apply to a product that has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes, where the product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.

D.    This section shall not apply to the sale or distribution of shisha tobacco products for use in a hookah. (Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.11.040 Enforcement.
A.     The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to establish regulations and to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, inspecting the premises of any business to verify compliance.

B.     Any person, business or tobacco retailer violating this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, or a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to criminal fines, any person, business or tobacco retailer violating this chapter shall also be subject to civil penalties or administrative fines or both under Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

C.    The City Attorney may seek legal injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter.

D.    Administrative enforcement of this chapter shall proceed pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

E.     Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.

F.     The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and not exclusive, and nothing in this chapter shall preclude any person from pursuing any other remedies provided by law.

G.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this chapter may be enforced through any remedy as provided for in this section upon its effective date. (Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.11.050 Conflict with Federal or State Law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any requirement, power, or duty that is preempted by Federal or State law. (Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.11.060 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion of this chapter irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. To this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 2020-13)

 

11.11.070 Operative Date.
The operative date of this chapter is January 1, 2021. (Ord. 2020-13)

Chapter 11.12 REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS RUBBISH AND WEEDS
11.12.010 Duty to Remove Rubbish and Weeds.
It is unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any real property within the City to place or maintain dirt, rubbish, materials, grass, weeds or vegetation on or about such property or on or about adjacent sidewalks, parking areas, alleys or streets in a manner that is either dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity; or interferes with the use of public rights-of-way. The conditions described in this section are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement by the City. (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.020 Regulating Authority.
The City Manager or authorized designee shall serve as the regulating authority for the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.030 Notice to Remove.
Whenever the regulating authority discovers a violation of this chapter, the regulating authority shall cause to be given a “notice to clean premises.” (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.040 Notice to Clean Premises.
A.     The “notice to clean premises” shall contain:

1.     The date the notice is mailed;

2.     The address of the property involved;

3.     A description of the violation;

4.     An order to cure the violation;

5.     A warning that if the violation is not cured within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice, or such additional time as may be expressly authorized by the regulating authority, the City shall abate the violation as a public nuisance and charge the owner for the costs incurred;

6.     A warning that the costs incurred may become a lien on the property and subject the property to foreclosure;

7.     A notice that the owner, lessee or occupant may contest the existence of the violation or deny the responsibility for its cure by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days of the date of the mailing of the notice; and

8.     A notice that the owner, lessee or occupant may appear and present evidence when the City Council considers the response.

B.     On the date of mailing indicated in the “notice to clean premises,” the regulating authority shall cause such notice to be distributed by one of the following methods:

1.     By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; or

2.     By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on the last available property assessment roll, or as otherwise known. Service shall be deemed completed upon the deposit of the notice, postage prepaid, in the United States mail; or

3.     By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right-of-way. (Ord. 2005-04; Ord. 2017-07)

 

11.12.050 City Council Consideration of Response to Notice to Clean Premises.
If a written appeal to the “notice to clean premises” is received by the City Clerk within 10 days of the mailing of the “notice to clean premises” which sets forth the reasons for the response, the matter shall be set for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting. The City Clerk shall notify the person submitting the appeal of the date on which the City Council will consider the response. (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.060 Removal by City.
A.     If no appeal is filed to the “notice to clean premises,” then on the 16th day following the mailing of the “notice to clean premises,” the regulating authority shall be authorized to abate the nuisance on the property.

B.     If an appeal is filed, then no sooner than five days after the rendering of a decision by the City Council, affirming the “notice to clean premises,” the regulating authority shall be authorized to abate the nuisance on the property. (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.070 Charge for Removal.
A.     After abatement of the violation, the regulating authority shall prepare and submit to the City Council a report listing the proposed assessment to be levied against the property. The City Clerk shall set the proposed assessment for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting no sooner than 10 days from the date of sending notice of the proposed assessment.

B.     Notice of the proposed assessment shall be distributed in accordance with the procedures applicable to a “notice to clean premises” and shall contain the date and time when the City Council shall consider the report of the regulating authority and such information as the owner, lessee or occupant wishes to present regarding the amount of the proposed assessment. (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.080 Confirmation of Assessment.
At the time set for considering the report of the regulating authority, the City Council shall hear any objections from persons liable to be assessed. The City Council may affirm, modify or reject the proposed assessment. The affirmation of any assessment shall declare that the amount is a lien upon the subject property. (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.090 Collection of Assessment.
A.     The assessment roll as confirmed by the City Council shall be delivered to the City Treasurer or his/her authorized designee who may receive the amount due on the assessment and issue receipts at any time within 10 days after the confirmation.

B.     At the end of the 10-day period, any unpaid assessment shall be given to the tax collector of San Diego County.

C.    The provisions of Government Code Sections 39580 and 39585, inclusive, are incorporated in this chapter by reference. The county auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 2005-04)

 

11.12.100 Violation—Penalty.
The owner, occupant or person in control of any lot or premises within the City who permits or allows the existence of a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her, or who violated any of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-04)

Chapter 11.20 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
11.20.010 Purpose and Intent.
A.     The storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, and other discarded matter, goods, and materials is a matter of great public concern, in that improper control of such matters creates a public nuisance, can lead to air pollution, fire hazards, illegal dumping, insect breeding and rat infestation, and other conditions affecting the health, welfare, and safety of the residents of this and surrounding cities. The periodic collection of garbage, rubbish, and other refuse from all residences and places of business in the City benefits all occupants of residences and businesses within the City and, therefore, the collection of garbage and refuse in the City shall be a mandatory service. All occupants, and legal owners, as hereinafter defined are made liable for the payment of fees for the mandatory service as may be from time to time approved by the City Council. The regulations provided in this chapter are designated to eliminate such problems.

B.     The City Council shall have the authority to make other reasonable rules and regulations concerning individual collection, disposal, and hauling of solid waste over City streets by private persons, or relating to the operation of a transfer station. (Ord. 88-24; Ord. 96-17)

 

11.20.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following defined words and phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the definition or meaning established by this section, unless it is clearly apparent from the context in which the word or phrase appears, that a different definition or meaning is intended.

“Animal waste” means manure, fertilizer, or any form of solid excrement produced by any and all forms of domestic or commercial livestock.

“Cardboard” means post-consumer waste paper grade corrugated cardboard (#11), kraft (brown) paper bags or solid fiber boxes which have served their packaging purpose and are discarded and can later be reclaimed for collection and recovery for recycling.

“City” means the City of Encinitas.

“City agent” means any employee or agent of the City designated by the City Manager or City Council as being responsible for administering, directing, supervising, collecting and providing for the disposal of garbage, rubbish, and other refuse.

“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Encinitas.

“Collection” means the organized picking up of solid waste and recyclables.

“Combined rubbish” means rubbish that is a combination of combustible or noncombustible materials.

“Commercial recyclables” means recyclables from the two commercial subcategories of office buildings (of more than 20,000 square feet) which are office paper, corrugated cardboard, newspaper, and awning; and hospitality (restaurants and taverns) which are corrugated cardboard, plastic beverage bottles, glass jars and bottles, white goods (appliances), aluminum, and tin and bi-metal cans.

“Commercial solid waste” means solid waste originating from stores, office, and other commercial sources, but does not include construction and demolition waste.

“Construction waste” means the demolition, dredging, grubbing, and the rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition activities on housing, commercial or governmental building and any other structure and pavement.

“Council” means the City Council of the City of Encinitas.

“Curbside collection” means the collection of recyclables from the residential waste stream from curb or alleyway.

“Designated recyclable materials” means materials that are recyclable and/or reusable within the following categories of residential, commercial (office and hospitality), and industrial as defined more specifically within each category by resolution of the City Council.

“Franchisee” means any refuse collector or recycling agent authorized by the City Council of the City of Encinitas, pursuant to the procedures established by this chapter.

“Garbage” includes, but is not restricted to, every accumulation of animal, vegetable, or other matter:

1.     Resulting from the preparation and consumption of edible foodstuffs; or

2.     Resulting from decay, dealing in storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables including the cans, containers, or wrappers wasted along with such materials; or

3.     Such industrial, domestic, and organic solid wastes or residue of animals sold for meat; or

4.     Fruit, vegetable, and animal matter from kitchens, dining rooms, markets, food establishments, or any other place using, dealing in or handling meats, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables, or grains; or

5.     Offal, animal excreta, or the carcasses of animals, fish or fowl; or

6.     Nonrecyclable glass, paper, or metal products.

“Glass bottles and jars” means food and beverage glass containers including container glass covered by the deposit law, and excluding household and kitchen containers such as drinking glasses, cups, cooking and serving dishes.

“Industrial recyclables” means recyclables from industry/ construction waste streams to include dirt, asphalt, sand, land clearing brush, concrete, and rock.

“Industrial solid waste” means solid waste originating from mechanized manufacturing facilities, factories, refineries, construction and demolition projects, publicly operated treatment works, and/or solid wastes placed in commercial collection bins.

“Household hazardous waste” means any unused or leftover portion of products containing toxic chemicals. Any product used for maintaining a private residence which is labeled Caution, Warning, Danger, Poison, Toxic, Flammable, or Corrosive.

“Metal” means recoverable aluminum, tin and bi-metal materials such as used beverage containers, siding, and other recyclable manufactured metal items.

“Newspaper” means materials printed on newsprint.

“Noncombustible rubbish” means ashes, bottles, broken crockery, glass, tin cans, metal and metallic substances which will not incinerate through contact with flames of ordinary temperature.

“Occupants” means persons that rent, own, or use certain premises such as residences or businesses.

“Office paper” means waste paper grades of white and colored ledgers. Examples include forms, copy paper, stationery, and other papers that are generally associated with desk activity.

“Person” as used in this chapter means any individual, firm, corporation, association, or group or combination acting as a unit.

“Plastic beverage bottles” means plastic containers with narrow necks, or mouth openings smaller than the diameter of the container bottles used for containing milk, juice, soft drinks, or water intended for human consumption; to be distinguished from non-food bottles such as those for containing motor oil, detergent, or other household products.

“Recyclable materials” means paper, glass, cardboard, plastic, used motor oil, ferrous metal, aluminum, compostable yard waste (e.g., tree trimmings, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter), tin and bi-metal cans, or other materials which may be recycled for use in an altered form that has been segregated from other solid waste.

“Recyclable plastic beverage containers” shall mean those bottles marked PET and HDPE and bottom of plastic beverage containers.

“Recycling operator” means a person or persons, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, or corporation engaged in the collection and recycling of waste and other discarded materials. For the purpose of this chapter, recycling shall be defined as established by Government Code Section 66716.5.

“Residential dwelling unit” means each place used for residential dwelling purposes for a single-family. A structure may have one or more residential dwelling units. No place used primarily for business purposes shall be considered as a residential dwelling unit.

“Rubbish” includes, but is not restricted to, all nonbiodegradable waste or debris such as paper, cardboard, grass, tree or shrub trimmings, rugs, straw, clothing, wood or wood products, crockery, glass, rubber, metal, plastic, construction waste and debris, and other similar materials.

“Solid waste” means and includes any or all types of rubbish, garbage or waste material defined in this section. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste as defined in Government Code Section 66714.8.

“Solid waste collector” means any person or persons, firm, partnership, joint venture, association or corporation engaged in the collection, transportation or disposal of refuse in the City.

“Solid waste disposal” includes the collecting, transporting, and disposal of solid waste in the City.

“Solid waste disposal operator” is synonymous with refuse collector, contractor, or collector.

“Streets” means the public streets, ways, alleys, and places, except state freeways, as the same now or may hereafter exist within the City.

“To segregate waste material” means any of the following: the placement of recyclables in separate containers; the binding of recyclable material separately from the other waste material; the physical separation of recyclables from other waste material.

“Transfer station” means the City’s designated site where collected refuse may be transferred to vehicles which will haul the refuse to a disposal site.

“Truck” means any truck, trailer, semi-trailer, conveyance, or vehicle used or intended to be used for the purpose of collecting refuse or to haul or transport refuse.

“White goods” means kitchen or other large appliances.

“Wood wastes” means lumber and wood products but excludes painted wood, wood treated with chemicals, and pressure treated wood.

“Yard wastes” means leaves, grass, weeds and wood materials from trees and shrubs. (Ord. 88-24; Ord. 96-17)

 

11.20.030 Award of Franchise.
A.     The disposal and collection of solid waste and recyclable materials are services subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     No person shall collect, remove, or dispose of any solid waste or recyclable materials within the City, nor transport the same over any public street or rights-of-way, unless a franchise to do so has first been obtained from the City and such person complies with the provisions of this chapter.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to permit, allow or enter into any agreement whatsoever, for the collection or transportation of solid waste or recyclable materials with any person who is not a franchisee as defined in this chapter, except as permitted in this chapter.

D.    It is unlawful for any person to burn, bury, or dump refuse within the City at any time, unless a special permit for such burning, burial or dumping has been issued by the City.

E.     It is unlawful for any person to store or accumulate any garbage, combustible or noncombustible rubbish, miscellaneous debris or combined rubbish, in any container or at any location other than as hereinabove set forth, or for any length of time other than as follows:

1.     Garbage. It is unlawful for any person to accumulate or store garbage for a period of time in excess of:

a.     Commercial and industrial zone areas: 48 hours (Sundays and holidays excepted); and

b.     All other areas: One week.

2.     Combustible or Noncombustible Rubbish. It is unlawful for any person to store or accumulate combustible or noncombustible rubbish and miscellaneous debris for a period of time in excess of one week.

3.     Combined Rubbish. It is unlawful for any person to store or accumulate combined rubbish for a period of time in excess of:

a.     Commercial and industrial zone areas: Six days (Sundays and holidays excepted); and

b.     All other areas: One week.

4.     Recyclable Materials. It is unlawful for any person to store or accumulate recyclable materials, separated for collection, for a period in excess of 30 days.

5.     The above periods of time which end in any week in which a holiday occurs are extended one additional day.

F.     Other than as herein set forth, it is unlawful for any person to dump, bury, or otherwise dispose of, or store or accumulate, any garbage, combustible or noncombustible rubbish, miscellaneous debris or combined rubbish or solid waste on any private or public property within the City, provided, however, that leaves, grass clippings and the like may be permitted for the purpose of composting under such circumstances and conditions as established by the City Manager.

G.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of garbage disposal devices authorized by the Uniform Plumbing Code, or to prohibit occupants of property from periodically transporting and disposing of solid waste or recyclable materials generated from the occupant’s property to an authorized landfill or recycling drop-off site.

H.    Each day’s violation shall be treated and considered as a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 88-24; Ord. 96-17)

 

11.20.040 Exemptions.
A.     Collection, removal, and disposal of household hazardous waste are not subject to the franchise provisions of this chapter.

B.     The following types of collection or transportation of solid waste is exempted from the requirements of this chapter:

1.     Yard waste removed from a premises by a gardening, landscaping, or tree trimming contractor as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a transportation service and tree trimmings, clippings, and all similar materials generated at parks, and other City-maintained premises, which may be collected and transported by the City to the disposal site.

2.     Demolition debris removed from a premises by a licensed demolition contractor as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a transportation service.

3.     By products of sewage treatment, including sludge, grit, and screenings.

4.     The collection of household hazardous waste or otherwise dangerous materials as part of regular services, to include without limitation, liquid and dry caustics, acids, bio hazardous, flammable, explosive materials, insecticides, and similar substances.

5.     The collection of infectious medical waste (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117.5). (Ord. 88-24; Ord. 96-17)

 

11.20.050 Collection in Emergencies.
In emergencies where, in the judgment of the City Manager, the particular situation justifies such action, the City Manager may issue limited or temporary franchises to private persons or corporations to perform any of the services covered by this chapter, subject to such reasonable fees, charges, and conditions as the circumstances may warrant and as the parties involved may agree upon; provided, that such fees and charges received from, or paid to, any private persons or corporations under this section for any period exceeding 15 days’ duration shall be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 88-24)

 

11.20.060 Issuance of Franchise.
A.     City shall provide for the collection of solid waste and recyclables within the City by the granting of one or more franchises. The City may grant an exclusive franchise for solid waste and recycling services.

B.     From time to time, the City Council may issue a request for proposal to provide solid waste and recycling collection services within the City.

C.    When proposals are requested by the City Council, the City Manager shall investigate the information contained in each proposal and prepare a report to the City Council.

D.    After the completion of the investigation, the City Manager shall schedule the matter for a public hearing before the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be given to each proposer and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.

E.     The City Council shall not be required to issue a franchise based upon the offer of a lower or the lowest rate, but shall be free to issue a franchise to the person(s) deemed best suited to comply with the terms of this chapter and such other terms and conditions imposed by the City Council.

F.     When considering whether to issue a franchise, the City Council may take into consideration the service performance of the existing operator or operators, and may give preference to existing operators.

G.    From time to time, the City Council may amend the franchise agreement to conform with current conditions, technologies and regulations. (Ord. 88-24; Ord. 96-17; Ord. 2006-02)

 

11.20.070 Terms of Franchise.
The terms and conditions of an issued franchise shall contain, without limitations, the following terms which are no less stringent than the following:

A.     The City Council may require the franchisee to pay an annual franchise fee in an amount established by the City Council. The annual fee shall reflect the City’s cost of administering this chapter, and may include recovery of the City’s costs of performing litter abatement programs, implementation of AB 939 objectives, and other solid waste management programs.

B.     No assignment or transfer of a franchise or any right occurring under such franchise, shall be made in whole or in part by the franchisee without first obtaining the express, written consent of the City Council.

C.    The City Council may require the franchisee to post with the City Clerk, security in a form and amount satisfactory to the City Council to secure the full and faithful performance by the collector of obligations under the applicable provisions of this chapter. The security shall be kept in full force and effect by the collector throughout the life of the franchise and all renewals thereof.

D.    Franchisee shall agree to appear and defend all actions against the City arising out of the exercise of the franchise, and shall indemnify and save the City, its officers, employees, and agents harmless of and from all claims, demands, actions or causes of action, of every kind and description resulting directly or indirectly, arising out of, or in any way connected with the exercise of the franchise, including, but not by way of limitation, any act or omission of any officer, employee, or agent of franchisee; but excluding any claim alleged to have arisen solely out of the conduct of the City.

E.     The City Council may require the franchisee to obtain and keep in force during the term of the franchise, public liability and bodily injury insurance in an amount set by the City Council; and worker’s compensation insurance covering all employees of the franchisee. Copies of such policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the City Manager. The City may be named an additional insured on all policies. The policy may contain a provision requiring a 90-day notice to be given to the City prior to cancellation, modification, or reduction of limits. The amounts of public liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage shall be subject to review and adjustment by the City Council.

F.     Infectious medical waste (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117.5) shall not be collected by the franchisee.

G.    Franchisee shall not be required to collect hazardous or dangerous materials as part of regular collection activity.

H.    Franchisee shall comply with all applicable local and state laws and regulations, and shall obtain and keep in force all required permits and licenses.

I.      Franchisee shall provide full time residential and commercial collection and recycling services over established routes, and may also provide other solid waste collection services such as the provision of temporary dump boxes, roll off bins and temporary containers.

J.     The City Council may impose such other terms and conditions on the franchise as the City Council may deem necessary or proper to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and shall reserve the right in each franchise to, from time to time, amend the franchise and this chapter; which amendments shall be binding upon any franchisee. (Ord. 88-24; Ord. 2017-07)

 

11.20.080 Revocation of Franchise.
A.     A franchise may be revoked:

1.     At the option of the City Council, in the event there is a change of ownership of any kind or nature of the operating company, unless approval therefor has been previously obtained in writing from the City Council; or

2.     If it is determined by the City Manager that the franchisee has not complied with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, and contractual obligations, the City Manager shall notify the franchisee in writing of noncompliance and shall order compliance.

B.     In the event that any franchisee shall fail or refuse to conform to the conditions of the franchise or this chapter, the City Council, at its option and after a hearing called upon 10 days’ written notice to the franchisee, may revoke such franchise. (Ord. 88-24)

 

11.20.090 Obligations of Customers.
A.     Customers shall place all solid waste within franchisee-provided automated waste container(s). Recyclable materials shall be placed by residents in separate franchisee-provided container(s). Automated waste and recycling containers shall remain the property of the franchisee.

B.     It shall be the duty of institutions producing infectious medical waste (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117.5) and similar substances to insure that such material is not deposited in collection containers, but is handled, stored and disposed of only in the manner approved by the County Health Officer or designated deputy, and in accordance with the California Health and Safety Code.

C.    It shall be the duty of the occupants of residential, commercial, and industrial occupancies to insure that liquid and dry caustics, acids, biohazardous, flammable, explosive materials, insecticides, and similar substances are not deposited in collection containers, but are handled under separate agreement between the franchisee and customer, and in accordance with the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code.

D.    Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, all containers or receptacles used for the reception, removal, and disposal of garbage, food plant waste, green waste, and other refuse should be water tight, constructed of a material of suitable strength and durability, shall be tight seamed and provided with handles and a tight fitting lid or cover, which lid shall be and remain affixed to the container at such time as the garbage, food plant waste, green waste, and other refuse are placed within the container.

E.     Yard waste and other compostables, may be deposited in well constructed containers having a capacity not in excess of 40 gallons and which, when filled, do not exceed a weight of 50 pounds. Occupants of residential premises shall be required to bundle and tie all wood waste in lengths not to exceed four feet with a diameter of three feet.

F.     No person shall so fill any container with garbage, rubbish or other refuse above the top of the container to such extent as to permit the contents of any container to be blown or otherwise strewn about.

G.    Paper bags and cardboard containers shall not be used as containers for the disposal of garbage, rubbish, recyclable waste, and other refuse.

H.    In commercial and business zones, containers shall be metal-lined, leakproof, constructed of noncombustible materials, provided with an impervious lid, and approved by the fire department or its representative as providing adequate protection against fire hazard. However, recyclable glass may be placed in plastic containers.

I.      It shall be the duty of occupants of residential property to set out or place containers or receptacles for collection and removal of solid waste as follows:

1.     Automated carts for solid waste and recyclables shall be placed at the curb in front of the premises occupied by the person for collection by the franchisee on the day specified by the franchisee for collection of the solid waste, provided that the franchisee may designate some other location for the placement of containers and receptacles to expedite collection. When no curb exists, place the cart as close to the roadway edge as possible without creating safety hazards for vehicle traffic or pedestrians. Carts shall not be placed in front of mail receptacles or on sidewalks unless directed to do so by the franchise.

2.     Yard waste containers shall be placed off the street leaving at least three feet between the automated waste and recycling carts and all other containers.

J.     No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any solid waste or solid waste container in any public highway or in any place, or in any manner, inconsistent with the regulations of this chapter.

K.     The City Manager may temporarily allow a franchisee to place a commercial solid waste collection container in that portion of a roadway reserved for the parking of vehicles, provided, that the franchisee shall first agree to defend and indemnify the City for any damage, liability or claim in any manner caused by the existence of the container at the allowed location and provided, further, that the franchisee shall agree to comply with any conditions deemed necessary by the City Manager to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.

L.     No person shall place, or cause to be placed, at a location designated for collection that is within public view, any solid waste or solid waste container at any time other than the days established by the City for the collection of such solid waste on the particular route involved; not earlier than sunset of the day preceding the day designated for collection.

M.    All solid waste containers shall be removed from the location designated for collection prior to midnight of the day the containers and receptacles have been emptied.

N.    Each owner, occupant, or lessee of a house or building used for residential, business or commercial purposes, shall maintain supervision and surveillance over the solid waste and recycling containers on the premises, and shall maintain the same in a sanitary condition. If the containers should not be emptied and the contents removed on the date and time scheduled by the franchisee, customer shall immediately notify the franchisee and it shall be the duty of the franchisee to forthwith arrange for the collection and disposal of the solid waste, yard waste, and other compostables, and/or collection of recyclables. However, should the owner or occupant fail to place the materials at the designated location in time for regular collection, the franchisee is not obligated to make a special, separate collection for the convenience of the occupant and may require payment of an additional fee for such late collection.

O.    Junk, salvage, and other solid waste which exceeds the limitations hereinabove set out may, in the discretion of the franchisee, be scheduled for special collection upon the application of the occupant of the premises. Special collection charges may be assessed by the franchisee for this service.

P.     No person, other than the owner thereof, owner’s agents or employees, or an officer or employee of this City, or any person holding a franchise with this City for the collection or disposal of refuse, franchisee’s agents or employees authorized for such purposes, shall tamper or meddle with any solid waste container or the contents thereof, or remove the contents of any solid waste container or remove any solid waste container, from the location where the same shall have been placed by the owner thereof or owner’s agent.

Q.    Unless otherwise expressly authorized in this chapter, all solid waste created, produced, or accumulated in or about a dwelling house or place of human habitation in the City shall be mandatorily removed from the premises at least once each week:

1.     All garbage created, produced or accumulated at hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses, or other business houses where solid waste containing garbage is accumulated shall be mandatorily removed from the premises at least once a week. The San Diego County Health Department may require a greater number of collections per week.

2.     It is unlawful for the occupant of any premises described in this section, to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of refuse.

R.    No persons shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the City, any garbage, rubbish, or other refuse in such manner that it may be carried or deposited by wind or rain on any streets, sidewalk, alley, sewer, storm drain, parkway, or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the City. (Ord. 88-24; Ord. 96-17; Ord. 2006-02)

 

11.20.100 Special Provisions Regarding Method of Disposal by Customers.
A.     The removal of wearing apparel, bedding, or other refuse from homes, hospitals, or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed, shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the health officer and such refuse shall neither be placed in containers nor receptacles nor left for regular collection and disposal.

B.     Highly inflammable or explosive or radioactive refuse shall not be placed in containers or receptacles for regular collection and disposal, but shall be removed under the supervision of the City Fire Department at the expense of the owner or possessor of the material.

C.    Garbage or other refuse containing water or other liquids shall be drained before being placed in a container or receptacle. Matter which is subject to decomposition shall be wrapped in paper or other material before being placed in a container or receptacle.

D.    No battery acid, poisonous, caustic or toxic material, or other substance capable of damaging clothing or causing injury to persons, shall be mixed or placed with any rubbish, garbage or other solid waste which is to be collected, removed or disposed of by the City or its agent. Such items shall be removed at the occupant’s expense only after arrangements have been made with the City or its agent for such removal.

E.     Animal wastes, as herein defined, shall not be placed in containers, or receptacles for regular collection and disposal, but shall be removed at the occupant’s expense.

F.     Containers for solid waste and designated recyclables shall be provided by franchisee to each of their customers.

G.    Containers provided to single-family and multifamily residences, commercial and industrial entities shall effectively segregate the designated recyclables for pickup.

H.    All recyclable materials shall be separated from other garbage and combined refuse, and placed for collection in the same manner as when their regular garbage collection occurs. (Ord. 2006-02)

 

11.20.110 Franchisee’s Employees.
A.     The franchisee must guarantee a top quality of service by industry standards; competent, qualified, sober, identifiable and uniformed personnel who serve the public in a courteous, helpful, and impartial manner.

B.     The City may, at its option, require fingerprinting of the franchisee’s employees whose service will cause them to enter onto or work in close proximity to private property.

C.    Any employee driving franchisee’s vehicles shall at all times have in their possession a valid and appropriate vehicle operator’s license issued by the State of California.

D.    The franchisee and its employees shall be required to wear clean identifiable uniforms when engaged in refuse collection service on public streets.

 

11.20.120 Franchisee’s Vehicles.
A.     The franchisee’s trucks, trailers or other vehicles must comply with the regulations as set forth in the California Motor Vehicle Code, all other applicable California codes and this chapter.

B.     Any persons who desire to operate privately owned, solid waste collection vehicles under provisions of this chapter shall provide that their vehicles are water tight and are provided with a tight cover. The City Manager shall require the franchisee to remove from service or repair those vehicles that allow or permit offensive odors to escape and/or refuse to be blown, dropped, or spilled therefrom.

C.    No person shall leave trailers or trucks loaded with solid waste parked for over a 24-hour period on the City streets.

D.    Each vehicle of the franchisee shall at all times have in the cab the registration of the truck, certificate of insurance card, and an identification card with the name of whom to telephone in case of an accident. Each vehicle shall also be equipped with a five pound fire extinguisher certified by the California State Fire Marshal.

E.     All of the franchisee’s equipment shall be available for inspection, at the discretion of the City Manager, at the point of operation.

F.     All vehicles used for solid waste collection within the City shall:

1.     Be completely enclosed with a rigid, nonabsorbent cover while transporting garbage, refuse, or rubbish in or through the City. Completely enclosed with a rigid, nonabsorbent cover means that refuse, rubbish, or garbage shall not be visible from the street nor shall any of the substance be permitted to leak, spill or become deposited along the public streets.

2.     Be painted the same colors as approved by the City Manager and identified by truck numerals and company logo.

3.     Be kept clean and in good repair at all times.

G.    The specifications of vehicles used for recycling collection may be separately established by the City Council and specified in the franchise.

 

11.20.130 Operations of Franchisee.
A.     The franchisee shall not collect solid waste within a residential area between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next day. With prior written permission of the City Manager, these times may be changed.

B.     Franchisee shall exercise all reasonable care and diligence in collecting solid waste so as to prevent spilling, scattering, or dropping refuse, and shall immediately, at the time of occurrence, clean up any spillage.

C.    Franchisee shall dispose of collected wastes, at franchisee’s expense, at an authorized landfill or transfer station in a manner satisfactory to the City of Encinitas, and in accordance with all state and local taxes and regulations.

D.    Franchisees shall provide an office with a full time manager with toll free telephone service from the entire City of Encinitas. Telephones will be attended by competent personnel from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on regular workdays, 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturdays, and an answering service provided after hours, weekends and holidays.

E.     Franchisee shall keep and preserve, during the term of the franchise and for three years thereafter, full, complete, and accurate records of:

1.     Customer accounts in a manner that clearly identifies the number of customers within the City of Encinitas and subject to the franchise fee. These records are subject to review by the City Manager at any reasonable time;

2.     Specific cost items, such as disposal fees, fuel, and similar items that may provide the basis for future rate increases due to unusual circumstances; and

3.     These records are subject to review by the City Manager at any time City staff has been asked to review special rate increase requests.

F.     Franchisee shall be required to collect and dispose of large bulk items on a 24-hour notice with a maximum charge and any limitations to be set by the City Council.

G.    Franchisee shall provide a minimum of one “self-haul” bulky item collection opportunity for residential customers per year.

H     Franchisee shall retain ownership of automated containers provided to residents for the purpose of storing solid waste and recyclables. Franchisee shall replace and/or repair damaged automated containers during the term of the franchise agreement. Franchisee shall repair or replace all customer-owned residential containers used for yard waste and other compostables damaged by collection operations, normal wear and tear excluded. (Ord. 2006-02)

 

11.20.140 Transfer of Solid Waste by Franchisee.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the transfer of solid waste within City limits from collection to disposal vehicles; provided, that such transfer stations should not be conducted in violation of any state law or county or City ordinance. Where the City operates a transfer station, users of the station shall follow the rules established for the station by the City Manager.

 

11.20.150 Charges for Service.
A.     When issuing a franchise extension, the City Council shall approve the amount of service charges. After approval, a charge for the collection of solid waste shall be imposed by the franchisee on the owner or person in control of each residential, commercial or individual property, or other entity subscribing to solid waste collection service. The amount of such charges may be changed, from time to time, by the franchisee after written approval by the City Council.

B.     All proposed revisions in the charge schedule must first be submitted to the City Council for review. Rates shall not be adjusted more than once annually, except to accommodate unforeseen circumstances justifying an increase. (Ord. 93-03)

 

11.20.160 Mandatory Collection and Payment of Charges.
A.     The accumulation of garbage, rubbish, and other solid waste constitutes a menace to the health, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the City, and the orderly and regular collection of garbage, rubbish, and other solid waste is necessary to prevent the spread of disease, and the creation of health menace and fire hazards.

B.     All occupants shall dispose of solid waste through the regular solid waste and/or curbside recycling collection service, and shall be liable for payment to the City, or to the franchisee, for solid waste and curbside recycling collection charges.

C.    The obligation to pay the charges provided in this chapter is upon the legal owner or owners of the residential unit or business so served. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent an arrangement or the continuance of an arrangement under which payments for refuse collection services are made by an occupant or any agent, on behalf of the owner; provided, any such arrangement shall not affect the legal owner’s obligation for payment of the charges for services rendered.

D.    Every occupant of the City shall be billed periodically for the charges established pursuant to this chapter. Should any person fail, refuse, or neglect to pay such bill within 30 days after the day that the same is rendered, then, a penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the bill will be added to the bill and the sum together with any costs incurred by the franchisee, may be recovered by the franchisee.

E.     Should the occupant of any property fail or refuse to pay the established charge, then the franchisee shall advise the City Manager. (Ord. 96-17; Ord. 2017-07)

 

11.20.164 Failure to Pay Franchisee for Refuse Collection.
A.     An account is deemed delinquent if payment for collection services has not been received within 15 days after the last day of the normal billing period for which service was rendered. Upon determination of delinquency, the franchisee shall give written notice to the delinquent account holder that the bill is now overdue and payable in full and shall attempt to collect payment through all available means, within 30 days of the date of such notice.

B.     Provided adequate arrangements for payment have not been made between the franchisee and delinquent account holder within 60 days of the end of the earliest unpaid billing period, the franchisee may assign the total unpaid bill amount to the City Manager for collection. The assignment shall provide all pertinent data including the name and address of the residence owner billed, address and parcel number of the property billed, dates of the period of service unpaid, amount due and certification that the billing procedures pursuant to subsection A of this section have been fulfilled.

C.    The delinquent bill presented by the franchisee to the occupant or legal owner pursuant to subsection A of this section, shall include a written notice warning that nonpayment within 60 days of the end of the earliest unpaid period may result in assignment of the debt to the City for collection, may include collection charges and may result in the recordation of a lien against the property to which service was rendered.

D.    Upon receipt of assignment of the debt, the City Manager shall advise the debtor in writing of the assignment, that a minimum fee of 10% of the bill amount is imposed in all collection cases filed with the City, that an additional $30.00 lien fee will be charged in all cases where the filing of a lien with the county auditor is necessitated, and that 30 days’ notice is given to permit payment of the debt to the City to avoid payment of the lien fee and to avoid a special assessment against the property in the amount of all above-mentioned fees and charges.

E.     Originally billed amounts which are collected by the City shall be paid to the franchisee on a quarterly basis. All fees and lien charges collected shall be retained by the City. (Ord. 96-17; Ord. 2017-07)

 

11.20.168 Special Assessment Collection.
A.     The City Manager may initiate proceedings to make delinquent refuse collection service fees and collection charges a special assessment against properties for which such debts were assigned to the City for collection.

B.     A report of delinquent charges shall be transmitted to the City Council, which shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any protests or objections thereto.

C.    The City Council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the owner of real property to which service was rendered not less than 10 days prior to the date of hearing. At the time fixed for the hearing, the City Council shall hear any objections of the legal owner liable to be assessed for delinquent accounts. The City Council may make such revisions to the report as it deems just and if satisfied with the correctness of the report as submitted or revised shall confirm or reject it by resolution. The decision of the City Council on the report and on all protests or objections thereto are final and conclusive.

D.    Upon confirmation of the report by the City Council, the delinquent charges contained therein shall constitute a special assessment against the property and shall be forwarded to the San Diego County Auditor as provided by Sections 39580 through 39586, inclusive, of the Government Code of the State of California, to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure of sale as provided for delinquent, ordinary real property taxes. The assessments are subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the property and paramount to all other liens except those for state, county and municipal taxes with which it has parity. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest and penalties due and payable thereon are paid. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes are applicable to such special assessments.

E.     There is created in the general fund an account entitled “Property Owners’ Delinquencies for Refuse Collection Service.” This account is funded from refuse services and shall be credited with such delinquencies as are collected by the county tax collector or otherwise collected for release of lien remitted to the City. The City will in turn, debit the account for payment to the franchisee of delinquencies collected exclusive of fees and charges imposed by the City. Collection fees and charges imposed by the City shall be cleared to a general revenue account. (Ord. 96-17; Ord. 2017-07)

 

11.20.170 Implementation and Enforcement of Mandatory Recycling.
A.     Diversion of designated recyclables from the City’s waste stream is required by all residential, commercial, and industrial customers within the City of Encinitas as set forth by resolution of the City Council.

B.     The City Manager or designee shall have responsibility for the enforcement of all provisions of this chapter. Violations of these regulations will be prosecuted in the same manner as other violations of the City Code; however, nothing in the regulations shall prevent the authorized agents or deputies from efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by way of notice of violation, warning, or by other educational means. (Ord. 2006-02)

 

11.20.180 Payment Under Protest.
Any occupant of any premises, which has been billed for solid waste collection service, and who desires to contest the legality of the charge billed, shall make payment of such charge under protest and, at the same time, file a written statement of such protest with the City Manager. Within 30 days after the date of filing, the City Manager shall notify the protesting occupant of the decision which may be appealed to the City Council. (See Chapter 1.12.)

 

11.20.190 Title to Solid Waste and Recyclables.
A.     Prior to collection of solid wastes within the City by franchisee, the property owner shall retain title of solid wastes and recyclables. Upon collection of solid wastes and recyclables by the franchisee, City retains title of all solid waste collected in the City, to include without limitation, the control of its disposition.

B.     City shall retain the title to all residential and commercial recyclables placed in containers for collection by franchisee. This title shall include, without limitation, the control of the disposition of residential and commercial recyclables. (Ord. 2006-02)

Chapter 11.21 PROHIBITION OF SCAVENGING
11.21.010 Purpose and Intent.
To reduce the waste stream generated by citizens of Encinitas, the City Council permits residential curbside and commercial recycling programs. Scavenging of recyclables from the program undermines the participation of residents and businesses. The regulations in this chapter are intended to eliminate scavenging. (Ord. 89-18)

 

11.21.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the definition or meaning established by this section, unless it is clearly apparent from the context in which the word or phrase appears, that a different definition or meaning is intended.

“City agent” means any person designated by the City Manager or City Council as being responsible for administering, directing, supervising, collecting or providing for the disposal of garbage, rubbish, and other refuse.

“Permittee” means a recycling operator issued a permit by the City Council, pursuant to the procedures established by this title.

“Recyclable materials” means paper, glass, cardboard, plastic, used motor oil, ferrous metal, aluminum, compostable yard (e.g., tree trimmings, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter) or other materials which may be recycled for use an altered form that has been segregated from other solid waste, and placed at a designated collection location for the purpose of collection and recycling.

“Recycling” shall have the meaning established by Government Code Section 66716.5.

“Recycling operator” means a person or persons, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, or corporation engaged in the collection and recycling of waste and other discarded materials. (Ord. 89-18)

 

11.21.030 Scavenging Prohibited.
A.     It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner thereof, the owner’s agents or employees, a City agent, or a permittee, or a permittee’s agents or employees to do any of the following:

1.     Tamper or meddle with a container for recyclable materials;

2.     Tamper or meddle with the contents of any container for recyclable materials;

3.     Remove the contents of any container for recyclable materials;

4.     Remove any container for recyclable material from the location where container has been placed by the owner of the container or owner’s agent; or

5.     Remove, or tamper or meddle with, any recyclable material set out for collection, pursuant to the provisions of this title, on private property or on any sidewalk, street or public right-of-way.

B.     The provisions of this section do not apply to:

1.     A permittee performing under the authority of their permit;

2.     A City agent performing within the authority granted by the City; or

3.     The owner (or the owner’s authorized representative) of the recyclable materials or its container. (Ord. 89-18)

Chapter 11.22 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING
11.22.010 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the recycling of construction and demolition debris in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to meet the City’s obligations under AB 939 and its alternative diversion debris requirement approved by the California Integrated Waste Management Board. It is not the intent of this chapter to circumvent the provisions of the City’s Solid Waste Franchise Agreement. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter 11.22, the following definitions shall apply:

“Administrative penalty” means any penalty or fine assessed to an applicant pursuant to Section 11.22.080 of this chapter.

“Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private for profit or non-profit corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the City.

“City sponsored project” means any project where the improvements are or will be upon completion owned by the City.

“Construction” means the building of any improvement or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

“Construction and demolition debris” (“C&D”) means used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, deconstruction, or demolition operations on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure. This term includes, but is not limited to, asphalt, concrete, brick, dirt, rock, lumber, cardboard, metals, and any vegetative or other land clearing/landscaping materials.

“Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the City pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a waste management plan.

“Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 11.22.030 of this chapter.

“Deconstruction” means the process of carefully dismantling a building or structure in order to salvage components for reuse and recycling.

“Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wreaking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

“Diversion requirement” means the redirection of at least 60% of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to Section 11.22.070 of this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for the project.

“Divert” means to use construction or demolition debris for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

“Final building approval” means acceptance by the City that all requirements and conditions of the project have been met.

“Hazardous waste” has the same meaning as set forth in state and federal law.

“Project” means any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the City.

“Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

“Remodel” means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.

“Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.

“Reuse” means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris.

“Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.

“Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, ashes, industrial waste, construction and demolition debris, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discard home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste, hazardous substances or medical wastes.

“Total costs” means the total construction value of the project as calculated by the Planning and Building Department using the City’s standard commercial and residential valuation formulas.

“Waste management plan” (“WMP”) means a completed form prepared and submitted by an applicant for any covered project approved by the City for the purpose of compliance with this chapter. The form is submitted when applying for a permit.

“WMP compliance official” means the staff person(s) designated by the Director of Public Works authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter.

“WMP report” means the final calculation of construction and demolition debris diversion for the project as described in Section 11.22.060.

“WMP review fee” means the fee for processing WMP applications as adopted by the City Council by resolution, if any. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.030 Construction and Demolition Debris Diversion Requirements.
All construction, renovation, and remodel projects within the City, including City-sponsored projects, with a total project square footage equal to or greater than 10,000 square feet, as calculated for purposes of receiving an Encinitas building permit, and all demolition projects shall be considered “covered projects” and shall comply with this chapter. For the purposes of determining whether a project meets the foregoing threshold, all phases of a project and all related projects taking place on single or adjoining parcels, as determined by the WMP compliance official, shall be deemed a single project. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project. Failure to include such a condition shall not relieve the project applicant from complying with this chapter. No building, site development or demolition permit shall be issued for a project unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved a WMP for the project. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the project applicant to the full range of penalty and enforcement mechanisms set forth in Sections 11.22.080 and 11.22.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.040 Submission of Waste Management Plan.
A.     WMP Forms. Applicants for a plan check involving any covered project shall complete and submit a waste management plan (“WMP”) on a form approved by the City for this purpose before a building or demolition permit may be issued and be required to pay a WMP review fee, if any. The WMP shall be submitted for review with the first plan check of an individual project or at the first check of a residential master plan in the case of a residential project. The completed WMP shall indicate all of the following:

1.     Estimated weight of project C&D debris, by materials type, to be generated;

2.     Maximum weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling;

3.     Vendor(s) or facility(ies) that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material;

4.     Estimated weight of C&D materials that will be landfilled; and

5.     Total square footage of the project.

B.     Calculating Weight of Debris. In estimating the weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the City for this purpose.

C.    Deconstruction. In preparing the WMP, applicants for a plan check involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage prior to sending to a landfill. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.050 Review of WMP.
A.     Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no plan check shall be approved for any covered project unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved the WMP. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition, as determined by the WMP compliance official, is required to protect public health or safety. The WMP compliance official shall only approve a WMP if he or she first determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

1.     WMP provides all of the information set forth in Section 11.22.040 of this chapter; and

2.     WMP must indicate that at least 60% of all C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted.

If the WMP compliance official determines that all of the above conditions have been met, he or she shall mark the WMP “approved” and notify the Planning and Building Department that the WMP has been approved.

B.     Nonapproval. If the WMP compliance official determines that the WMP is incomplete or fails to indicate that at least 60% of all C&D debris generated by the project will be reused or recycled, he or she shall either:

1.     Contact the applicant to discuss the WMP, make recommendations for additional diversion, and obtain and note verbal confirmation from the applicant of changes to the WMP that would meet the requirements of this chapter; or

2.     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “denied,” including a statement of reasons, and so notify the Planning and Building Department, which shall withhold permit issuance until the WMP is resubmitted and approved; or

3.     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “further explanation required.”

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code the decisions of the WMP compliance official with regard to this section shall be final. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.060 Compliance with WMP.
A.     Documentation. Prior to final building approval, the applicant shall submit to the WMP compliance official documentation that it has met the diversion requirement for the project. If the applicant does not submit the required documentation, he or she may be subject to an administrative penalty or enforcement action as described in Sections 11.22.080 and 11.22.090 of this chapter. The diversion requirement shall be that the applicant must divert at least 60% of the total C&D debris generated by the project via reuse or recycling; provided, however, that an applicant granted an exemption pursuant to Section 11.22.070 of this chapter shall be required to comply with the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for that project. The documentation for compliance shall include all of the following:

1.     Copies of all receipts from the vendor(s) or facility(ies) which collected or received each material showing the actual weight of that material.

2.     A copy of the previously approved WMP for the project adding the actual weight of each material diverted and landfilled.

3.     Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.

B.     Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris diverted or landfilled is measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the City for this purpose.

C.    Determination of Compliance and Assessment of an Administrative Penalty. The WMP compliance official shall review the information submitted under Sections 11.22.040 and 11.22.050 of this chapter and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows:

1.     Full Compliance. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, he or she shall approve the final WMP report.

2.     Good Faith Effort to Comply. If the WMP compliance official determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this Chapter 11.22. In making this determination, the WMP compliance official shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D debris landfilled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, he or she may approve the final WMP report or assess an administrative penalty as described under Section 11.22.080 of this chapter. Any penalty assessed must be paid to the City prior to final building approval.

3.     Noncompliance. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by subsection A of this section, then the applicant may be assessed an administrative penalty as described under Section 11.22.080 of this chapter and/or be prosecuted for a criminal violation under Section 11.22.090 of this chapter or use any other legal remedy which may be available. Any penalty assessed must be paid to the City prior to final building approval.

4.     The WMP compliance official upon determining noncompliance with this chapter shall notify the applicant of the WMP report findings. The notice shall be in writing and shall identify the specific noncompliance with the WMP by the applicant and inform the applicant that it has a right to a hearing to appeal the decision of the WMP compliance official. The applicant’s request for a hearing must be made in writing and received by the City Manager no later than the City’s close of business on the seventh calendar day from the mailing date (as determined by postmark) of the non-compliance notice. Appeal of a determination made under this chapter by the WMP compliance official shall be filed with the City Manager and heard by an impartial hearing officer. A hearing shall be held no earlier than 10 calendar days and no later than 30 calendar days following the receipt by the City Manager of the written request for hearing. The applicant shall be permitted to submit evidence. The rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer may consider any relevant evidence. The applicant shall not be entitled to cross-examine any witnesses. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision of the hearing officer. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Municipal Code (including Section 11.22.020) the decision of the hearing officer shall be final. If the hearing officer determines that the applicant has failed to comply with the WMP as required by subsection A of this section, then the applicant may be assessed an administrative penalty as described under Section 11.22.080 of this chapter and/or be prosecuted for a criminal violation under Section 11.22.090 of this chapter or use any other legal remedy which may be available. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.070 Exemption.
A.     Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the WMP required under Section 11.22.040 of this chapter. The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

B.     Meeting with WMP Compliance Official. The WMP compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement.

C.    Granting of Exemption. The WMP compliance official shall issue an infeasibility exemption if he or she can make one or more of the following findings:

1.     That circumstances exist which are unique to the project to the effect that compliance with the provisions of this chapter would create an unusual burden on the project which is different than that of similarly situated properties; or

2.     That for a specific project compliance with this chapter would result in minimal or no increase in recycled materials or reduction in waste stream; or

3.     That diversion of one or more substances involved in the project presents unique and burdensome obstacles and would create an especially onerous economic burden on the project unless diversion of that substance is reduced or eliminated.

If the WMP compliance official is able to make one or more of the above findings for a project he or she may excuse the project from compliance with this chapter or determine the maximum feasible reduced diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the applicant. The WMP compliance official shall return a copy of the WMP to the applicant marked “approved for exemption” and shall notify the Planning and Building Department that the WMP has been approved.

D.    Denial of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official is unable to make any of the findings required by subsection C of this section, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have 30 days to resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with Section 11.22.040 of this chapter. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with Section 11.22.040 of this chapter, the WMP compliance official shall deny the WMP in accordance with Section 11.22.060 of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code the determination of the WMP compliance officer shall be final. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.080 Administrative Penalty.
Any applicant who does not comply with any requirement of this chapter shall be assessed an administrative penalty of $1,000.00 or one percent of the total cost of the project, whichever is greater. The WMP compliance official upon determining noncompliance with this chapter shall notify the applicant of the penalty assessed against it. The notice shall be in writing and shall identify the amount of the penalty assessed, the specific noncompliance for which the penalty is being assessed and inform the applicant that it has a right to a hearing to appeal the validity or amount of the assessed penalty pursuant to Section 11.22.060C4. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.090 Enforcement.
Any person responsible for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from initiating a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If the City shall prevail in any such civil action it shall be entitled to attorney fees. (Ord. 2008-14)

 

11.22.100 Appeal.
Appeal of a determination made under this chapter by the WMP compliance official shall be filed with the City Manager and heard by an impartial hearing officer, as described in Section 11.22.060C4. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the City Manager within 10 days of receipt of the WMP compliance official’s decision by the appellant. Appeals shall be limited to whether the applicant made a good faith effort to comply with the WMP. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision of the hearing officer. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Municipal Code (including Section 11.22.020), the decision of the hearing officer shall be final. Any penalty assessed must be paid to the City prior to final building approval. Nothing in this chapter precludes the use of any other type of enforcement if administrative fines are imposed under this section. (Ord. 2008-14)

Chapter 11.24 LITTER CONTROL
11.24.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides the regulations to control litter within the City. (Ord. 87-43)

 

11.24.020 Definition.
“Litter” is waste material, including, but not limited to, convenience food, beverage and other product packages or containers, steel, aluminum, glass, paper, plastic or other materials, thrown, deposited or left on property within the City, but not including waste materials discarded in accordance with the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 87-43)

 

11.24.030 Prohibition.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, cause to be deposited, or leave litter in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, beach, public right-of-way, or public place within the City except in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, cause to be deposited, or leave any litter in or upon any private property within the City, vacant or occupied, other than the owner of the private property. (Ord. 87-43)

 

11.24.040 Litter Receptacles Required.
A.     The owner or person in control of any private property which is held open to the public shall provide a sufficient number of litter receptacles to receive the volume of waste materials likely to be discarded by persons going upon the property.

B.     Design, marking, and maintenance standards for litter receptacles may be adopted by resolution of the City Council.

C.    In the event of a dispute, the number of litter receptacles required for a specific property shall be determined by the Planning Commission following a public hearing noticed by publication.

D.    The number of litter receptacles required for a particular property may be included in any discretionary permit or other approval granted by the City.

E.     The City may place additional litter receptacles on public property. (Ord. 87-43; Ord. 96-07)

 

11.24.050 Abuse or Improper Use of Litter Receptacles.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, abuse or misuse any litter receptacle required by this chapter, not owned by such person, so as to interfere with its proper function or to detract from its proper appearance.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit leaves, clippings, prunings, or gardening refuse in any litter receptacle required by this chapter.

C.    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit household refuse or garbage in any litter receptacle required by this chapter; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to mean that waste food consumed on the premises of any public place may not be deposited in litter receptacles. (Ord. 87-43)

 

11.24.060 Property Owner Responsibility.
A.     The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; except that litter may be stored in litter receptacles for collection.

B.     Whenever the owner or person in control of any private property fails to maintain the premises free of litter as required by this chapter, the City may proceed to remove and dispose of such litter in accordance with the provisions of this title governing the removal of dangerous rubbish and weeds. (Ord. 87-43)

Chapter 11.26 SINGLE-USE DISPOSABLE BAG REDUCTION
11.26.010 Definitions.
“Carry-out bag” means any bag that is provided by a retail establishment at the point of sale to a customer for use to transport or carry away purchases, such as merchandise, goods, or food, from the retail establishment. Carryout bags do not include product bags as defined in this chapter.

“Grocery store” means any retail establishment that sells groceries, fresh, packaged, canned, dry, prepared or frozen food or beverage products and similar items, and includes, without limitation, supermarkets, convenience stores, liquor stores and gasoline station stores.

“Paper bag cost pass-through” means the cost which may be collected by retailers from their customers when providing a recycled paper bag.

“Pharmacy” means any retail establishment, where prescriptions, medications, controlled or over the counter drugs, personal care products or health supplement goods or vitamins are sold, but excluding any licensed pharmacy located within a hospital.

“Product bag” means any bag provided to a customer for use within a retail establishment to assist in the collection or transport of products to the point-of-sale within the retail establishment, or to protect a purchased item from damaging or contaminating other purchased items when placed together in a recycled paper bag or reusable bag; a bag provided by a pharmacy to a customer purchasing prescription medication.

“Recycled paper bag” means a paper carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale for the purpose of transporting food and merchandise out of the store and that meets the following standards: (1) contains no old-growth fiber; (2) contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled materials; (3) is recyclable; (4) has printed in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag the word “recyclable” and the percentage of post-consumer recycled content.

“Recycled paper bag cost pass-through” means the cost that this chapter requires grocery stores and pharmacies to collect from their customers whenever a recycled paper bag is provided to a customer.

“Restaurant” means any person or establishment doing business within the City of Encinitas that provides prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off its premises such as a restaurant, café, bakery, grocery or convenience store counter or delicatessen, or catering truck vehicle.

“Retail establishment” means any person, including a corporation, partnership, business, facility, vendor, organization or individual, that sells or provides merchandise, goods or materials, including, without limitation, clothing, food, or personal item of any kind, directly to a consumer. “Retail establishment” includes, without limitation, any grocery store, department store, hardware store, pharmacy, liquor store, convenience store, outdoor farmers’ market, and any other retail store or vendor. “Retail establishment” does not include restaurants, catering trucks, mobile food trucks, and other similar food establishments.

“Reusable bag” means a bag with handles that is specially designed and manufactured for reuse and meets all of the following requirements: (1) has a minimum lifetime of 125 uses, which for purposes of this subsection, means the capability of carrying a minimum of 22 pounds 125 times over a distance of at least 175 feet; (2) has a minimum volume of 15 liters; (3) is machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; (4) does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts, as defined by applicable state and federal standards and regulations for packaging or reusable bags; and (5) if made of plastic, is a minimum of at least two and one-quarter (2.25) mils thick.

“Single-use plastic carry-out bag” means any bag less than 2.25 mils thick and made predominately of plastic derived from petroleum or bio-based sources, such as corn or other plant source, and includes compostable, non-compostable, and biodegradable plastic bags. Single-use carry out bag does not include product bag as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2014-08)

 

11.26.020 Prohibition on the Distribution of Single-Use Plastic Carryout Bags.
A.     No retail establishment in the City shall provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to a person except as otherwise permitted by this chapter.

B.     No retail establishment in the City shall provide any type carry-out bag to a person at the point of sale unless it is a reusable bag or a recycled paper bag being provided pursuant to the terms of this chapter.

C.    No person shall distribute a single-use plastic carryout bag at any City facility, City-managed concession, City-sponsored event, or City-permitted event except as otherwise else permitted by this chapter.

D.    Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit the distribution of product bags, including plastic carry-out bags, as may be necessary to comply with California Retail Food Code or any other state of federal law.

E.     No person shall distribute single-use plastic carryout bags at any farmers market within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2014-08)

 

11.26.030 Regulation of the Distribution of Recycled Paper Carryout Bags.
A.     Subject to subsection B of this section, an affected retail establishment may provide a recycled paper bag to a customer if it collects a paper bag cost pass-through from the customer for each recycled paper bag provided.

B.     The recycled paper bag cost pass-through shall not be less than $0.10 unless a retail establishment has previously submitted a full accounting to the City, signed by a responsible manager under penalty of perjury, which identifies all costs including bag purchase, shipping, handling, and storage, showing a lesser actual cost to the store for each paper carry-out bag. Any such accounting shall expire one year from the date of original submission and a new accounting must be resubmitted.

C.    An affected retail establishment may rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer for use of a reusable bag up to $0.05 per reusable bag per transaction.

D.    All retail establishments shall indicate on the customer transaction receipts the number of recycled paper bags provided and the total amount of the recycled paper bag cost pass-through. (Ord. 2014-08)

 

11.26.040 Exemptions.
Notwithstanding the requirements contained in Section 11.26.020.

A.     A retail establishment shall provide a customer participating in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the California Health and Safety Code and a customer participating in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code with a reusable bag or a recycled paper bag at no cost at the point of sale.

B.     This chapter shall not apply to a charitable organization as defined in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or a distinct operating unit or division of the charitable organization that reuses and recycles donated goods or materials.

C.    The provision of product bag as defined in this chapter is not prohibited.

D.    The provision of single-use plastic carry-out bags at restaurants as defined in this chapter is not prohibited.

E.     The provision of single-use bags for the collection and disposal of pet waste is not prohibited.

F.     The City Manager, or his/her designee, may exempt a retail establishment or nonprofit from the requirements of this chapter for up to a one-year period upon a showing by the retail establishment that the conditions of this chapter would cause undue hardship. An undue hardship shall only be found if:

1.     Circumstances or situations unique to the particular retail establishment are such that there are no reasonable alternatives to single-use, plastic carryout bags or a recycled paper bag cost pass-through charge; or

2.     Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment are such that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right.

G.    If a retail establishment requires an exemption beyond the initial exemption period, the retail establishment must re-apply prior to the end of the exemption period and must demonstrate continued undue hardship if it wishes to have the exemption extended. Extensions may only be granted for intervals not to exceed one year.

H.    An exemption application shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The City Manager or his/her designee may require the applicant to provide additional information to permit the City to determine facts regarding the exemption application.

I.      The City Council may by resolution establish a fee for exemption applications. The application fee shall be an amount sufficient to cover the costs of processing the exemption application. (Ord. 2014-08)

 

11.26.050 Enforcement and Notice of Violation.
A.     The City Manager, or his/her designee, may establish regulations or administrative procedures to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to further the purposes of this chapter or to obtain compliance with this chapter, including, without limitation, performing inspections in accordance with applicable law of a retail establishment’s premises to verify compliance.

B.     Any violation of any of the requirements of this chapter, or of any regulation or administrative procedure authorized pursuant to this chapter shall constitute an infraction.

C.    Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.

D.    The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive, and nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from pursuing any other remedies. The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any regulation or administrative procedure developed pursuant hereto. (Ord. 2014-08)

 

11.26.060 Administrative Remedies.
A.     Any person violating, causing or maintaining a violation of any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation assessing a civil fine as provided in this section. The procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal, civil or other legal remedy established by law and available to the City to address violations of this chapter.

B.     Upon a first violation of any provision of this chapter, the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a written warning notice of violation to the offending retail establishment. The warning notice of violation shall specify the violation(s), a date by which the violation(s) must be ceased and abated, and the penalties in the event of future violations. If, after the specified correction period following the written warning, the violation is not ceased or abated, the City Manager or his/her designee may issue an administrative citation assessing fines in accordance with this section.

C.    Each separate violation following the issuance of a warning notice of violation shall be subject to the following administrative fines which shall be cumulative with each day that a violation occurs constituting a separate violation:

1.     A fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

2.     A fine not exceeding $200.00 for the second violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

3.     A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation that occurs following the issuance of a warning notice.

D.    Each administrative citation issued for a violation of this chapter shall at a minimum contain the information specified in Section 1.08.080 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, Administrative Citations, and any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the citation, and shall be entitled to an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in that chapter. (Ord. 2014-08)

 

11.26.070 No Conflict with Federal or State Law.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to or shall be interpreted as conflicting with any federal or state law or regulation. (Ord. 2014-08)

 

11.26.080 Operative Date.
A.     This chapter shall become operative as to grocery stores, pharmacies and City facilities six months after its effective date, and all remaining affected retail establishments and farmers’ markets within 12 months after the effective date.

B.     Within 15 days of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City Clerk shall post a copy of the ordinance in places designated for such posting and shall certify to the same. The City Clerk shall certify the passage of this chapter and shall cause the same to be published as required by law. (Ord. 2014-08; Ord. 2017-07)

 

11.26.090 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion of this chapter irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. To this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 2014-08)

Chapter 11.27 PROHIBITION ON THE USE, DISTRIBUTION, AND SALE OF EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE FOOD SERVICE WARE, PLASTIC UTENSILS, AND BEVERAGE STRAWS MADE OF PLASTIC
11.27.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Expanded Polystyrene Disposable Food Service Ware, Plastic Utensil, and Beverage Straw Ordinance.” (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.020 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for environmental waste and litter reduction measures, and promote environmentally sustainable practices throughout the City by prohibiting the use and distribution of Expanded Polystyrene Disposable Food Service Ware, Plastic Utensils, and Beverage Straws by food providers within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter only, the terms below have the following meaning:

“Beverage straw” means any straw or tube used for transferring a beverage from its container to the mouth of the drinker.

“City” means the City of Encinitas.

“City contractor” means any person that enters into an agreement with the City to furnish products or services to or for the City.

 

“City facility” means any building, structure, property, park, open space, or vehicle, owned, leased or operated by the City, its agents, agencies, departments or franchisees.

“City-sponsored event” means any event, activity or meeting organized or sponsored, in whole or in part, by the City or any department of the City.

“Customer” means any person obtaining prepared food from a restaurant or food provider.

“Disposable food service ware” or “disposables” means single-use, disposable products used for serving or transporting prepared food, including, but not limited to, plates, bowls, trays, wrappers or wrapping, platters, cartons, condiment containers, cups or drink ware, or any other container in or on which prepared foods are placed or packaged for consumption. This definition excludes single use disposable straws, cup lids, and utensils.

“Distribute” means to provide or offer to provide an item, either as a separate transaction or as part of a transaction for another item, regardless of whether compensation is received.

“Egg carton” means a container commonly used to package eggs sold to a customer.

“Event” means an organized recreational activity that includes 25 or more participants.

“Expanded polystyrene” or “EPS” means polystyrene that has been expanded or “blown” using a gaseous blowing agent into a solid foam. EPS is sometimes called “Styrofoam”, a Dow Chemical Co. trademark form of polystyrene foam insulation.

“Food provider” means any person or establishment that provides or sells prepared food within the City to the general public to be consumed on the premises or for take-away consumption. Food provider includes, but is not limited to: (1) a grocery store, supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, drive-thru, café, cafeteria, coffee shop, snack shop, public food market, farmers’ market, convenience store, or similar fixed place where prepared food is available for sale on the premises or for take-away consumption; and (2) any mobile store, food vendor, caterer, food truck, vending machine or similar mobile outlet. Food provider also includes any organization, group or individual that regularly provides prepared food to its members or the general public as a part of its activities or services.

“Food tray” means a tray commonly used for packaging food for retail sale to a customer.

“Person” means any person, business, corporation, or event organizer or promoter; public, nonprofit or private entity, agency or institution; or partnership, association or other organization or group, however organized.

“Plastic utensil” means fork, spoon, knife or stirrer, or other eating implement made predominately of plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically based polymer.

“Polystyrene” means a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing the styrene monomer, including, but not limited to, polystyrene foam or expanded polystyrene, processed by any number of techniques, including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, or extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene), and clear or solid polystyrene (oriented polystyrene). The Recycle Code for polystyrene is ‘6’ or ‘PS,’ either alone or in combination with other letters. This definition applies to all polystyrene food service ware, regardless of whether it exhibits a Recycle Code.

“Prepared food” means any food or beverage that is: (1) ready to consume without any further food preparation, alteration or repackaging; and (2) prepared, provided, sold or served by a food provider using any cooking, packaging or food preparation technique. Prepared food may be eaten either on or off the food provider’s premises. For purposes of this chapter, prepared food does not include: (1) any raw uncooked meat, poultry, fish or eggs, unless provided for consumption without further food preparation; and (2) fresh produce provided for consumption without food preparation or repackaging, including fruits, vegetables, and herbs, sold by grocery stores, supermarkets, food markets, farmers’ markets and other food vendors.

“Restaurant” means any person or establishment doing business within the City of Encinitas that provides prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off its premises such as a restaurant, café, bakery, grocery or convenience store counter or delicatessen, or catering truck vehicle. “Restaurant” for the purposes of this chapter, includes mobile food preparation units. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.040 Prohibition of Expanded Polystyrene Food Service Wares.
A.     Food providers are prohibited from providing prepared food in disposable food service ware made of EPS.

B.     City facilities, City-managed concessions, City-sponsored or co-sponsored events, City permitted events and all franchisees, contractors, and vendors doing business with the City are prohibited from using disposable food service ware made of EPS within the City. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.050 Distribution of Plastic Utensils.
A.     A food provider may only distribute plastic utensils upon request by the customer or upon offer to the customer by the food provider. This provision shall apply to takeout and drive-thru orders.

B.     A food provider may have plastic utensils available for customers at locations within the restaurant.

C.    City facilities, City-managed concessions, City-sponsored or co-sponsored events, and all franchisees, contractors, and vendors doing business with the City are prohibited from distributing plastic utensils.

D.    Effective August 1, 2020, City permitted special events on City property are prohibited from distributing plastic utensils. (Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.060 Distribution of Beverage Straws.
A.     A food provider may only distribute beverage straws upon request by the customer or upon offer to the customer by the food provider. This provision shall apply to takeout and drive-thru orders.

B.     Effective August 1, 2020, food providers are prohibited from the distribution of beverage straws made of plastic.

C.    City facilities, City-managed concessions, City-sponsored or co-sponsored events, and all franchisees, contractors, and vendors doing business with the City are prohibited from the distribution of beverage straws made of plastic.

D.    Effective August 1, 2020, City permitted special events on City property are prohibited from the distribution of beverage straws made of plastic. (Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.070 Prohibition on the Distribution of Disposable Food Service Ware Made from EPS.
Effective October 1, 2020 no person may distribute, within the City:

1.     Any disposable food service ware made, in whole or in part, from EPS.

2.     Egg cartons or food trays made, in whole or in part, from EPS.

3.     Coolers, ice chests, or similar containers made in whole or in part, from expanded polystyrene that is not wholly encapsulated or encased within a non-polystyrene material. (Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.080 Prohibition on Expanded Polystyrene Packaging Materials.
No person shall use expanded polystyrene loose fill packaging and cushioning material, such as foam peanuts, packing peanuts, foam popcorn or packing noodles, in the packaging of products, equipment, or other items. (Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.090 Exemptions.
Notwithstanding the requirements contained in Sections 11.27.040, 11.27.050, 11.27.060 and 11.27.070,

A.     The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

1.     Food and/or products prepared or packaged outside of the City, provided such food is not altered, packaged or repackaged within the City limits.

2.     Food provided by school districts under its official food service program.

3.     Food, plastic utensils, or beverage straws brought by individuals for personal consumption or use to City facilities, including, but not limited to, City parks and the beach, provided the City facility is being used for individual recreation or similar purposes and such facility use is not part of an event.

4.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in recognition that straws and other utensils may provide basic accommodation for persons with disabilities or medical conditions to eat or drink, food or beverage establishments in the City of Encinitas must provide a single-use plastic straw upon request to any consumer who requires the use of same due to a disability or medical condition. Nothing in this chapter shall conflict, or be construed to conflict, with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Unruh Act, the Disabled Persons Act, or other applicable laws concerning the rights of individuals with disabilities. In particular, nothing in this chapter shall restrict, or be construed to restrict, the availability of single-use plastic straws to individuals who may require and request the use of single-use plastic straws.

5.     Public Health and Safety. The City Manager may exempt a food provider or beverage provider when there is a public health and safety requirement or medical necessity to use the product.

6.     During a locally declared emergency, the City, emergency response agencies operating within the City, users of City facilities, and food providers shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The City Manager or his/her designee may exempt any food provider or person from the requirements of this chapter for a one-year period, upon written request by applicant that the conditions of the chapter would cause an undue hardship following the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, as follows:

1.     A request for an exemption shall be filed in writing with the City Manager or his/her designee and shall include documentation of the reason for the claimed exemption and any other information necessary for the City to make its decision. An exemption application shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The City may require the applicant to provide additional information as necessary to make the required determinations.

2.     The City Manager or his/her designee may approve the exemption for a maximum of one year, with or without conditions, upon finding that compliance would create an undue hardship. Undue hardship shall be construed to include but not be limited to situations where:

a.     There are no reasonable alternatives to expanded polystyrene food service ware for reasons that are unique to the applicant; or

b.     Compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right. The exemption may be extended for additional terms of up to one year each, upon a showing of the continuation of the legal right.

3.     The City Council may by resolution establish a fee for exemption applications. The application fee shall be an amount sufficient to cover the costs of processing the exemption application. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.100 Enforcement.
A.     Any violation of this chapter shall be enforced through the Administrative Citation Program set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

B.     Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.

C.    The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive and nothing in this shall preclude the City from pursuing any other remedies. The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any regulations or administrative procedure developed pursuant hereto.

 

D.    In addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalty, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable pursuant to the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.110 Administrative Remedies.
A.     Any person violating, causing or maintaining a violation of any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation assessing a civil fine as provided in this section. The procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal, civil or other legal remedy established by law and available to the City to address violations of this chapter.

B.     Upon a first violation of any provision of this chapter, the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a written warning notice of violation to the offending retail establishment. The warning notice of violation shall specify the violation(s), a date by which the violation(s) must be ceased and abated, and the penalties in the event of future violations. If, after the specified correction period following the written warning, the violation is not ceased or abated, the City Manager or his/her designee may issue an administrative citation assessing fines in accordance with this section.

C.    Each separate violation following the issuance of a warning notice of violation shall be subject to the following administrative fines which shall be cumulative with each day that a violation occurs constituting a separate violation:

1.     A fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

2.     A fine not exceeding $200.00 for the second violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

3.     A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation that occurs following the issuance of a warning notice.

D.    Each administrative citation issued for a violation of this chapter shall at a minimum contain the information specified in Section 1.08.080 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, Administrative Citations, and any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the citation, and shall be entitled to an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in that chapter. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.120 No Conflict with Federal or State Law.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to or shall be interpreted as conflicting with any federal or state law or regulation. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.130 Operative Date.
A.     This chapter shall become operative upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

 

B.     Within 15 days of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City Clerk shall post a copy of said ordinance in places designated for such posting and shall certify to the same. The City Clerk shall certify the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and shall cause the same to be published as required by law. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

 

11.27.140 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion of this chapter irrespective of the fact that one or more, sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 2016-12; Ord. 2019-30; Ord. 2020-05)

Chapter 11.28 LEAF BLOWER ORDINANCE
11.28.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Leaf Blower Ordinance.” (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.020 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards to protect the natural environment, increase sustainability efforts, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and improve the overall quality of life within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter only, the terms below have the following meaning:

“City” means the City of Encinitas.

“City contractor” means any person that enters into an agreement with the City to furnish products or services to or for the City.

“City facility” means any building, structure, property, park, open space, or vehicle, owned, leased or operated by the City, its agents, agencies, departments or franchisees.

“City-sponsored event” means any event, activity or meeting organized or sponsored, in whole or in part, by the City or any department of the City.

“Commercial operator” means any person who, for compensation or hire, engages in providing services or products.

“Leaf blower” or “leaf blowers” means any portable, hand-held or backpack, air blowing machine that uses a concentrated stream of air to push, propel, or blow dirt, dust, leaves, grass clippings, trimmings, green waste, solid waste or debris.

“Person” means any person, business, corporation, or event organizer or promoter; public, nonprofit or private entity, agency or institution; or partnership, association or other organization or group, however organized. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.040 Prohibition of Gas-Powered Leaf Blowers.
A.     The use or operation of any leaf blower powered by a combustion or gasoline engine shall be prohibited.

B.     All City facilities, City-managed concessions, City-sponsored or co-sponsored events, City permitted events and all franchisees, City contractors, and vendors doing business within the City shall be prohibited from using or operating any leaf blower powered by a combustion or gasoline engine. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.050 Use of Leaf Blowers.
A.     Leaf blowers powered by line current (electricity) or by battery may be used in the City subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Permitted hours of operation by any person shall be as follows:

1.     8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.

2.     12:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday.

C.    No person shall operate a leaf blower on Federally-recognized holidays.

D.    Operation of a leaf blower shall not deposit dirt, dust, leaves, grass clippings, trimmings, green waste, solid waste or debris onto a neighboring property or into a street, sidewalk, gutter, or storm drain.

E.     No person shall operate any leaf blower without attachment of all mufflers and full extension blower tubes supplied by the manufacturer for that leaf blower. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.060 Enforcement.
A.     Any violation of this chapter shall be enforced through the Administrative Citation Program set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

B.     Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.

C.    The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive and nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from pursuing any other remedies. The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any regulations or administrative procedure developed pursuant hereto.

D.    In addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalty, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable pursuant to the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.070 Administrative Remedies.
A.     Any person violating, causing or maintaining a violation of any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation assessing a civil fine as provided in this section. The procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal, civil or other legal remedy established by law and available to the City to address violations of this chapter.

B.     Upon a first violation of any provision of this chapter, the City Manager or designee shall issue a written warning notice of violation to the offending person. The warning notice of violation shall specify the violation(s), a date by which the violation(s) must be ceased and abated, and the penalties in the event of future violations. If, after the specified correction period following the written warning, the violation is not ceased or abated, the City Manager or designee may issue an administrative citation assessing fines in accordance with this section.

C.    Each separate violation following the issuance of a warning notice of violation shall be subject to the following administrative fines which shall be cumulative with each day that a violation occurs constituting a separate violation:

1.     A $100.00 fine for the first violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

2.     A $200.00 fine for the second violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

3.     A $1,000.00 fine for each additional violation that occurs following the issuance of a warning notice.

D.    Each administrative citation issued for a violation of this chapter shall at a minimum contain the information specified in Section 1.08.080 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, Administrative Citations, and any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the citation, and shall be entitled to an administrative hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in that chapter. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.080 No Conflict with Federal or State Law.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to or shall be interpreted as conflicting with any Federal or State law or regulation. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.090 Operative Date.
A.     This chapter shall become operative according to the following schedule:

1.     This chapter shall become operative as to City contractors, City facilities, and City-sponsored events on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

2.     This chapter shall become operative as to any commercial operator conducting business within the City of Encinitas three months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3.     This chapter shall become operative as to any person four months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B.     Within 15 days of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City Clerk shall post a copy of said ordinance in places designated for such posting and shall certify to the same. The City Clerk shall certify the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and shall cause the same to be published as required by law. (Ord. 2019-06)

 

11.28.100 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion of this chapter irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. To this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 2019-06)

Chapter 11.29 PLASTIC BOTTLED BEVERAGE ORDINANCE
11.29.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Bottled Beverage Ordinance.” (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.020 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for environmental waste and litter reduction measures and promote environmentally sustainable practices throughout the City by prohibiting the use and distribution of plastic bottled beverages at a City facility or at a special event. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter only, the terms below have the following meaning:

“City” means the City of Encinitas.

“City contractor” means any person that enters into an agreement with the City to furnish products or services to or for the City.

“City facility” means any building, structure, property, park, open space, or vehicle, owned, leased or operated by the City, its agents, agencies, departments or franchisees.

“City funds” means all monies or other assets received and managed by, or which are otherwise under the control of the City, and any notes, bonds, securities, certificated of indebtedness or other fiscal obligations issued by the City.

“City property” means real property, including any buildings thereon, owned or leased by the City of Encinitas and in the City of Encinitas’s possession or in the possession of a public or private entity under contract with the City of Encinitas to perform public purposes, including, but not limited to, public beaches and parks. This definition includes a City street and City facility.

“City street” means the public right-of-way owned by the City (e.g. streets, sidewalks, public alleys).

“Distribute” means to sell, offer for sale or otherwise provide or offer to provide an item, either as a separate transaction or as part of a transaction for another item.

“Person” means any person, business, corporation, or event organizer or promoter; public, nonprofit or private entity, agency or institution; or partnership, association or other organization or group, however organized.

“Plastic bottled beverage” means drinking water, sparkling water, enhanced water, soda, sports drinks, juice, or other similar products in a rigid plastic bottle, having a capacity of one liter or less, and intended primarily as a single-service container.

“Rigid plastic bottle” means any formed or molded container comprised predominantly of plastic resin, having a relatively inflexible fixed shape or form, having a neck that is smaller than the container body, and intended primarily as a single service container.

“Special event” means any scheduled or planned event occurring within the City of Encinitas requiring a special event permit, that impacts the normal use of public or private property, or disrupts the normal flow of traffic or access to public property or public right-of-way and which can reasonably be expected to require support by the City and County government and/or personnel. Types of events include, but are not limited to, celebrations, festivals, fairs, musical gatherings, organized aquatics, sporting or similar events accessible to the public and may include live or amplified music and/or a stage, may include the sale of alcohol requiring an ABC permit and/or associated regulations, and the use of booths or vendors. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.040 Plastic Bottled Beverages on City Property and at Special Events.
A.     No person shall distribute plastic bottled beverages on City property.

B.     Effective September 1, 2020, no person shall distribute plastic bottled beverages at a special event held indoors or outdoors.

C.    All new, renewed, and amended leases, operations permits granted under Chapter 6.11 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, or other such agreements awarded by the City which authorize a person to use City property shall prohibit the sale or distribution of plastic bottled beverages. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.050 Use of City Funds for the Purchase of Plastic Bottled Beverages.
City funds shall not be used to purchase plastic bottled beverages except as exempted or allowed under Section 11.29.060. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.060 Exemptions.
A.     The provisions of Section 11.29.040 and 11.29.050 shall not apply:

1.     Emergencies;

2.     Plastic bottled beverages brought by individuals for personal consumption or use to City property, including, but not limited to, City parks and the beach, provided that the City property is being used for individual recreation or similar purposes;

3.     When there are hydration requirements for City employees working outside (e.g. field work) and no reasonable alternative to plastic bottled beverages will serve the same purpose;

4.     When the City Manager, or his/her designee, determines that the use or distribution of plastic bottled beverage is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and no reasonable alternative to plastic bottled beverages will serve the same purpose.

B.     The City Manager or his/her designee may waive the provisions of this chapter, in full or in part, upon written request by any person, claiming that the conditions of the chapter would cause an undue hardship, as follows:

1.     A request for waiver shall be filed in writing with the City Manager or his/her designee and shall include documentation of the reason for the claimed waiver and any other information necessary for the City to make its decision. A waiver application shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed waiver. The City may require the applicant to provide additional information as necessary to make the required determinations.

2.     The City Manager or his/her designee may approve the exemption for a maximum of one year, with or without conditions, upon finding that compliance would create an undue hardship. Undue hardship shall be construed to include, but not be limited to, situations where:

a.     There are no reasonable alternatives to plastic bottled water for reasons that are unique to the person; or

b.     Compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right. the waiver may be extended for additional terms of up to one year each, upon a showing of the continuation of the legal right.

3.     The City Council may by resolution establish a fee for waiver applications. The application fee shall be an amount sufficient to cover the costs of processing the waiver application. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.070 Enforcement.
A.     Any violation of this chapter shall be enforced through the Administrative Citation Program set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

B.     Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense.

C.    The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter are cumulative and not exclusive and nothing in this shall preclude the City from pursuing any other remedies. The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or any other relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any regulations or administrative procedure developed pursuant hereto.

D.    In addition to any other applicable civil or criminal penalty, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable pursuant to the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.080 Administrative Remedies.
A.     Any person violating, causing or maintaining a violation of any provision of this chapter may be issued an administrative citation assessing a civil fine as provided in this section. The procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal, civil or other legal remedy established by law and available to the City to address violations of this chapter.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, upon a first violation of any provision of this chapter by a retail establishment, the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a notice of violation to the offending retail establishment. The notice of violation shall specify the violation(s), a date by which the violation(s) must be ceased and abated, and the penalties in the event of future violations. If, after the specified correction period established by the notice, the violation is not ceased or abated, the City Manager or his/her designee may issue an administrative citation assessing fines in accordance with this section.

C.    Each separate violation following the issuance of a warning notice of violation shall be subject to the following administrative fines which shall be cumulative with each day that a violation occurs constituting a separate violation:

1.     A fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

2.     A fine not exceeding $200.00 for the second violation following the issuance of a warning notice.

3.     A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation that occurs following the issuance of a warning notice.

D.    Each administrative citation issued for a violation of this chapter shall at a minimum contain the information specified in Section 1.08.080 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, Administrative Citations, and any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the citation, and shall be entitled to an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in that chapter. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.090 No Conflict with Federal or State Law.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to or shall be interpreted as conflicting with any federal or state law or regulation. (Ord. 2020-02)

 

11.29.100 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted said ordinance and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion of this ordinance irrespective of the fact that one or more, sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or unconstitutional to this end, the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 2020-02)

Title 12 PERSONNEL ORDINANCE
Chapter 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 12.04 RESERVE APPOINTMENTS
Chapter 12.08 EXECUTIVE REGULAR APPOINTEES
Chapter 12.12 MANAGEMENT REGULAR APPOINTEES
Chapter 12.16 PROFESSIONAL REGULAR APPOINTEES
Chapter 12.20 GENERAL REGULAR APPOINTEES
Chapter 12.24 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT

Chapter 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
12.01.010 Title.
It is the purpose of this title to provide a reference for employees from which they may understand the overall personnel structure, and provide a reference for related policies and procedures. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to generally outline the positions of employment within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.030 Definition of Terms.
Annual Leave. Accrual of time which allows employees to be absent from work.

Appointment. The employment of a person in a position.

Appointing Authority. The officer(s) of the City who have authority to make appointments to positions to be filled.

Categories of Position. The grouping in which a position of employment is located.

Date of Appointment. The date of an employee’s original appointment to the City service. This date is used principally in matters regarding annual leave, the accrual of units of benefit under the income protection plan, and other related personnel actions.

Full-time Employee. An employee who is scheduled to work a minimum of 40 hours a week.

Income Protection Plan. A plan which provides continued compensation for a limited time period for employees who are incapacitated by an illness.

Part-time Employee. An employee who is scheduled to work less than 40 hours a week.

Personnel Officer. The City Manager or his/her designee.

Personnel Ordinance. The ordinance which creates a personnel system for the City.

Position of Employment. The established title, category and pay range of a City position.

Position Specification. A written description of the qualification requirements, desired qualifications, main characteristics, knowledge, skills, abilities, and duties of a position of employment (reference Section 12.08.060).

Regular Appointment. Appointment to a position with no fixed term of employment.

Reserve Appointment. Appointment to a position for a limited term. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.040 Personnel Officer.
The City Manager or his/her designee shall be the personnel officer for the City. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.050 Creation and Assignment of Positions.
A.     Positions of employment with the City shall be created by resolution of the City Council setting forth:

1.     Title.

2.     Pay range.

B.     The City Manager shall assign and reassign created positions and incumbents to departments.

C.    The City Manager may combine part-time positions to form a full-time position; and may divide a full-time position into part-time positions.

D.    The City Manager shall assign and reassign created positions to categories for the purpose of implementing all personnel policies and rules. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.060 Positions of Employment.
The following are the categories of positions of employment with the City:

A.     The “City Manager” whose terms and conditions of employment are fixed by contract and not by the provisions of this title unless the provision is expressly incorporated into the contract.

B.     The “City Clerk” whose terms and conditions of employment are fixed by contract and not by the provisions of this title unless the provision is expressly incorporated into the contract.

C.    Executive.

D.    Management.

E.     Professional.

F.     General. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.070 Appointment to Positions.
A.     The two types of appointments to positions of employment are:

1.     A regular appointment to work without a fixed term of employment, and

2.     A reserve appointment to work for a limited term of employment.

B.     An appointment to any position may be regular or reserve at the discretion of the appointing authority.

C.    If the position of the executive for a department is vacant or if an executive is absent, the City Manager shall serve as the appointing authority for that department. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.090 Resignation.
An employee wishing to leave City employment in good standing shall file with the appointing authority a written resignation stating the effective date and reasons for leaving at least two weeks before leaving the service, unless such time limit is waived by the appointing authority.

Failure to give notice as required by this section shall be cause for denying future employment by the City. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.100 Conduct and Discipline.
The Code of Ethics and Discipline shall be those provisions set forth in the Administrative Manual of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.01.110 Grievance Procedure.
The grievance procedure shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Administrative Manual of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 89-31)

Chapter 12.04 RESERVE APPOINTMENTS
12.04.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the employment status of persons with a reserve appointment to a position within the City.

B.     A reserve appointment conveys terms and conditions of employment other than those conveyed by a regular appointment. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.04.020 Salary.
A.     A person with a reserve appointment to a position within the City shall receive a salary recommended by the appointing authority and fixed by the City Manager within the range established by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Movement within the salary range shall be based upon performance. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.04.030 Terms and Conditions.
The terms and conditions of employment of a person with a reserve appointment to a position shall be specified by the appointing authority in letter of reserve appointment. (Ord. 89-31)

Chapter 12.08 EXECUTIVE REGULAR APPOINTEES
12.08.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the employment status of persons with a regular appointment to an executive position. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.08.020 Salary.
A.     A person with a regular appointment to an executive position shall receive a salary designated by the City Manager within a range established by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Movement within the salary range shall be based upon performance. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.08.030 City Holidays, Annual Leave, Administrative Leave, and Car Allowance.
A.     Regular appointees shall receive those City holidays designated by City Council resolution.

B.     Regular appointees shall earn and use annual leave in accordance with the provisions contained in the annual leave policy as established by the City Council.

C.    Regular appointees shall earn and use administrative leave in accordance with the provisions contained in the annual leave policy as established by the City Council.

D.    Regular appointees shall be provided a car allowance designated by City Council resolution. (Ord. 89-31; Ord. 2017-09)

 

12.08.040 Income Protection Plan.
Regular appointees shall earn and use units of benefit in accordance with the provisions contained in the income protection plan as established by City Council. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.08.050 Duties of Executives.
The following general duties pertain to all executives.

A.     Executives shall perform those duties that are directed by the Municipal Code, state law and the City Manager.

B.     The executive shall be the appointing authority for each subordinate position within the executive’s department. In accordance with procedures and guidelines established by the City Manager, the appointing authority is authorized to:

1.     Propose compensation for appointed employees;

2.     Discipline appointed employees;

3.     Appoint persons to fill vacant positions;

4.     Terminate appointed employees;

5.     Prepare and maintain a position specification for each position within the department; and

6.     Prepare and maintain an organizational chart for positions assigned to the department. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.08.060 Position Specifications.
The position specifications required to be prepared and maintained by each executive shall include the following:

A.     Qualification requirements such as physical agility, citizenship, education level, etc.;

B.     The main characteristics and desirable qualifications required by persons in the position;

C.    A list of duties required of persons appointed to the position with an indication that the list is not restrictive or inclusive of all duties performed; and

D.    A listing of particular examples of duties. (Ord. 89-31)

Chapter 12.12 MANAGEMENT REGULAR APPOINTEES
12.12.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the employment status of persons with a regular appointment to a management position. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.12.020 Salary.
A.     A person with a regular appointment to a management position within the City shall receive a salary recommended by the appointing authority and fixed by the City Manager within the range established by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Movement within the salary range shall be based upon performance. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.12.030 City Holidays, Annual Leave, Administrative Leave, and Car Allowance.
A.     Regular appointees shall receive those City holidays designated by City Council resolution.

B.     Regular appointees shall earn and accrue annual leave in accordance with the provisions contained in the annual leave policy as established by the City Council.

C.    Regular appointees shall earn and use administrative leave in accordance with the provisions contained in the annual leave policy as established by the City Council. (Ord. 89-31; Ord. 2017-09)

 

12.12.040 Income Protection Plan.
Regular appointees shall earn and use units of benefit in accordance with the provisions contained in the income protection plan as established by the City Council. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.12.050 Duties.
The duties of persons appointed to management positions shall be those duties contained within the position specification. (Ord. 89-31)

Chapter 12.16 PROFESSIONAL REGULAR APPOINTEES
12.16.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the employment status of persons with a regular appointment to a professional position. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.16.020 Salary.
A.     A person with a regular appointment to a professional position within the City shall receive a salary recommended by the appointing authority and fixed by the City Manager within the range established by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Movement within the salary range shall be based upon performance. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.16.030 City Holidays and Annual Leave.
A.     Regular appointees shall receive those City holidays designated by City Council resolution.

B.     Regular appointees shall earn and use annual leave in accordance with the provisions contained in the annual leave policy as established by the City Council. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.16.040 Income Protection Plan.
Regular appointees shall earn and use units of benefits in accordance with the provisions contained in the income protection plan as established by the City Council. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.16.050 Duties.
The duties of persons appointed to professional positions shall be those duties contained within the position specification. (Ord. 89-31)

Chapter 12.20 GENERAL REGULAR APPOINTEES
12.20.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the employment status of persons with a regular appointment to a general position. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.20.020 Salary.
A.     A person with a regular appointment to a general position within the City shall receive a salary recommended by the appointing authority and fixed by the City Manager within the range established by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Movement within the salary range shall be based upon performance. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.20.030 City Holidays and Annual Leave.
A.     Regular appointees shall receive those City holidays designated by City Council resolution.

B.     Regular appointees shall earn and use annual leave in accordance with the provisions contained in the annual leave policy as established by the City Council. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.20.040 Income Protection Plan.
Regular appointees shall earn and use units of benefit in accordance with the provisions contained in the income protection plan as established by the City Council. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.20.050 Duties.
The duties of persons appointed to general positions shall be those duties contained within the position specification. (Ord. 89-31)

Chapter 12.24 TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
12.24.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to specify the process for termination from City service. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.24.020 Termination Without Cause.
A.     The employment of persons with a regular management, regular executive, or reserve appointment may be terminated at the sole discretion of the appointing authority, without cause, subject to the following:

1.     The termination of employment cannot be based upon the race, ethnic background, religion, age, sex, national origin, or personal disability of the employee; and

2.     No cause need be stated by the appointing authority.

B.     The appointing authority shall deliver to the regular management or reserve appointee a written notice effective as of the date of delivery to the appointee that the appointee’s services shall no longer be required. Two times the appointee’s regular monthly salary shall be paid to the appointee as severance pay upon delivery of written notice of termination.

C.    The City Manager shall deliver to the regular executive appointee a written notice effective as of the date of delivery to the appointee that the appointee’s services shall no longer be required. Three times the appointee’s regular monthly salary shall be paid to the appointee as severance pay upon delivery of written notice of termination.

D.    If the regular management, regular executive, or reserve appointee determines that the termination under this section has been accomplished in a manner that is likely to adversely stigmatize the appointee in obtaining other employment, the appointee shall deliver to the appointing authority a written request setting forth the manner in which the appointee has been stigmatized and the actions requested of the appointing authority to remove the apparent stigmatization.

E.     In order to support a claim of stigmatization, the regular management, regular executive, or reserve appointee must identify public statements or actions taken by the City, that have resulted in what the appointee has concluded to be a stigmatization. The fact of a personal delivery of the notice of termination, and the consequent termination of employment does not constitute stigmatization.

F.     The appointing authority shall review the regular management, regular executive, or reserve appointee’s request to remove the apparent stigmatization and render a decision within 10 working days.

G.    If the appointing authority does not take the action requested by the regular management, regular executive, or reserve appointee to remove the apparent stigmatization, then the appointee may apply to the City Manager for an opportunity to remove the apparent stigmatization by the presentation of mitigating and exculpatory information. No further appeal shall be allowed. (Ord. 89-31)

 

12.24.030 Disciplinary Termination.
The termination of employees not within the scope of Section 12.24.020 shall be accomplished in accordance with disciplinary policy. (Ord. 89-31)

Title 13 RESERVED

Title 14 TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 14.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 14.06 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 14.08 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 14.12 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS—ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
Chapter 14.16 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 14.20 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 14.28 STOP AND YIELD REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 14.32 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Chapter 14.33 TRUCK ROUTES
Chapter 14.34 INTERSTATE TRUCKS
Chapter 14.35 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OF LARGE COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 14.36 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 14.40 STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Chapter 14.41 PERMIT PARKING ZONES
Chapter 14.42 PARKING VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 14.44 SPEED REGULATIONS
Chapter 14.52 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
Chapter 14.54 STREET INTERSECTIONS—OBSTRUCTIONS WITHIN VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
Chapter 14.56 BICYCLES

Chapter 14.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
14.04.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this title to establish the regulations governing traffic within the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.04.020 Enforcement.
A.     Any person performing any act forbidden or failing to perform any act required by this title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

B.     Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.

C.    No person shall be found in violation of a regulation of this title unless a traffic control device or sign has been established to give notice of the regulation. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.04.030 Exemptions.
A.     The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle that has qualified under the Vehicle Code as an authorized emergency vehicle when such vehicle is operated in the manner specified in the California Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

B.     The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her willful disregard of the safety of others.

C.    The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a state, County or City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.04.040 Nonexclusive Jurisdiction.
No ordinance or resolution proposed to be enacted is effective as to any highway not under the exclusive jurisdiction of the City except that an ordinance or resolution which is submitted to the State Department of Transportation in complete draft form for approval prior to the enactment thereof is effective as to any state highway or part thereof specified in the written approval of the department. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.04.070 Boundary Line Streets.
No rule or regulation shall be effective as to boundary line streets where portions thereof are within different jurisdictions unless all authorities having jurisdictions of such portions of the street concerned have approved the same. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.04.080 Encinitas General Plan.
All powers, authorizations and determinations under this title shall be consistent with relevant policies and provisions of the Encinitas General Plan, and area specific plans. (Ord. 93-09)

Chapter 14.06 DEFINITIONS
14.06.010 Generally.
The definition of words and phrases contained in the Vehicle Code of the State of California are deemed to apply to such words and phrases as used in this title unless a broader meaning is ascribed in this title. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.020 Bicycle.
A bicycle is a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain, or gears, and having one or more wheels. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.030 Business District.
A “business district” is that portion of a highway and the property contiguous thereto (1) upon one side of which highway, for a distance of 600 feet, 50% or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by buildings in use for business; or (2) upon both sides of which highway, collectively, for a distance of 300 feet, 50% or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is so occupied. A business district may be longer than the distances specified in this section if the above ratio of buildings in use for business to the length of the highway exists. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.035 Central Business District.
“Central Business District” shall include all of the following named streets and portions thereof:

1.     First Street between Encinitas Boulevard and “K” Street.

2.     Second Street between “C” Street and “K” Street.

3.     “D” Street between Third Street and Vulcan Avenue.

4.     “E” Street between Third Street and Vulcan Avenue.

5.     “F” Street between Third Street and First Street.

6.     “G” Street between Third Street and First Street.

7.     “H” Street between Third Street and First Street.

8.     “I” Street between Third Street and First Street.

9.     “J” Street between Third Street and First Street.

10.   “K” Street between Third Street and First Street. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.040 Highway.
“Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.050 Loading Zone.
“Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.060 Official Time Standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they shall mean Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time as may be in current use in the City. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.070 Pedestrian.
“Pedestrian” means any person afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle, or any person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid tricycle, or motorized quadricycle and, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.080 Residence District.
A “residence district” is that portion of a highway and the property contiguous thereto, other than a business district, (1) upon one side of which highway, within a distance of a quarter of a mile, the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by 13 or more separate dwelling houses or business structures; or (2) upon both sides of which highway, collectively, within a distance of a quarter of a mile, the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by 16 or more separate dwelling houses or business structures. A residence district may be longer than one-quarter of a mile if the above ratio of separate dwelling houses or business structures to the length of the highway exists. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.06.090 Vehicle.
“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 93-09)

Chapter 14.08 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
14.08.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the duties and powers of City officials responsible for the enforcement and administration of the traffic regulations under this title. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.08.020 City Traffic Engineer—Office Established—Powers and Duties Generally.
The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. A Principal/Senior Engineer in the Development Services Department shall serve as City Traffic Engineer in addition to his or her other functions and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.08.030 Additional Powers and Duties of Traffic Engineer.
It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic collisions and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the City. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.08.040 Police Administration.
There is established in the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department an Encinitas Sheriff Station to be under the control of an “appointing authority.” For the purpose of this title, the appointing authority is referred to as the Police Chief and the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department, Encinitas Station, is referred to as the Police Department.

 

14.08.050 Duty of Police Chief.
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to enforce the street traffic regulations in the City, and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the City.

 

14.08.060 Traffic Collision Records.
The Police Department or San Diego County Sheriff’s Office shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic collision reports which shall be made available to the City Traffic Engineer and shall cooperate with the City in the development of remedial measures to reduce the number of accidents

Chapter 14.12 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS—ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE
14.12.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standards on enforcement and obedience of traffic provisions under this title. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.12.020 Authority of Police, Firefighters and Medical Personnel.
A.     It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Police Chief to enforce all street traffic laws of the City and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the City.

B.     Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned by the Police Chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.

C.    Firefighters, emergency medical technicians, and paramedics when at the scene of an emergency, while engaged in outside training activities, or to facilitate the safe movement of apparatus; may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. Flag crews at construction sites may also direct or assist the police at scene of emergency.

 

14.12.030 Obedience to Police, Firefighters, Paramedics and Emergency Medical Technicians.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer, fire department official or paramedics and emergency medical technicians when engaged in directing traffic.

 

14.12.040 Persons Other Than Officials Not to Direct Traffic.
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or a person deputized by the Police Chief or person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate when and as provided in this title, any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the City Traffic Engineer.

 

14.12.050 Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or City and it is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute.

Chapter 14.16 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
14.16.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the procedures for placement of traffic control devices to facilitate the safe movement of traffic.

B.     Traffic control devices include, without limitation, signs, signals, crosswalks, street markings, one way streets, no-turn restrictions, one-way turn only restrictions and other devices intended to regulate, guide or warn traffic. (Ord. 86-21; Ord. 93-09)

 

14.16.020 Authority to Install.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer or designee is authorized and shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required.

B.     Whenever the Vehicle Code of the state requires that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

C.    The City Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as deemed necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic. The City Traffic Engineer shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.16.030 Enforcement.
No provision of the State Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws.

 

14.16.040 Obedience to Traffic Control Devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of the City unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other official pursuant to Chapter 14.12 subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.

 

14.16.050 Installation of Traffic Signals.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer as authorized by a City Council Resolution is authorized to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

B.     The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required based on field observation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and such determinations shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions issued by the State Department of Transportation.

C.    Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, there shall be likewise erected and maintained at such intersections street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such street name signs have been placed and are maintained at any intersection. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.16.060 Lane Markings.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway.

 

14.16.070 Distinctive Roadway Markings.
Whenever the State Department of Transportation determines and designates a distinctive roadway marking which shall indicate no driving over such marking, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to designate by such marking those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.16.080 Removal—Relocation—Discontinuance.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to remove, relocate, or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by state law or this chapter whenever it is determined in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or pertain.

 

14.16.090 Hours of Operation.
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect.

 

14.16.100 Destruction or Removal of Traffic Control Devices.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously tear down, damage, mutilate, deface or destroy any sign, notice or traffic control device erected under the authority of this title.

B.     Any person who willfully or negligently damages any traffic control device is liable for the reasonable cost of the repair or the replacement thereof.

 

14.16.110 Suspension of Regulations.
A.     Based upon a determination of emergency or public necessity, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to suspend one or more of the provisions of this chapter for a temporary period for the purpose of protecting the public.

B.     When acting under the authority of this section, the City Traffic Engineer shall remove or cover existing signs or other traffic control devices and erect temporary traffic control devices, as necessary.

C.    For the duration of closure of any street, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect signs and barricades, as necessary, to give notice of the closure to the public.

 

14.16.120 Portable School Crossing Signs.
The City Traffic Engineer may issue a permit to any school district authorizing such district to maintain a portable school crossing sign and flash or flasher. Such permit may be issued on the terms and conditions deemed necessary or appropriate by the City Traffic Engineer for the protection of the public. Any such permit issued by the City Traffic Engineer shall contain a provision that it may be revoked by the City Traffic Engineer for violation of any of the terms or conditions of such permit. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.16.130 Local Regulation Affecting State Highway Traffic.
No local authority, except by permission of the Department of Transportation, shall erect or maintain any stop sign or traffic control signal in such manner as to require the traffic on any state highway to stop before entering or crossing any intersecting highway or any railroad grade crossing.

 

14.16.140 Temporary Closing of Streets.
The City Traffic Engineer may temporarily close a portion of a street when, in the City Traffic Engineer’s opinion, such closure is necessary for the safety and protection of persons using that portion of the street during the temporary closing. No such closure shall be for a period in excess of 24 hours except by approval of the City Council. (Ord. 87-41)

 

14.16.150 One-Way Streets and Alleys.
Whenever any resolution of the City designates any one-way street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 2019-26)

Chapter 14.20 TURNING MOVEMENTS
14.20.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures for the placement of markers, buttons, or signs indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles at intersections. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.20.020 Authority to Place—Obedience.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left turns, and in the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.

When authorized markers, buttons, or other indicators are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning therefrom, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indicators.

 

14.20.030 Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs—Obedience.
Consistent with relevant policies and provisions of the Encinitas General Plan, and area specific plans, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or the signs may be removed when such turns are permitted. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.

 

14.20.040 Obedience to No-Turn Signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.

 

14.20.050 Authority to Prohibit Right Turns Against Traffic Stop Signal—Obedience.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine those intersections within the Central Business District, any business district or residence district at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. (Ord. 2019-26)

Chapter 14.28 STOP AND YIELD REQUIREMENTS
14.28.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the procedures for the erection of stop and yield signs. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.28.020 Erection and Location of Stop Signs.
Whenever any resolution of the City designates and describes any street or portion thereof, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:

A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting a street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop sign is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated.(Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.28.030 Through Streets.
A.     The following streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this section. Through streets shall include, but not be limited to, all streets which are part of the Circulation Element of the General Plan:

Balour Drive - Santa Fe Drive northerly to Encinitas Boulevard.

Birmingham Drive - San Elijo Avenue easterly to Lake Drive.

Cerro Street - El Camino Real easterly to Encinitas Boulevard.

Chesterfield Drive - San Elijo Avenue to Edinburg Avenue.

Crest Drive - Santa Fe Drive northerly to El Camino Real.

El Camino Real - Manchester Avenue northerly to the North City Limits.

Encinitas Boulevard - First Street easterly to I-5 Freeway; I-5 Freeway easterly to Manchester Avenue/Rancho Santa Fe Road.

“F” Street - Vulcan Avenue easterly to Cornish Drive.

First Street - “K” Street northerly to Encinitas Boulevard.

Garden View Road - El Camino Real easterly to Glen Arbor Drive.

Gardendale Road - Mountain Vista Drive northerly to Willowspring Drive.

Glen Arbor Drive - Willowspring Drive easterly to end.

Grandview Street - Neptune Avenue easterly to North Highway 101.

“K” Street - Third Street easterly to First Street.

La Costa Avenue - North Highway 101 easterly to East City Limit.

Lake Drive - Birmingham Drive northerly to Santa Fe Drive.

Leucadia Boulevard - North Highway 101 easterly to end.

Liverpool Drive - San Elijo Avenue easterly to MacKinnon Avenue.

MacKinnon Avenue - Villa Cardiff northerly to Santa Fe Drive.

Manchester Avenue - San Elijo Avenue to I-5 Freeway; I-5 Freeway to El Camino Real; El Camino Real easterly to Encinitas Boulevard.

Mountain Vista Drive - El Camino Real easterly to end.

Nardo Road - Santa Fe Drive northerly to Requeza Street.

Neptune Avenue - Sylvia Street northerly to Grandview Street.

North Highway 101 - Encinitas Boulevard northerly to La Costa Avenue.

Olivenhain Road - El Camino Real easterly to East City Limit.

Orpheus Avenue - Vulcan Avenue northerly to Leucadia Boulevard.

Park Dale Lane - Village Park Way easterly to Willowspring Drive.

Piraeus Street - Leucadia Boulevard northerly to La Costa Avenue.

Rancho Santa Fe Road - Encinitas Boulevard northerly to North City Limit.

Requeza Street - Cornish Drive easterly to Nardo Road.

San Elijo Avenue - Manchester Avenue northerly to Santa Fe Drive.

Santa Fe Drive - Vulcan Avenue easterly to El Camino Real.

Saxony Road - Encinitas Boulevard northerly to La Costa Avenue.

Second Street - “K” Street northerly to “C” Street.

South Highway 101 - South City Limit northerly to “K” Street.

Sylvia Street - Neptune Avenue easterly to Third Street.

Third Street - “K” Street northerly to Sylvia Street.

Via Cantebria - Encinitas Boulevard northerly to Via Montoro.

Via Molena - Via Cantebria easterly to El Camino Real.

Via Montoro - Via Cantebria easterly to El Camino Real.

Villa Cardiff - Birmingham Drive northerly to MacKinnon Avenue.

Village Park Way - Encinitas Boulevard northerly to Mountain Vista Drive.

Wandering Road - Mountain Vista Drive to Glen Arbor Drive.

Willowspring Drive - El Camino Real easterly, southerly, westerly to El Camino Real.

B.     The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the Council.

 

14.28.040 Emerging From Alley, Driveway, or Building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building, shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or in the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.

 

14.28.050 Compliance with Signals of Properly Appointed Persons Wearing Insignia.
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any person appointed by the Police Chief to control traffic at school crossings; provided that such person giving any order, signal, or direction at such crossings shall at the time be wearing some insignia indicating such appointment. It is unlawful for any minor to direct or attempt to direct traffic unless authorized to do so by order of the Police Chief.

 

14.28.060 Stopping in School Pedestrian Lanes.
It is unlawful for any person driving or operating, propelling or causing to be propelled, any vehicle to fail to stop not less than 50 feet from the nearest side of a school pedestrian lane where any signal device, flagger, or other person is stationed, giving warning that children are about to cross or are crossing the street; and it is further declared unlawful to proceed until such signal has stopped, raised, or been removed, or the flagger or person stationed at such pedestrian lane has given a signal to go, or has left the locality.

Chapter 14.32 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
14.32.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide other regulations not included under other chapters of this title. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.32.020 Driving Through Funeral Processions.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such processions are conspicuously so designated.

 

14.32.030 Driving Vehicles on Sidewalks or Parkways Prohibited.
The driver of a vehicle, shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any parkway except at a permanent or temporary driveway. This section does not apply to bicycles. Regulations regarding bicycles are included under Chapter 14.56.

 

14.32.035 Roller Skates, Coasters and Skateboards.
No person shall skate, use, or ride any roller skates, coaster, skateboard, bicycle, toy vehicle or other forms of transportation in any public drainage facility, culvert, ditch or channel, tennis courts, or gymnasiums.

 

14.32.040 New Pavement.
No person shall place their hands or feet in, ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly-made pavement or freshly-painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.

 

14.32.050 Operating Vehicles on Private or Public Property.
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle, motorcycle, minibike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep or other form of motorized transportation upon the private property of another or upon any public property, which is not held open to the public for any vehicular use and which is not subject to provisions of the Vehicle Code, without having, and upon request of a peace officer, displaying written permission from the owner of such property or his/her agent or the person in lawful possession thereof, provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, governmental agencies or to other persons driving upon such property with the written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property, or to the owner him or herself, his or her family, employees, agents or lessees. (Ord. 87-40)

 

14.32.080 Equestrian Crossings.
The City Council may by resolution designate equestrian crossings.

 

14.32.085 Use of Streets and Cul-de-Sacs for Sports Activities.
No person shall erect basketball backboards or play basketball or any other sport upon any public street or cul-de-sac.

 

14.32.090 Tampering with Traffic Counting Devices Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons authorized by the City Traffic Engineer, to move, or tamper with or damage any traffic counting device.

 

14.32.092 Vehicles Damaging Highway.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, draw, or propel or permit to be ridden, driven, drawn or propelled along, upon or over any improved highway any vehicle, traction engine, harrow or disc harrow, disc plow or other implement that will tear up or in any manner disturb or damage the surface on the highway.

 

14.32.093 Motorcycles Prohibited on Trails.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle or power cycle on any trails used by hikers, horse riders or bicyclist.

 

14.32.094 Flashing Lights.
No person not authorized by the City Council shall erect or maintain any device which directs a beam of light in a flashing sequence toward any highway, nor shall any person erect or maintain any electric advertising sign or similar device that interferes with the visibility of any official traffic control device or warning signal.

 

14.32.095 Removal of Unofficial Devices.
The City Traffic Engineer shall be and is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed every unofficial sign, signal or device place, maintained or displayed contrary to the provisions of the Vehicle Code and this title.

 

14.32.096 No Entrance Into Intersection That Would Obstruct Traffic.
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 87-46)

Chapter 14.33 TRUCK ROUTES
14.33.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate truck traffic on streets within the City.

B.     The provisions of this chapter will be applied to state highways within the City only after approval of the California Department of Transportation.

C.    “Truck” as used in this chapter means a commercial truck and trailer combination, a commercial tractor and trailer combination, or any truck or vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of 14,000 pounds. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.33.020 Regulation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck on City streets unless in accordance with an exception provided in this chapter.

 

14.33.030 Exceptions.
A.     Trucks may be operated on streets which have been designated by resolution of the City Council as truck routes.

B.     Vehicles owned, operated, controlled, or used by a public utility in connection with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or repair of any public utility facility are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Vehicles used for the collection and transportation of garbage, rubbish, or refuse using traditionally used routes. “Traditionally used routes” are any streets used for a period of one year or more as access to or from a solid waste disposal site.

D.    Any commercial vehicle carrying a legal load coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained.

E.     A person may operate an interstate truck on a route designated by the City when traveling to or from an interstate truck terminal.

 

14.33.040 Truck Routes.
All streets and portions thereof established by the resolution of the Council as truck routes, as hereinafter set forth, shall be posted with appropriate signs displaying in letters not less than four inches in height, the words “truck route.”

1.     El Camino Real - Manchester Ave. to North C/L.

2.     Encinitas Blvd. - Highway 101 to Rancho Santa Fe Road.

3.     Highway 101/First Street - South C/L to North C/L.

4.     La Costa Ave. - Highway 101 to East C/L.

5.     Manchester Ave. - El Camino Real to I-5.

6.     Olivenhain Rd. - El Camino Real to East C/L.

7.     Rancho Santa Fe Rd. - Encinitas Blvd. to East C/L.

8.     San Diego Freeway - South C/L to North C/L. (Resolution 87-107, adopted September 28, 1987, and Resolution 89-87, adopted December 6, 1989)

Chapter 14.34 INTERSTATE TRUCKS
14.34.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks as defined herein operating on a federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the public. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.34.020 Definitions.
“Interstate truck” is a tractor semi or doubles with unlimited length as regulated by California Vehicle Code.

“Terminal” is a facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped, or at which vehicle combinations are regularly maintained, stored, or manufactured.

 

14.34.030 Application.
A.     Any interested person requiring terminal access from federally designated highways, shall submit an application on a form as provided by the City and the application fee to the City Clerk, City Hall, Encinitas, California.

B.     Upon receipt of the application, the City Manager will determine the applicant’s conformance with the “terminal” designation and if so approved, will then determine the capability of the route requested and/or alternate routes. Capability will be determined by the adequate turning radii and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways. Also, a determinate factor will be general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed, and traffic volumes for safe operation. Access off the federally designated highways will require CalTrans (District 11) approval.

 

14.34.040 Cost Recovery.
A.     The application fee will cover the cost of reviewing route(s) and terminal designation and to be established by City Council resolution. The application fee is non-refundable.

B.     If the application for a terminal designation is approved, the applicant will be required to pay for the purchase and installation of terminal access signs and trailblazer signs. Trailblazer signs will be required at every decision point on the route to the terminal. Costs shall be determined by the City Manager. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

14.34.050 Retrofitting Ramps, Intersections and Roadways.
A.     If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are deemed unsatisfactory by the City Traffic Engineer, the applicant may request retrofitting the deficiencies, but all costs of engineering, construction and inspection will be borne by the applicant.

B.     Upon request, the City will make a substantial effort to form a benefit district to assist in cost recovery by any other terminal(s) using the improved route. Benefit district costs would be in proportion to the section of route utilized. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

14.34.060 Revocation of Route.
The City Manager or designated representative is authorized to revoke any approved route if the route proves to be a safety hazard for any vehicular traffic. A safety hazard is defined as inability of interstate trucks to negotiate route and/or trucks causing unsafe driving conditions for other vehicular traffic and/or pedestrians. (Ord. 2017-07)

Chapter 14.35 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OF LARGE COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
14.35.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide regulations controlling large commercial vehicles in residential districts. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.35.020 Definitions.
“Commercial vehicle” is a vehicle of a type required to be registered under the State of California Vehicle Code used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.

“Large commercial vehicle” is a commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more.

“Residential district” is any property or portion thereof zoned RR (Rural Residential), RR-1 (Rural Residential), and RR-2 (Rural Residential), R-3 (Single-Family Residential), R-5 (Single-Family Residential), R-8 (Single-Family Residential), R-11 (Single-Family Residential), R-11/RS-11 (Single-Family Residential), R-15 (Higher Density Single-Family and Multiple-Family Residential Zones), R-20 (Higher Density Single-Family and Multiple-Family Residential Zones), R-25 (Higher Density Single-Family and Multiple-Family Residential Zones), and MHP (Mobile Home Park). (Ord. 2017-05)

 

14.35.030 Regulations.
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park a commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more on a street, alley or highway in any residential district within the City. (Ord. 90-13)

 

14.35.040 Exceptions.
The prohibition in this section shall not apply to an operator who stops, stands or parks a commercial vehicle when then engaged in:

A.     Making a pickup or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise from or to property located on the restricted street, alley or highway on which the commercial vehicle is stopped, standing or parked; or

B.     Providing services to property located on the restricted street, alley or highway on which the commercial vehicle is stopped, standing or parked so long as the commercial vehicle’s presence is required to provide the service; or

C.    Delivering materials to be used for a project for which a building permit has previously been obtained involving the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure located upon the restricted street, alley or highway on which a vehicle is stopped, standing or parking; or

D.    Buses when loading or unloading of passengers at established zones.

Chapter 14.36 PEDESTRIANS
14.36.001 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations and procedures regarding pedestrians and pedestrian facilities. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.36.005 Pedestrians Subject to Traffic Control.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals installed and maintained pursuant to this title.

 

14.36.010 Establishment of Crosswalks.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate, and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, markers or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

Crosswalks shall be established and maintained where the City Traffic Engineer determines that there is a need for marked pedestrians crossing on the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

B.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length. Elsewhere not more than one additional crosswalk shall be established in any one block and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.36.020 Use of Crosswalks.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district.

 

14.36.030 Crossing at Right Angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk.

 

14.36.040 Standing in Roadways.
No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty.

 

14.36.050 Pedestrian Tunnels.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any highway within 500 feet of any regularly established and maintained underpass, subway, bridge or grade separation intended for the use of pedestrians in crossing highways except by the use of such underpass, subway, bridge, or grade separation.

Chapter 14.40 STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Article I. Generally
14.40.001 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide regulations prohibiting the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.40.002 Procedures.
A.     The City Council may establish by resolution regulations which prohibit or restrict the parking or standing of vehicles.

B.     The City Council may establish by ordinance parking meter zones and fix the rate of fees for such zones.

C.    The City Council may establish by resolution parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard of a disabled person in accordance with the provisions of Section 2511.7 of the Vehicle Code.

D.    The City Council may establish by resolution a parking permit program within residential areas to include the designation of streets and/or zones where parking is restricted to use by residents having authorized permits. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.40.005 Application of Regulations.
A.     The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

B.     The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the State Vehicle Code or the ordinances of the City, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.

 

14.40.010 Parking for 72 or More Consecutive Hours Prohibited—Removal of Vehicle.
A.     No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain stopped, standing or parked in one location upon any street, alley, highway or public parking lot for a period of time exceeding 72 consecutive hours.

B.     Any law enforcement officer of the City may remove any vehicle parked in violation of subsection A of this section in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of California.

C.    Moving a vehicle for a distance of less than 200 feet from its original parking position shall not constitute a change of parking location for purposes of enforcing this section. (Ord. 95-01)

 

14.40.015 Prohibited Purposes for Parking on Roadway.
A.     No person shall stand or park any commercial vehicle on any street for the purpose of loading or unloading any merchandise or goods except in authorized loading zones as provided in the traffic ordinances of the City.

B.     No person shall stand or park any vehicle on any street while displaying such vehicle for sale or selling merchandise therefrom unless authorized by other provisions of this Code. A vehicle shall not be considered to be displayed for sale when it is legally parked on a public street if the vehicle contains a for sale sign not greater than 8½ inches by 11 inches and the sign is placed on a side window and presents no impediment to the view of the driver when the vehicle is in operation.

C.    No person shall stand or park any vehicle on any street for the purpose of greasing, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency.

 

14.40.020 Parking Parallel with Curb.
A.     Except as otherwise provided in the Vehicle Code, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel with and within 18 inches of the right-hand curb, except that motorcycles shall be parked with at least one wheel or fender touching the right-hand curb. Where no curbs or barriers bound any roadway, right-hand parallel parking is required unless otherwise indicated.

B.     Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

C.    In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

D.    Consistent with relevant policies and provisions of the Encinitas General Plan, and area specific plans, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

 

14.40.025 Signs or Markings Indicating Angle Parking.
A.     Consistent with relevant policies and provisions of the Encinitas General Plan, and area specific plans, the City Traffic Engineer may mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked.

B.     When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as provided in this section, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.

C.    Angle parking shall be permitted upon those streets and parts of streets established by the City Traffic Engineer, and consistent with relevant policies and provisions of the Encinitas General Plan, and area specific plans. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.40.030 Parking Adjacent to Schools.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B.     When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.

 

14.40.035 Parking Prohibited on Narrow Streets.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.

B.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking.

 

14.40.050 Parking on Hills.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means.

 

14.40.055 Parking Prohibited at All Times Where Signs Are Erected.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to appropriately sign or mark places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such places. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.40.058 Parking Within 100 Feet of Intersections.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle which is six feet or more in height (including any load thereon) within 100 feet of any intersection at any location at which such prohibition is indicated by appropriate signs giving notice thereof. Vehicles found in violation of this section may be cited, or removed, in accordance with the provision of Section 14.42.020.

 

14.40.065 Emergency Parking Signs.
A.     Whenever the City Traffic Engineer determines that traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the City Traffic Engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Traffic Engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the City Traffic Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park, or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

Article II. Stopping for Loading or Unloading
14.40.080 Authority to Establish Loading Zones.
A.     Consistent with relevant policies and provisions of the Encinitas General Plan, and area specific plans, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

1.     At any place in any business district;

2.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

C.    Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line stenciled with black letters, “LOADING ONLY,” upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

D.    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled with black letters, “PASSENGER LOADING ONLY,” upon the top of all curbs in such zones.

 

14.40.090 Curb Markings.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings and their different variations as authorized by the State Vehicle Code to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:

1.     Red indicates no stopping, standing, or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended, except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or sign posted as a bus loading zone.

2.     Yellow means no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes.

3.     White means no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows:

a.     When such zone is in front of a hotel the restrictions shall apply at all times;

b.     When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed;

c.     When depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox.

4.     Green means no standing or parking for longer than 20 minutes at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays.

5.     Blue shall mean parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons.

B.     When the City Traffic Engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand, or park vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section.

C.    When there are no curbs, the City Traffic Engineer shall indicate the parking or standing regulations by installing in lieu of curb markings appropriate signs giving notice of such regulations. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.40.095 Permit for Loading or Unloading at Angle to Curb.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to allow the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as thereof stated and authorized herein, and it is unlawful for any permitted or other person to violate the special terms or conditions of any such permit.

 

14.40.100 Effect of Permission to Load or Unload.
A.     Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes.

B.     The loading or unloading of material shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C.    Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.

D.    Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted in this chapter.

 

14.40.105 Standing for Loading or Unloading Only.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 14.40.100.

 

14.40.110 Standing in Passenger Loading Zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as specified in Section 14.40.100.

 

14.40.115 Standing in any Alley.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley.

 

14.40.120 Bus Zones.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer, after consultation with the North County Transit District, is authorized to establish bus zones for the loading and unloading of buses of common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth in this chapter.

B.     The word “bus” as used in this section means any motorbus, motor coach, trackless trolley coach or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.

C.    No bus zone shall exceed 80 feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the City Traffic Engineer showing the necessity therefor, the City Traffic Engineer may extend bus zones not to exceed total length of 125 feet.

D.    Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.

E.     No bus zone shall be established opposite and to the right of a safety zone.

F.     If deemed necessary, the City Traffic Engineer may paint a red line stenciled with white letters “NO STANDING,” together with the words “BUS ZONE” upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone.

G.    No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

Article III. Restricted or Prohibited Parking
14.40.125 Parking Time Limited in Business Districts.
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle within a business district between hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours.

 

14.40.140 Parking Space Markings.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbs where authorized parking is permitted.

When such parking space markings are placed in the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.40.145 Parking of Recreational Vehicles.
A.     No person shall park a recreational vehicle on any public street or public property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the vehicle displaying a validly issued permit pursuant to Section 14.40.150 of this Code. “Recreational vehicle” means any trailer, camper trailer, boat and trailer, cab-over camper/truck camper, motor home, or similar vehicle. Also, vans or van conversion being used for habitation purposes or camping purposes shall be subject to provisions of this chapter.

B.     Any recreational vehicle in violation of this section may be removed and impounded in areas posted as designated by City Council resolution.

C.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following:

1.     Vehicles making pick-ups or deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure in nonresidential zones.

2.     Any vehicle involved in an emergency or any vehicle being repaired under emergency conditions but no more than 72 hours.

3.     Any vehicle belonging to federal, state, or local agencies.

4.     Any vehicle displaying a valid permit issued pursuant to Section 14.40.150.

5.     Vehicles authorized by the City Manager in writing upon a finding of personal or professional hardship.

D.    Vehicles (singular or in combination) over 25 feet in length or nine feet wide are prohibited on South Coast Highway 101 (adjacent to Cardiff State Beach), Moonlight Beach, Swami’s Beach, Grandview Beach, and Beacon’s Beach Parking Lots during the peak season (between the Friday before Memorial Day through Labor Day). Tailgating is prohibited. No awnings, slide-outs, chairs, tables, barbeques, or other recreational equipment may be used that encroach into adjacent sidewalks, bike paths or other parking areas. (Ord. 2017-07; Ord. 2019-17)

 

14.40.150 Permit Process for Overnight Parking of Recreational Vehicles—Residents.
A.     The City Clerk or designee shall issue a permit on an annual basis for overnight parking of a recreational vehicle to any resident of the City for 48-hour nonconsecutive time periods to allow for preparing the vehicle for travel and for unloading upon return if the vehicle will not create a safety hazard and meets the requirements stated in subsection B of this section. The permit shall indicate the address of the resident and shall state: “OVERNIGHT RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING PERMIT.”

B.     Requirements for issuance of a recreational vehicle parking permit by residents:

1.     Proof the vehicle is stored in an off-site storage facility.

2.     The vehicle shall be parked in front of the permittee’s property if possible or immediately adjacent to it if not possible.

3.     The vehicle shall not be used for overnight camping, lodging, sleeping, residing in or accommodation purposes. (Ord. 2005-05)

 

14.40.155 Permit Process for Overnight Parking of Recreational Vehicles for Bona Fide Guest or Visitor of a City Resident.
A.     The City Clerk or designee shall issue a permit for overnight parking of a recreational vehicle to any bona fide guest of a City resident for no more than seven consecutive days. No more than three such permits shall be issued to an address in any one 12-month period. The permit shall state the address of the City resident and shall state: “OVERNIGHT RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING PERMIT.”

B.     Requirements for issuance of a recreational vehicle parking permit by guest or visitors of City residents:

1.     Certification by the resident that the permit is being issued for the benefit of a bona fide guest or visitor of the resident.

2.     The recreational vehicles shall be parked in front of the City resident’s property.

3.     The vehicle shall not be used for overnight camping, lodging, sleeping, residing in or accommodation purposes. (Ord. 2005-05)

Chapter 14.41 PERMIT PARKING ZONES
14.41.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth procedures and regulations for establishing permit parking zones to protect residential areas of the City.

 

14.41.020 Definition.
“Residential parking” includes parking for residents at their residence; guests of residents; and public and commercial services and deliveries being made to a residence.

 

14.41.030 Designation of Zones.
A.     By a resolution adopted following a noticed, public hearing, the City Council may designate permit parking zones when the City Council finds facts that support each of the following conclusions:

1.     The proposed zone is designated for residential uses only;

2.     The proposed zone is being used as an on-street parking site for commercial, commuter or other nonresidential parking purposes;

3.     The nonresidential parking within the proposed zone adversely impacts the residential character and quality of life in the proposed zone.

B.     The resolution shall designate the geographic boundaries of the zone.

C.    The zone regulation shall be effective following the adoption of the resolution, the placement of signs and 30-day period for persons to obtain permits.

 

14.41.040 Parking Regulation in Designated Zones.
Within a designated permit parking zone, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on a public street, or alley during the period of time designated, unless a valid parking permit is properly displayed on such vehicle.

 

14.41.050 General Prohibitions.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any permittee to loan, assign, sell or otherwise transfer a permit for use by a vehicle whose parking is within the zone and is unrelated to the permittee’s residence.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person to make false representations in obtaining a permit.

C.    It shall be unlawful for any person to use a permit without the express authority of the permittee.

D.    It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or otherwise alter any permit.

 

14.41.060 Permit Issuance.
A.     The Public Works Department shall issue parking permits as follows:

1.     Resident Permit, Formula for Maximum Allowance. The number of vehicles customarily parked at the residence by persons who reside at the residence in the zone. Each parking permit shall be valid indefinitely, unless an expiration date is set by the City Council.

2.     Visitor Permit. A maximum of three permits for each residence in the zone for use only by public, commercial or private guests temporarily at the residence. Each parking permit shall be valid indefinitely, unless an expiration date is set by the City Council.

B.     As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the Public Works Department shall collect a fee from the permittee in an amount established by resolution. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

14.41.070 Displaying Permits.
A.     A permit shall be issued in the form of a decal which shall be affixed to the rear window of the registered vehicle, in the lower corner of the driver’s side, clearly visible from the outside.

B.     A temporary permit shall be issued in the form of a card which shall be placed on the dashboard of the authorized vehicle, on the driver’s side, clearly visible from the outside.

Chapter 14.42 PARKING VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT
14.42.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures and fees for controlling parking of vehicles. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.42.020 Parking Violation Enforcement.
A.     Enforcement. Every peace officer and every City employee charged with enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 14.40 of this Code relating to illegal parking, the provisions of the California Vehicle Code, and the other laws of the state applicable to parking violations within the City, shall have the duty, when any vehicle is illegally parked, to issue written parking violation notice thereof stating the vehicle license number and registration expiration date, the last four digits of the vehicle identification number (if visible), the state, the make of such vehicle, the color of the vehicle, the approximate time and date of such illegal parking, street location, and a reference to the appropriate section of the code violated and a procedure to deposit the parking penalty or contest the notice. Such notice shall be attached in a conspicuous place upon the vehicle so as to be easily observed by the person in charge of such vehicle upon return thereto.

B.     Penalties. The penalties for violations of the provisions of this title, as well as provision of the California Vehicle Code, regulating or restricting stopping, standing and parking of vehicles shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Such penalties shall be established pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 40203.5.

The penalties established by the City Council shall include all applicable state surcharges for parking violations pursuant to the California Government Code.

The owner or operator may mail such payments, payable to the City of Encinitas within the time established herein, but shall be responsible for delivery. In addition, payments may be mailed to the City’s parking processing center as noted on the reverse side of the parking violation notice.

From time to time, city staff shall recommend appropriate penalties to the City Council for adoption. To the extent feasible, the City Council will establish penalties in an amount that will standardize parking penalties with other agencies in San Diego County as recommended by Section 10203.5 of the California Vehicle Code. The penalty will double for payments made after 21 days from the date of issuance of the parking violation notice.

C.    Failure to Pay. Failure to pay the appropriate penalty as established by the City Council resolution or failure to request a review of the issuance of a parking violation notice contesting the violation within the time limits set forth in Section 40215 of the California Vehicle Code will result in either notification of the Department of Motor Vehicles, which agency shall collect the maximum fee established hereby at such time as the owner or operator seeks to register his or her vehicle in accordance with provision of Section 4760 of the California Vehicle Code, or in legal proceedings or other remedies as provided by law. (Ord. 2009-10)

Chapter 14.44 SPEED REGULATIONS
14.44.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations to control the speed of vehicles in accordance with the authority granted to the City by the State of California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.44.020 Increase of Speed Limits.
The City Council may determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that a speed greater than 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon any street other than a state highway otherwise subject to a prima facie limit of 25 miles per hour, the local authority may by resolution determine and declare a prima facie speed limit of 30, 35, 40, 45, or 50 miles per hour or a maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour, whichever is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.44.030 Decrease of Speed Limits.
The City Council may determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the limit of 55 miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of any street other than a state highway where the limit of 55 miles per hour is applicable, the local authority may by resolution determine and declare a prima facie speed limit of 50, 45, 40, 35, 30 or 25 miles per hour, whichever is found most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.44.040 School Area.
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of less than 25 miles per hour for any street near a school that would otherwise be subject to the state limit of 25 miles per hour.

 

14.44.050 Business/Residential/Park Areas and Narrow Streets.
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of less than 25 miles per hour for any street in a business or residential area or in a park or having a width of 25 feet or less that would otherwise be subject to the state limit of 25 miles per hour.

 

14.44.060 On Grades.
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of less than 25 miles per hour on any street having a grade in excess of 10% that would otherwise be subject to the state limit of 25 miles per hour. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.44.080 Traffic Signal Timing.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.

 

14.44.090 Large Trucks.
The City Council may establish by resolution a speed limit of less than 55 miles per hour for large trucks on any street that would otherwise be subject to the state limit of 55 miles per hour.

Chapter 14.52 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
14.52.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide regulations controlling the removal of vehicles from streets, highways and private property.

B.     The City Manager is the designated authority for administering the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.52.020 Removal of Vehicles—Generally.
The City Manager is authorized to cause the removal of a vehicle from a street, highway or private property in accordance with the authority granted in Article I, Chapter 10 of the California Vehicle Code commencing with Section 22650. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.52.025 Removal of Vehicles—Special Events.
A.     Whenever the City Manager or the Manager’s designee shall determine that traffic congestion or a traffic hazard is likely to result from the standing or parking of vehicles during the holding of public assemblies, gatherings or special events, he or she may place or cause to be placed, temporary signs prohibiting the standing or parking of vehicles during such an event and, giving notice that the illegally parked vehicle is subject to removal.

B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, the City Manager or the Manager’s designee may cause the removal of a vehicle from a street or highway in accordance with the authority granted in Article 1, Chapter 10 of the California Vehicle Code commencing with Section 22650. (Ord. 98-19)

 

14.52.030 Removal of Abandoned Vehicles.
In accordance with the authority of Section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code, the City Manager shall cause abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof to be removed as a public nuisance from streets, highways or private property as follows:

A.     Notice shall be given in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22661(a).

B.     This section is not applicable to vehicles or portions thereof exempted by Vehicle Code Section 22661(b).

C.    A 10-day notice of intention shall be accomplished in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22661(c).

D.    The 10-day notice of intention shall be accomplished in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22661(d).

E.     The City Manager shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22661(e).

F.     Reconstruction of the removed vehicle or parts shall be limited by the provisions of Vehicle Code Section 22661(f). The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may participate in the public hearing in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22661(g).

G.    In accordance with Vehicle Code Section 22661(g) the City Manager may assess the costs of administration and removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located and against the owner of the vehicle, who may be made jointly and severally liable for such assessment.

 

14.52.040 Storage of Removed Vehicle.
The City Manager shall cause the moved vehicles to be stored in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 10, Division 11 of the California Vehicle Code commencing at Section 22850.

Chapter 14.54 STREET INTERSECTIONS—OBSTRUCTIONS WITHIN VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
14.54.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to control obstructions at intersections. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.54.020 Definitions.
A.     Obstructions include signs, hedges, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstructions within the visibility triangle higher than three feet above the level of the nearest street pavement or nearest unpaved roadway surface.

B.     Visibility triangle is that portion of both the public and private property at any corner bounded by the curb line or edge of roadway of the intersecting streets and a line joining points on the curb or edge of roadway 45 feet from the point of intersection of the extended curb lines or edges of roadway as illustrated below:



C.    An intersection is the area embraced within the prolongations of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways, of two highways which join one another at approximately right angles or the area within which traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.

 

14.54.030 Obstructions Prohibited.
It is unlawful to install, set out or maintain, or to allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any obstructions within the visibility triangle at any corner of any intersection where the City Traffic Engineer determines that an obstruction exists which restricts the view necessary for the safe operation of motor vehicles.

 

14.54.040 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to permanent buildings, public utility poles; trees trimmed to the trunk to a line at least eight feet above the level of the street pavement or roadway surface; saplings or plant species of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed as to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed crossview; supporting members of appurtenances to permanent buildings existing on the effective date of this title; official traffic control signs, poles, or signals; or to places where the contour of the ground is such that there can be no cross-visibility at the intersection.

 

14.54.050 Enforcement and Administration.
A.     The enforcement of this chapter shall be under the direction of the Code Enforcement Office, Department of Planning and Building.

B.     Any obstruction maintained in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.

C.    Upon determination by the City Traffic Engineer that an obstruction causes a sight distance issue, a notice to abate the public nuisance shall be hand delivered or mailed to the property owner by certified mail. If the property owner fails to abate the public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 15 calendar days from the date of the notice, the code enforcement officer will instruct the Department of Public Works, to initiate proceedings enabling City crews to remove the obstruction. All costs incurred by the City, including labor, equipment and overhead costs, shall be assessed to the property owner. (Ord. 2019-26)

Chapter 14.56 BICYCLES
14.56.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations on the use of bicycles on City streets. (Ord. 93-09)

 

14.56.020 Riding on Sidewalks.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer shall erect signs on any public sidewalk or roadway regulating the riding of bicycles thereon.

B.     No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within a business district.

C.    Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. (Ord. 2019-26)

 

14.56.030 Riding on Bicycles.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle or motorcycle to carry any other person upon the handlebars of any such bicycle or motorcycle or for any person to so ride upon any such vehicle or bicycle upon any highway.

 

14.56.040 Clinging to Moving Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, toy vehicle or other moving device of any nature whatever, on any public highway to cling to or attach him or herself or his/her vehicle, or such device, to any other moving vehicle.

 

14.56.050 Traffic Laws Apply to Persons Riding.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle established by this division, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.

 

14.56.060 Daily Reports From Secondhand Bicycle Dealers.
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are required to make a daily report to the Police Chief, giving name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of the license sticker found thereon, if any. All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are required to make a daily report to the Police Chief, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and frame number thereof and the number of the license sticker attached thereto, if any.

 

14.56.070 Impoundment.
The Police Department is authorized to direct or to remove and hold in the office of the Police Department all bicycles which are found being ridden or parked in violation of this chapter until determination of the penalty period.

Title 15 CITY STREETS
Chapter 15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 15.02 MUNICIPAL TREE ORDINANCE
Chapter 15.04 CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 15.08 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 15.10 BANNERS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 15.12 STREET NAMES
Chapter 15.16 VACATION OF CITY STREETS

Chapter 15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.01.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures and regulations for the use and protection of City streets. (Ord. 87-02)

 

15.01.020 Definitions.
A.     “City street” shall be defined in accordance with the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code to include state highways, public highways, roads, streets, avenues, alleys, lanes, driveways, places, courts, trails, sidewalks, curbs, parkways and the rights connected therewith including, but not limited to, restrictions of access, sloping easements and other incidents to a street or highway.

B.     The words and phrases contained in this title shall be defined in accordance with the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code.

 

15.01.030 Damage to City Streets.
Any person who willfully or negligently damages any City street or appurtenances thereto is liable for the cost of repair, including the cost of replacement, thereof.

Chapter 15.02 MUNICIPAL TREE ORDINANCE
15.02.010 Purpose.
A City’s urban forest is an integral part of its character as well as its infrastructure. Properly planned, managed, and maintained, the urban forest provides significant ecological, health, and economic benefits. The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, management, maintenance, preservation, and, where necessary, removal of public trees and heritage trees. This chapter is intended to supplement the City’s Policies and Administrative Procedures as outlined in the City’s Urban Forestry Management Program. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.020 Authority.
The City Manager, or designee, shall have the authority and jurisdiction to regulate the management, maintenance, planting, care, and removal of certain trees within the public right-of-way or on public property to ensure safety, protect the environment, or to preserve or enhance the aesthetics of such public sites. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.030 Definitions.
“Administrative Manual” means the Manual of Procedures as revised by the City Arborist that provides technical guidance to City staff and others regarding the planting, removal, maintenance, care, and protection of trees in the City of Encinitas.

“Approved Tree Species Master List” means a listing of trees as approved by the City Council that are deemed appropriate for planting on a Citywide basis, or in limited areas as determined by the City Arborist. This listing shall consider, as appropriate, ultimate tree canopy and root growth; compatibility with nearby buildings, sidewalks, and streets; shade canopy provided; and fire resistance. It shall also include a listing of invasive or otherwise undesirable trees that the City has determined shall not be planted within the City of Encinitas by public or private parties as part of a development plan. The approved tree species master list shall be maintained by the City Arborist and included as part of the Administrative Manual and shall be made available to the public.

“Certified arborist” is a professional arborist who has been certified by the International Society of Arboriculture.

“City” shall mean the City of Encinitas.

“City Arborist” means that person appointed by the City Manager who shall serve as the City’s resource and shall advise the City Manager and all departments on urban forestry matters.

“City tree” means a tree within the City’s public rights-of-way, parks, or other public places and is maintained by the City.

“Diameter at standard height (DSH)” means the diameter of a tree measured at 54 inches above finish grade.

“Dripline area” means the area from the trunk of a tree to the outermost edge of the tree canopy.

“Emergency removal” means that a tree must be immediately removed due to an imminent threat to persons or property due to disease, lack of structural integrity or stability. The tree may be removed as provided in the City’s Administrative Manual.

“Excessive pruning” means removing more branches, stems, and roots than necessary to accomplish the desired objective. Typically no more than 25% of a tree’s total number of major branches or canopy volume should be removed in a single year. Pruning in excess of 25% can injure a tree and is prohibited unless approved by the City Arborist.

“Hazard” or “hazardous” means a tree, or part of a tree, that has been assessed for risk and found to be very likely to fail and cause severe consequences by causing injury, damage, or disruption.

“Heritage tree” means a tree of community significance located in the City on public or private property designated by the City in accordance with the following criteria: that is one of the oldest and largest of its species; is of unique form or species; has historic significance due to an association with an historic building, site, street, person or event; or is a defining landmark or significant outstanding feature of a neighborhood. The designation of a heritage tree on private property requires the written consent of the private property owner in a form deemed sufficient by the City Attorney.

“Injury” means any damage to a tree resulting from any activity, including, but not limited to, excessive pruning, cutting, topping, trenching, excavating, altering the grade, paving or compaction within the tree protection zone, including deliberate damage such as vandalism.

“Maintain” or “maintenance” means pruning, spraying, fertilizing, watering, treating for disease or injury or other similar acts which promote the growth, health, beauty, and the life of trees.

“Park” means and includes any park owned, operated and/or maintained by the City of Encinitas.

“Parkway” means the strip of ground in the City right-of-way between the sidewalk and street, and may also refer to a landscaped area between the streetmost edge of a private property and the start of the City street pavement.

“Pruning” means the selective removal of plant parts to meet specific goals and objectives.

“Public nuisance” means an individual tree or shrub on public or private property that in the opinion of the City Arborist is likely to destroy, impair or otherwise interfere with any street improvements, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, or other public improvements, including above and below ground utilities or constitutes an unacceptable risk to the public or nearby public or private property.

“Public places” means and includes all grounds, other than streets or parks, owned by, leased to, or otherwise under the control of the City of Encinitas.

“Risk” is the combination of the likelihood of an event and the severity of the potential consequences.

“Shrub” means and includes any woody perennial plant commonly achieving a height of less than 10 feet in height at maturity and usually having multiple stems.

“Street tree” means and includes any woody perennial plant typically having a single trunk commonly achieving 10 feet in height or greater at maturity and capable of being pruned to develop a branch-free trunk at least nine feet in height and that is located within City rights-of-way.

“Topping” means the reduction of tree size using internodal cuts without regard to tree health or structural integrity. Topping is not an acceptable pruning practice.

“Tree plan” means a plan adopted by the City Council for a City street, park or other public area which establishes the species, spacing and maintenance of trees to be planted along a particular street or in a geographic area, as designated by that plan.

“Tree protection and preservation plan” means a plan that outlines measures to protect and preserve trees on a project. This plan shall include requirements for preconstruction; treatments during demolition and/or construction; establishment of a tree protection zone; tree monitoring and inspection schedule.

“Tree protection zone” means the dripline area around a tree within the tree canopy or as determined by the City Arborist where no soil disturbance or other activity is permitted unless otherwise approved by the City Arborist.

“Urban forest” means the trees and shrubs that comprise the tree canopy in the City’s rights-of-way, streets, parks, and under the circumstances specified in this ordinance, private property.

“Urban Forest Management Program” means the ordinances, policies and procedures as approved by the City that provide direction and goals regarding the planting, maintenance, care, and protection of trees. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.040 City Arborist.
The City Manager shall designate a City Arborist, who shall serve as the City’s expert and shall advise the City Manager and all departments on urban forestry matters. In addition to the authority granted in this ordinance, the City Arborist shall have the authority to bring disagreements or conflicts related to the City’s tree responsibilities to the City Manager, who shall direct the issue to the relevant City Commission, Committee, and/or the City Council for resolution as he or she deems appropriate. The City Arborist shall have the authority to formulate and publish a master tree list and tree plan subject to City Council approval. The City Manager may fill the City Arborist position through assignment to existing staff, new recruitment, or contract, consistent with approved budget and personnel guidelines. The City Arborist shall also serve as staff liaison to the Urban Forest Advisory Commission. The City Arborist shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager or designee exclusively. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.050 Urban Forest Advisory Committee.
The City Council, or a subcommittee designated by the Council, in consultation with the City Arborist, shall establish an Urban Forest Advisory Committee (UFAC) consisting of no less than five members and composed predominantly of community members with relevant expertise. The City Arborist shall serve as the City Staff liaison to the UFAC. Terms, meeting times, and other responsibilities shall be as determined by the City Manager or designee. Committee meetings shall be open to the public. The UFAC shall review and provide comments on City plans and policies related to urban forestry, including updates to the various aspects of the City’s Urban Forest Management Program and Administrative Manual, and, shall among other things:

A.     Review and provide comments on tree plans prior to consideration by the City Council.

B.     Review and provide comments on the Approved Tree Species Master List prior to consideration by the City Council.

C.    Review and provide comments to the City Arborist on proposed City tree removals except in the case of emergency removals.

D.    Advise City staff regarding programs of public outreach and education in order to promote public understanding of the City’s urban forest, including programs to celebrate and promote Arbor Day.

E.     Review and consider heritage tree applications in consultation with the City Arborist, and shall make recommendations to the Planning Commission.

F.     Review and provide comments to the City Arborist on proposed changes to the City’s Urban Forest Management Program. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.060 Species, Cultivars, and Varieties.
All trees to be planted in City rights-of-way, parks, or other public spaces shall conform to approved tree palettes identified in adopted City and Community Master Plans, General Plans, specific plans, and tree plans, and as reflected in the Approved Tree Species Master List contained in the Urban Forest Management Program. Exceptions may be granted subject to recommendation by the UFAC and the review and approval of the City Arborist. The initial Approved Tree Species Master List shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council. Minor revisions may be made by the City Arborist following review by the UFAC. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.070 Maintenance and Preservation.
All City trees shall be maintained in accordance with the City’s Urban Forest Management Program, which will be reviewed periodically by the UFAC. The City shall consider the long-term sustainability of the tree canopy in various areas of the City and proactively maintain and/or remove trees in a manner that promotes the long term sustainability and enhancement of the City’s urban forest. The City will use best practices to protect existing trees from the impacts of development and maintenance projects. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.080 Pruning and Maintenance of City Trees and Heritage Trees.
Pruning of City trees and heritage trees must conform to the pruning practices specified in the Administrative Manual. Pruning of heritage trees other than minor maintenance pruning must be approved by the City Arborist.

Any spraying or application of pesticides will be in accordance with the City’s Integrated Pest Management Program.

Tree topping of any City tree or heritage tree shall be prohibited, unless authorized by the City Manager in writing after consultation with the City Arborist.

All woody and leaf materials resulting from the pruning operation must be properly recycled. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.090 Removal of City Trees or Heritage Trees.
Unless authorized by the City Arborist, no person shall remove any City tree or heritage tree. In addition to the requirements in this section, removals of a heritage tree require a public hearing before the Planning Commission. If a complete heritage tree application has been received by the Planning Commission but not yet acted upon, no removal shall take place until the application for heritage tree status has been considered by the Commission. Except in cases of emergency as determined by the City Manager or designee, a public notification shall be required prior to the planned removal of any City tree or heritage tree with a diameter greater than six inches measured at 54 inches above finish grade (DSH). Such notification shall at a minimum consist of placing two signs no less than 12 inches wide by 18 inches high and visible from at least two directions in the immediate vicinity of each City tree or heritage tree to be removed no less than 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled removal. The notification shall include the reason for the proposed removal and shall include a link to further information on a City website, including how to appeal the proposed action. Unless preserved as required by Section 15.02.100, any City tree or heritage tree removed shall have its stump removed to a depth at least 16 inches below the adjacent ground level, or as determined by the City Arborist. If appropriate as determined by the City Arborist, a minimum of one replacement tree of a type, size, and location shall be planted. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.100 Preservation of Stumps for Artistic Purposes.
Individuals, groups, City appointees or elected officials requesting to preserve a stump or trunk for artistic purposes must make a request to the City Arborist. The City Arborist will evaluate the stump or trunk for suitability to ensure that it is structurally sound, free of rot, disease or insect infestation and will not adversely impact City or private infrastructure, persons or property. If the City Arborist finds that a stump or trunk is a suitable candidate, the City Arborist will forward the application to the City Commission on the Arts. If an application has been received by the City Arborist, the decision on removal or other disposition shall be delayed pending a decision of the Commission on the Arts to either reject the application or forward it to the City Council for final determination. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.110 Protection of Trees.
Every effort should be made to protect trees during construction. If construction activity or the movement of equipment is to take place within the dripline area of any City tree or heritage tree, a fenced tree protection zone shall be established by the City Arborist, except that the fenced area shall not include private property. No person shall store any equipment, store any solid or liquid waste materials, or any other liquids which may be injurious to a tree, nor excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or drive within the tree protection zone. Should a construction project on private property involve digging, excavating or trenching within the tree protection zone, a Tree Protection and Preservation Plan must be prepared by the property owner and approved by the City Arborist.

Nothing in this chapter prevents a private property owner from the ability to develop his or her property. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.120 Approval Required.
Unless performed pursuant to a City maintenance plan, or as part of an approved development, any work performed in the City’s rights-of-way, parks, or other public areas shall require the written approval of the City Arborist before committing any of the following acts:

A.     Removing, cutting, pruning, breaking, injuring, defacing, or in any other way interfering with any tree, or any part thereof, either above or below the ground.

B.     Planting any tree or shrub not identified on the Approved Tree Species Master Tree or Council-adopted tree plan (if applicable).

C.    Spraying (or otherwise applying) any chemical on any tree or shrub.

D.    Securing any rope, wire, sign, or other device on or about such tree or shrub.

E.     Removing or injuring any guard or device intended to assist in the growth and health of a tree or shrub.

F.     Closing or obstructing the base or branch of a tree or shrub that may limit the ability of the tree or shrub to grow or absorb water or nutrients.

Nothing in this chapter shall preclude a property owner from maintaining the parkway in front of his or her property as may be required by law. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.130 Nuisance Abatement.
Any tree, shrub, or part thereof in the City that interferes with the use of any public street, park, or public place, or is unsafe and constitutes a risk to the life, health, safety, or property of the public, or constitutes a center of infection for disease or insects that may endanger the health and life of other trees or shrubs shall be declared a public nuisance by the City Arborist and the owner thereof shall be required to correct or remove it. The property shall be posted with a minimum of two signs no less than 12 inches wide by 18 inches high and visible from at least two directions in the immediate vicinity of the nuisance, giving notice of the required abatement, and the owner shall be notified in writing via certified mail by the City Arborist or designee of the existence of such public nuisance and be given 30 days for its correction or removal. If not corrected or removed within the time allowed, the City Arborist shall cause said nuisance to be corrected or removed at once and initiate action necessary to defray all cost resulting therefrom.

Any tree or shrub on a City parkway not planted with an approved City of Encinitas encroachment permit, nor conforming to the Approved Tree Species Master List (at the time of the planting) may be considered to be a nuisance, and may be required to be pruned or removed at the expense of the individual or entity that caused said planting. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.140 Violations and Penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided by Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. Nothing in this section shall limit the City’s ability to seek restitution for damage to City trees or shrubs or heritage trees in accordance with valuation methodologies as outlined in the City’s Urban Forest Administrative Manual and additional penalties as established by law in the State of California. (Ord. 2017-02)

 

15.02.150 Severability.
If any one portion or section of this chapter shall be determined to be invalid, the remaining portions or sections shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2017-02)

Chapter 15.04 CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
15.04.010 Purpose and Intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide the orderly administration of private contract work in the public right-of-way and to protect the public interest and safety in the development of private property by regulating grading, private encroachments on public rights-of-way or public property, and construction within the public right-of-way, establishing standards therefor. (Ord. 87-02; Ord. 88-08)

 

15.04.020 General Requirements.
A.     No person or entity shall do or cause to be done any work covered under this chapter without first having obtained a permit, City contract, or City franchise to do such work.

B.     All work done under this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved plans and the conditions of the required permits, City contract or City franchise. The work shall conform to the standards of the City of Encinitas as set forth and contained in standard drawings, specifications and general conditions, on file in the office of the City Clerk and available for public distribution in the office of the City Engineer.

C.    This chapter shall not affect the requirements of any other section of the Code, other permits, fees, charges or affect any provisions concerning the granting of franchises.

D.    Any person or entity performing work covered by this chapter shall provide the required security to guarantee proper completion of the permitted work as described in this chapter.

 

15.04.030 Administration.
A.     The Director of Public Works shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. He or she shall, upon application by qualified persons, issue permits for the work under this chapter when all applicable prerequisite conditions established by this chapter for such permits have been met.

B.     The Director of Public Works shall determine the extent, type, and requirements of the work to be done under this chapter and the type of application and permit required.

C.    When the nature of the work requested is such that it is subject to other requirements of this Code or administrative regulations issued pursuant thereto or affects the operations of any other department of the City, the Director of Public Works shall adhere to the other requirements and shall be guided by the recommendations of such departments in determining the disposition of the application. Applications which are not in the interest of the public health, safety, or general welfare or do not constitute a reasonable use of land as indicated by the existing zoning or an approved land use plan, shall be denied.

D.    The Director of Public Works shall fix the time for completion of the work when a permit is issued. The Director of Public Works may, upon request of the permittee, and for good cause shown, extend the period of time for completion for a sufficient time which, in the option of the City Engineer, will enable the permittee to complete the work.

E.     The Director of Public Works shall cause to be inspected all work done under this chapter to ensure compliance with the provisions of the permit and shall determine when such work is properly completed.

F.     The Director of Public Works may cancel a permit or may require plans to be amended when it is in the interest of public health, safety or general welfare to include, without limitation, any of the following situations:

1.     Upon the request of the permittee.

2.     When the facts are not presented accurately and/or correctly by the permittee in application.

3.     When work as constructed or as proposed to be constructed creates a hazard to public health, safety, or general welfare.

G.    Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the Director of Public Works may appoint deputies, as shall be authorized from time to time, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.035 Work Undertaken Without a Permit.
A.     Where work subject to the provisions of this chapter is undertaken without a permit, the City Engineer may:

1.     Order the work to be stopped.

2.     Report the violation to the Contractors’ Licensing Board.

3.     Impose a penalty of double the normal City processing and inspection fee for obtaining the permit.

B.     If a permit is not promptly obtained, the Director of Public Works may cause building permits to be suspended or certificates of occupancy withheld, and shall cause to be stopped all administrative action toward the processing of any project for which the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter is a prerequisite until the property is restored to its original condition satisfactory to the Director of Public Works at the sole cost of the applicant, or until an appeal of such requirement is heard. The Director of Public Works’ decision may be appealed* to the City Council. (*See Chapter 1.12.)

C.    Should restoration or such other resolution as determined by the Council not begin by a time specified by the Director of Public Works, the City Manager may direct the City Attorney to begin prosecution. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.040 Application for Permit.
A.     An application for a permit authorizing work under this chapter shall be made in accordance with procedures established by the Director of Public Works. Each application shall be accompanied by such detailed plans, specifications, schedules, and estimates as may be required by the Director of Public Works in determining the nature and extent of the work and applicable fees.

B.     Detailed plans shall be prepared on material and to the size and in the manner designated by the Director of Public Works.

C.    When proposed work or inquiries concerning the public rights-of-way necessitates investigation, the Director of Public Works may require a special investigation application and fee. Special investigation fees shall be in addition to other fees and are not refundable.

D.    The permittee shall notify all public utilities within the area of proposed work of permittee’s request to construct improvements or encroachments within the rights-of-way and shall coordinate with the public utilities in order that any necessary relocations of existing facilities may be done in an orderly fashion without interrupting the continuity of service or endangering life or property. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.050 Issuance of Permits.
The Director of Public Works shall issue permits authorizing work under this chapter upon approval of the application and plans, receipt of the prescribed fees, guarantee of public liability insurance, and posting of the required security. The permits shall include, or refer to, the conditions, plans, and specifications which shall govern the work authorized. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.060 Permits for Projects Within the Coastal Zone.
No land development permit, public improvement permit or encroachment permit will be issued by the City of Encinitas for projects or developments within the California Coastal Zone as established by the California Coastal Act of 1976 as amended until such time as a development permit or certificate of exemption has been obtained from the California Coastal Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing such development, except that public improvements or encroachments with valuations of less than $7,500.00 considered as repairs or improvements to single-family dwellings which are not located between the mean high-tide line as defined by the Coastal Commission and the nearest improved public street will not be subject to this provision. Procedures to be followed when application is submitted for a permit in the Coastal Zone are: The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works. Such plans shall be reviewed by other City departments to ensure compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the work described in the application for a permit, and the plans and specifications filed therewith conform to the requirements of this Code, and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he or she shall issue to the applicant a letter stating that he or she is prepared to issue a permit therefor to the applicant when the appropriate fees have been paid and the applicant presents an approved permit or certificate of exemption granted by the California Coastal Commission, or a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing construction for which the application was filed; provided, however, that the application, plans and specifications comply with all laws and ordinances in effect at the time of the presentation of such permit or certificate of exemption and payment of the fee specified in Section 15.04.070 of this Code is made. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.070 Fees.
Permit fees and deposits required by this chapter shall be collected by the Director of Public Works or other designated persons in accordance with procedures established by the Director of Finance. A schedule of fees and deposits to cover the costs of processing the various types of work referred to in this chapter shall be established by the City Council and filed in the office of the City Clerk. Fixed charges may be established to cover portions of the City costs. Such fixed charges may include, but are not limited to, the cost for construction permits, encroachment permits, inspection and update of City records. No permit shall be issued and no work in the public rights-of-way or land development shall be permitted until the fees applicable under this chapter have been received by the Director of Public Works.

Any portion of the deposit not used to cover the actual costs of the City in processing a permit application will be refunded, but no funds will be released until all billings are in, and until final acceptance of the work by the Director of Public Works. In determining the actual costs incurred by the City in connection with the processing of final maps and improvement plans, the costs as recorded by the Director of Finance shall be prima facie evidence of actual costs of services performed by the City.

The State of California, its political subdivisions or other governmental agencies shall file applications for permits and shall be issued permits as required by this chapter; provided, however, that no fees shall be required for work to be performed directly by the State of California, its political subdivisions or other governmental agencies. Contractors working for the State of California, its political subdivisions, or other governmental agencies shall obtain a permit and shall pay all applicable permit fees. (Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2017-07)

 

15.04.080 Refunds.
In the event a permit fee refund is requested by the permittee and the Director of Public Works has determined that it is in the public interest to allow the permittee to abandon the work, the Director of Public Works shall cancel the permit and refund the refundable portion of the fee. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.090 Security Required.
A.     Persons performing work under a permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall furnish security, in the amount specified in this chapter, guaranteeing proper completion of the permitted works. The security shall be in the form of one or more of the following at the option of the City Engineer for the full protection of the City:

1.     A deposit, with the Director of Finance, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys.

2.     An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the permitted works are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.

3.     A lien on the permittee’s property.

4.     Any form of security acceptable to the Director of Public Works and specified by ordinance.

B.     The security shall be conditioned upon the payment to the City of any costs incurred by the City in completing the required work or in employing a contractor to complete such work. Whenever the Director of Public Works finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of work authorized by a permit, he or she shall give written notice of such default to the permittee. Such notice shall state the work remaining to be done, the estimated cost of completion and the time estimated by the Director of Public Works to be necessary for the completion of work. After receipt of such notice the permittee must, within the time specified, satisfactorily complete the permitted work.

C.    If the default is not corrected by the permittee within the time specified, the Director of Public Works shall proceed without delay and without further notice of proceedings whatever to use the security or any portion thereof to complete the required work. The balance, if any, of any cash deposit shall, upon completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or to his or her successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work. (Ord. 2003-04; Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.100 Amount of Security Required.
The security amount shall be based on an estimate of the cost of work approved by the Director of Public Works in an amount of at least 150% of the approved estimate. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.110 Qualifications to do Work.
A.     The permittee shall ensure all work under this chapter is performed by a contractor who is appropriately licensed by the State of California to do the work proposed under the permit. The Director of Public Works will make the determination regarding the appropriate license.

B.     Plans for public improvement and major work involving encroachment or land development authorized under this chapter shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered by the State of California. Where soils reports or soils investigations and/or geologic reports or geologic investigations are required, the reports and investigations shall be prepared and conducted by a California licensed soils engineer or engineering geologist. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.120 Liability Insurance.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the permit applicant must provide a policy of liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Director of Public Works in order to protect the City from any potential claims that may arise from the works covered by the permit. The policy must remain in effect throughout the full term of the permit and provide that the insurer shall give 30 days’ notice to the City before the policy is canceled or expires. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.130 Traffic Control Around Work Sites.
A.     A permittee authorized to commence construction within a public right-of-way shall place and maintain sufficient traffic control measures around the work site to protect the public safety by controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic and advising the public of detours and construction hazards.

B.     Traffic control measures include, without limitation, barriers, guards, lights, signs, flaggers and watchpersons.

C.    Control devices shall be installed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. All permits shall be subject to the requirement for a traffic control plan, reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works. All traffic control devices and activities shall conform to the latest edition of the “Work Area Traffic Control Handbook” published by Building News, Inc. All permit sites requiring traffic control shall have at least one copy of the above handbook at the site during working hours.

D.    If a construction permittee fails to comply satisfactorily with the provisions of this section, the Director of Public Works may cause additional control devices to be erected for which the permittee shall reimburse the City. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

15.04.140 Private Driveways.
A.     Driveways serving private property shall require a permit for construction, reconstruction, removal or repair, except for minor maintenance. An encroachment permit shall also be required for their placement on a City street.

B.     The dimensions and location of any driveway serving private property shall be as specified in the appropriate City standards. All proposed variances to the standards shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works.

C.    Driveways serving private property shall not be located or constructed in a manner that endangers public safety or causes undue inconvenience to the public.

D.    When a driveway serving private property is abandoned or is no longer suited for vehicular use, the property owner shall remove the depressed curb section and apron and restore the right-of-way to the standards normally required for an improved street. (Ord. 2014-12)

Chapter 15.08 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
15.08.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations governing the placement and construction of obstructions and encroachments within City rights-of-way. (Ord. 87-02; 88-08)

 

15.08.020 Requirements.
A.     Without first having obtained a construction and encroachment permit from the City Engineer, it shall be unlawful for any person to paint, deface, or place any sign upon any City street.

B.     Without first having obtained a construction and encroachment permit, it is unlawful for any person to erect on a City street any sign, post, pole, barricade or other obstruction.

C.    Without first having obtained a construction and encroachment permit from the City Engineer, it is unlawful for any person to erect any structure which projects beyond a private property line into a City street.

D.    Without first having obtained an encroachment permit from the Development Services Department, or a sidewalk vendor operations permit in accordance with Chapter 6.15, Operations Permit: Sidewalk Vending, it is unlawful for any person to set out for exhibition, show or otherwise maintain or allow any goods, wares or merchandise upon any sidewalk or curb portion of a City street. (Ord. 2020-15)

 

15.08.030 Loading and Unloading of Goods.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit any person from using sidewalks or curbs for such length of time as is reasonably necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise at the point of pick-up or delivery.

 

15.08.040 Obstructing Use or Access.
Unless the conduct is pursuant to issued permit or other lawful authority, it shall be unlawful for any person to block, impede or obstruct or to otherwise prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage of persons on a City street.

 

15.08.050 Encroachment Applications.
Applications for permits authorizing encroachments and the administration of the permit procedure shall be made in accordance with this title.

No encroachment application shall be approved when it is determined by the City Engineer that the encroachment will adversely affect the public health, safety, or general welfare.

 

15.08.060 Encroachment Removal Covenant.
Applications for encroachment permits shall be accompanied by an encroachment maintenance and removal covenant signed by the property owner. This covenant shall be prepared by the City Engineer and shall contain the following provisions and such other provisions as may, in the opinion of the City Engineer, be necessary to afford protection to the property owner, City, and public utilities:

A.     The covenant shall run with the land and be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the future owners, encumbrances, successors, heirs, personal representatives, transferees, and assigns of the respective parties.

B.     Permittee shall use and occupy the City property only in the manner and for the purposes approved by the City Engineer.

C.    Permittee shall acknowledge title to the City property to be in the City and shall waive all right to contest that title.

D.    The term of the encroachment permit is to be set by the City Engineer and may be revoked by the City or abandoned by permittee at any time. The City shall mail written notice of revocation to permittee, addressed to the benefited property which shall set forth the date upon which the benefits of encroachment permit are to cease.

E.     City is entitled to remove all or a portion of the improvements constructed by the permittee in order to repair, replace, or install public improvements. City shall have no obligation to pay for or restore permittee’s improvements.

F.     Permittee shall agree to indemnify and hold the City harmless from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation, and liability arising out of or related to the use, construction, encroachment or maintenance to be done by the permittee or permittee’s agents, employees or contractors on City property.

G.    Upon abandonment or revocation, permittee shall, at no cost to the City, return City property to its pre-permit condition within the time specified in the notice of revocation or prior to the date of abandonment.

H.    If permittee fails to restore the City property, the City shall have the right to enter upon the City property, after notice to the permittee, delivered at the benefited property, and restore the City property to its pre-permit condition to include the removal and destruction of any improvements and permittee agrees to reimburse the City for the costs incurred.

I.      If either party is required to incur costs to enforce the provisions of this covenant, the prevailing party shall be entitled to full reimbursement for all costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees.

J.     Permittee shall agree that the permittee’s duties and obligations under the covenant are a lien upon the benefited property. Upon 30-day notice, and an opportunity to respond, the City may add to the tax bill of the benefited property any past-due financial obligation owing to City by way of the covenant.

K.     Permittee shall waive the right to assert any claim or action against the City arising out of or resulting from the revocation of the permit or the removal of any improvements or any other action by the City, its officers, agents, or employees taken in a non-negligent manner, in accordance with the terms of the permit.

L.     Permittee shall recognize and understand that the permit may create a possessory interest subject to property taxation and that the permittee may be subject to the payment of property taxes levied on such interest.

M.    As a condition precedent to the permittee’s right to go upon the City property, the permit must first be signed by the permittee, notarized executed by the City and recorded with the County Recorder of the County of San Diego. The recording fee shall be paid by the permittee.

 

15.08.070 Public Improvement Repair or Relocation.
The following provisions of this section shall apply unless provision is otherwise made by an agreement pursuant to this chapter.

A.     In the event the City is required to place, replace or maintain a public improvement over which the property owner has constructed an encroachment structure, the property owner shall pay the City that portion of the cost of placement, replacement or maintenance caused by the construction, or existence of the owner’s permanent encroachment structure.

B.     The property owner shall pay the City for all the cost of placing, replacing or maintaining a public improvement within a public right-of-way when the City’s facility has failed as a result of the construction or existence of the owner’s encroachment structure.

C.    The costs of placing, replacing or maintaining the public improvement shall include the cost of obtaining a necessary alternate easement.

D.    The property owner shall pay the City or public utility for all costs of relocating, replacing, or protecting a facility within the public right-of-way when such relocation, replacement or protection results from the construction of an encroachment.

Chapter 15.10 BANNERS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
15.10.010 Purpose and Forum Designation.
The City’s banner program is a limited forum intended to be used consistent with the purposes and requirements identified in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-14)

 

15.10.020 Banners in Public Rights-of-Way—Permit Required.
Banners in the public rights-of-way shall be authorized by a City permit issued pursuant to this chapter and subject to the “non-content based” standards established by the City and approved by the City Manager or designee which are on file with the City Clerk and available for public inspection. Authorization shall be known as the City’s “Banner Program.” (Ord. 2012-14; Ord. 2017-07)

 

15.10.030 Promotion or Depiction Restrictions.
Banners shall be for the exclusive purpose of promoting or depicting the following:

A.     Authorized local civic events such as art festivals, athletic events, car shows and similar special events;

B.     Promotional or celebratory depiction of or related to the City such as points of interest, attractions, and milestones; and

C.    Promotions or depictions suitable for viewing by all ages. (Ord. 2012-14)

 

15.10.040 Political Figures—Prohibited.
Banners shall not promote nor depict the likeness of any political figure presently alive. The phrase “political figure” for purposes of this section shall mean any former elected public official, present elected public official and current candidate for any elected public office, in the County of San Diego. The phrase “candidate” for purposes of this section shall mean any person who has publically expressed or demonstrated an intention to run for any public office and/or filed the appropriate papers to do so with any government agency in the County of San Diego. (Ord. 2012-14)

 

15.10.050 Banner Dimensions, Location, and Display Period.
Banners shall not exceed 45 square feet in area and shall be located only on City-approved structures. Banners shall be installed pursuant to City specifications. Banners may be displayed no more than 14 days prior to the start of the event and shall be removed within three days of the end of the event. Banners not related to a specific actual event shall not be displayed more than 90 days. (Ord. 2012-14)

 

15.10.060 Cost Recovery Fees Related to the Banner Program.
Fees to recover City costs in reviewing applications for placing banners in the public rights-of-way shall be established by City Council. (Ord. 2012-14)

 

15.10.070 Termination of Banner Program by City—Reservation of Right.
The City Council reserves the right to terminate the City’s Banner Program at any time; provided, however, that any banner erected prior to termination may remain in place for the duration of its authorization to do so. (Ord. 2012-14; Ord. 2017-07)

Chapter 15.12 STREET NAMES
15.12.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures for the naming of City streets. (Ord. 87-02)

 

15.12.020 Procedure.
Upon noticed, public hearing, the City Council may adopt by resolution a street name for a new street or a renaming of a street.

 

15.12.030 Report to San Diego County.
Upon the adoption of a resolution in accordance with the procedures of this chapter, the City Clerk shall promptly mail a copy of the resolution to the San Diego County Board of Supervisors.

 

15.12.040 Street Signs.
At each signal controlled intersection on a City street, there shall be a street name sign or signs that clearly and visibly announce the name of the street to approaching traffic.

Chapter 15.16 VACATION OF CITY STREETS
15.16.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures for the vacation of City streets. (Ord. 87-02)

 

15.16.020 General Procedures.
Upon the adoption of a resolution of intention, and the conduct of a subsequent, noticed public hearing, the City Council may adopt a resolution vacating a City street.

 

15.16.025 Authority to Vacate a City Street.
The City Council shall be the sole and exclusive body authorized to vacate or abandon City streets within the City of Encinitas, including vacations or abandonments in conjunction with a subdivision. (Ord. 2006-08)

 

15.16.030 Summary Vacation.
By the adoption of a resolution, the City Council may summarily vacate certain types of City streets.

 

15.16.040 Vacation Effective.
Upon recordation of a certified copy of the resolution of vacation, the vacation is complete.

 

15.16.050 Nonmotorized Right-of-Way.
A City street shall not be abandoned unless the City Council determines that it is not useful as a non-motorized transportation facility for use by pedestrians, bicyclists or equestrians.

Title 16 RESERVED

Title 17 RESERVED

Title 18 SANITARY SEWER
Chapter 18.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 18.04 GENERAL SEWER REGULATIONS
Chapter 18.08 SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
Chapter 18.12 SEWER CONSTRUCTION REIMBURSEMENT CONNECTION FEE
Chapter 18.16 SEWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 18.20 COST RECOVERY FOR PROTECTIVE SEWER SERVICES
Chapter 18.24 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT

Chapter 18.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.01.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this title to establish procedures and regulations for the use and protection of the City’s sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 95-16)

 

18.01.020 Severability.
If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remaining portions of the title and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances are to be considered valid.

 

18.01.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

“Applicant” means any person or group of persons who applies for sewer services.

“Cost” means the cost of labor, material, transportation, supervision, engineering and all other necessary overhead expenses.

“Customer” means any person, firm, association, corporation or government agency served or entitled to be served sewer service by the City for compensation.

“Developer” means any person or group of persons, including contractors, corporations or public entities, who request to extend or connect to the sewer system.

“District.” Any reference to the “Cardiff Sanitation District” by that name or any other reference within this Code shall mean the City of Encinitas.

“Equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)” means the unit of measure which is based on the flow characteristics of an average single-family residence in terms of sewage quantity and constituent quality.

“Extension” means an extension of an existing sewer main.

“Fiscal year” means the period from July 1st to June 30th, both inclusive.

“Garbage” means the animal and vegetable waste from the handling, preparation, cooking, dispensing, and disposal of food.

“Grease” means any material which is extractable from an acidified sample of water by hexane or other designated solvent and as determined by the appropriate procedure in standard methods. “Grease” includes fats and oils.

“Grease interceptor” means a pretreatment device designed and installed to separate fats, oils, and grease from wastewater.

“Industrial waste” means solid, liquid, or gaseous substances discharged or flowing from an industrial, manufacturing, or commercial premises resulting from manufacturing, processing, treating, recovery, or development of natural or artificial resources of whatever nature.

“Industrial wastewater” means all water-carried wastes and wastewater of the community, excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water. Includes all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural, or other operation. These may also include wastes of human origin similar to domestic wastewater.

“Interceptor line” refers to a large sewer line to which many trunk lines are connected and which serves the primary purpose of transporting sewage from trunk lines to the disposal.

“Main” or “sewer main” is a sewer pipeline in the sanitary sewer system of the City. Individual service laterals discharge sewage into sewer mains which convey the sewage toward trunk lines and interceptor lines and ultimately to the disposal.

“Maximum charge” refers to the maximum amount residential accounts can be charged for annual sewer service. This amount is based on indoor water usage for a household of six persons.

“Median annual water usage” means the annual water use at which exactly half the customers in the classification are under the amount and half the customers are above the amount.

“Minimum charge” refers to the minimum amount residential accounts can be charged for annual sewer service. This charge covers the fixed costs incurred by the City in providing sewer service to a customer, regardless of the amount of water usage.

“Multifamily residential” means the residential classification with more than one living unit served by a single water meter, and shall include all residential accounts other than single-family residential.

“Nonresidential” means the classification which includes all accounts other than single-family residential and multifamily residential customers.

“Owner” or “property owner” means the person owning the fee, the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the County Recorder’s office, or the person in possession of the property or buildings under claims of, or exercising acts of ownership over same for him or herself, or as executor, administrator, guardian or trustee of owner. Includes a holder in fee, life tenant, fiduciary, lessee or licensee holding under government lease or license of real property.

“Person” means any individual, property owner, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.

“pH” indicates the intensity of acidity and alkalinity on a pH scale running from 0 to 14. A pH value of 7.0, the midpoint of the scale, represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 indicate alkalinity and those below 7.0 indicate acidity.

“Premises” means any lot, piece or parcel of land, building or establishment.

“Pretreatment” or “treatment” is the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing to the sewer system.

“Return to sewer” is the percentage of metered water usage, measured in hundred cubic feet, that is discharged into the sanitary sewer system for collection and treatment. This percentage excludes storm, surface, and groundwaters not intentionally admitted into the sewer system.

“Regular sewer service” means the sewer service and facilities rendered for normal domestic and industrial or commercial purposes on a permanent basis and the sewer system available therefor.

“S.S.” means suspended solids, a measure of the strength of wastewater.

“Sanitary sewer or sewer” shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

“Self-regenerating or automatic water softener” is a water softener unit which is a water conditioning apparatus such as zeolite and resinous ion-exchange softeners or dimineralizers or other like devices which require the periodic discharge of brine solutions in their operation.

“Sewage” means the waterborne wastes derived from ordinary human living processes and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sanitary sewer, a private sanitary sewer, or by means of household septic tank systems.

“Sewer, building or house” means that portion of a pipe or conduit carrying sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes from a building to the public sanitary sewer or a common sewer.

“Sewer lateral or service lateral” means the service pipes extending from the private property line to the public sanitary sewer main in a public street, alley or easement. It is the connection of any domestic, commercial or industrial sanitary sewer lines to the City’s system after the payment of established fees and charges and City approval.

“Sewer, private” refers to a privately owned sanitary sewer which is not directly controlled by the City.

“Sewer, public” refers to the sanitary sewer system under the jurisdiction of the City and the sewage treatment plant where the sewage will be processed.

“Sewer system” means the sanitary sewer system of the City. Includes all construction and appurtenant equipment utilized in the collection, transportation, pumping, treatment and final disposal of sewage.

“Single-family residential” means the residential classification where one living unit is served by one water meter, with the exception that where two or more living units are attached they are treated as multifamily residential regardless of the number of water meters.

“Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial wastes which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration of flows during normal operation.

“Standard methods” means the current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by the American Public Health Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation.

“Subclassification” refers to the individual uses arranged under the classification.

“Sub-meter” means a device used in addition to a water utility meter maintained by the San Dieguito Water District or Olivenhain Municipal Water District to measure the water usage within a dwelling unit or outside a dwelling unit for the purpose of isolating outdoor water usage.

“Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are largely removable by laboratory filtering and as determined by the appropriate procedure in standard methods.

“Trunk line” means a main sewer line to which many sewer mains are connected and which serves the primary purpose of transporting sewage from sewer mains to the disposal.

“Utility hole” is an access to underground utilities. It is also referred to as a manhole.

“Wastewater” means waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer. (Ord. 97-04; Ord. 98-10; Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.01.040 Grammatical Interpretation.
For the purpose of this title:

A.     All words used in the present tense shall include the future;

B.     All words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine;

C.    The word “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive;

D.    All words in the plural number shall include the singular number; and

E.     All words in the singular number shall include the plural number.

Chapter 18.04 GENERAL SEWER REGULATIONS
18.04.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Sewer Regulations Ordinance.” (Ord. 95-16)

 

18.04.020 Purpose of Rules and Regulations.
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to set forth the terms and conditions under which the City will authorize connections and provide sewer service to customers.

 

18.04.030 Sewer System.
The City will furnish a system, works and infrastructure used for and useful for collection of domestic and industrial sanitary sewage, including all parts of the enterprises, all appurtenances to it, and lands, easements, rights in land, contract rights, franchises, and other sewage collection facilities and equipment.

 

18.04.040 Sewer Service and Connection Conditions.
All applicants for sewer service or sewer connections shall be required to accept such conditions of connection and service as may be provided by the City. The construction, installation, or repair of sewer service laterals and house sewers and connections to the sewer main and sewer system shall be completed in accordance with all existing laws, ordinances, and rules of the City, County of San Diego, and the State of California or any department thereof. The type of sewage discharged into the sewer system shall meet the requirements and restrictions of the Encina Wastewater Authority or the San Elijo Joint Powers Authority as applicable. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.04.050 Tampering with City Property.
No one except an employee or representative of the City shall at any time in any manner operate the valves, motors, gates, machinery, sewage treatment plant, sewer utility holes, or siphons of the City system or interfere with sewer lines or other parts of the sewer system.

 

18.04.060 Damage to City Sewers.
No person shall willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or equipment which is part of the City’s sewer system. Any person who willfully or negligently damages any City sewer or facility thereto is liable for the cost of repair, including the cost of replacement thereof.

 

18.04.070 Right to Inspect and Enter Private Property for Work within Sewer Easements.
With the permission of the property owner, the officers, employees and agents of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall have the right to enter upon any premises within the City to inspect and determine if this title is being complied with, and for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, replacement and maintenance of any portion of the sewer system within any easements on the property.

 

18.04.080 Unlawful to Make Sewer Connection without Payment of Fee.
A.     No person shall connect to the City’s sewer system or sewer main without first submitting an application for sewer connection/capacity and obtaining the approval of the City Engineer authorizing such connection.

1.     Approval of the application shall be given if the applicant is able to deliver sewage to points and elevations designated by the City and has paid all related fees and charges.

2.     All applicants for new connections must be served within the boundary of the City or within the sphere of influence of the City with a submitted request for annexation into the City through the Local Agency Formation Commission procedure.

B.     It is unlawful for any person:

1.     To place, discharge or dispose of any material, solid or liquid, into the sewer system, or any part thereof, without first obtaining a permit from the City pursuant to this title, and without having first paid all fees required by this title; or

2.     To place, discharge or dispose of any substance into the sewer system except substances of waste materials originating on the premises to which a sewer connection permit has been issued. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.04.090 Enforcement Measures in Case of Delinquency.
When any fee or charge imposed by this title becomes delinquent, the enforcement agents are authorized to take any or all of the following actions in accordance with the law:

A.     Any steps authorized by law to collect fees and charges;

B.     Disconnect the premises from the City’s sewer system; prior to such disconnection, notice of such delinquency shall be given to the occupant of the premises by United States mail with return receipt, or by posting such notice on the premises; the occupant will be given the opportunity for informal hearing with the City Manager prior to disconnection, and if requested, within five days thereafter appeal to the City Council; concurrently with the disconnect, a copy of the City’s notice to occupant will be furnished to the regional office of the County Health Department. When a premises has been disconnected, it shall not be reconnected until all delinquent fees and charges have been paid, together with a charge for such disconnection and reconnection, as established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

18.04.100 Maintenance of Sewer Lateral.
A.     The property owner serviced by a sewer lateral shall be responsible for cleaning, maintaining and repairing the sewer lateral between the sewer main and the lateral connection to the structure.

B.     The property owner shall do such work at the property owner’s sole expense and only after the required permits have been issued.

C.    The owner of such property shall reimburse the City for work on sewer laterals for the removal of obstructions, when the work is designated as necessary for public safety. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.04.110 Restrictions Relating to Use of Public Sewers.
A.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water groundwater, unpolluted industrial process water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or any waters from an uncontaminated cooling system, swimming pool, decorative fountain or pond, into any public sewer or any private sewer which is connected to the public sewer without written permission from the City Engineer in conformance with adopted regulations.

B.     No person shall enter, obstruct, uncover, or tamper with any portion of the public sewer, or connect to it, or dispose septic tank/cesspool wastes, or dispose of anything into any sewer and/or sewer utility hole without the written permission of the City Engineer.

C.    No person shall remove or demolish any building or structures with plumbing fixtures connected directly or indirectly to the public sewer as follows:

1.     The person shall notify the City Engineer prior to commencing work;

2.     The person shall ensure that all openings in or leading to the public sewer line or lines caused by such work shall be sealed watertight; and

3.     The person shall ensure that the work is inspected by the City Engineer or his/her representative before being backfilled.

D.    No person shall fill or backfill over, or cause to cover, or obstruct access to, any sewer utility hole.

E.     No person shall erect any improvements, structures, or buildings over public sewers or sewer easements without the written permission of the City Engineer.

F.     Except as hereinafter provided in this section, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described substances, waters or wastes into any public sewer:

1.     Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 140 degrees Fahrenheit;

2.     Water or waste which may contain more than 200 mg/l for inorganic or 400 mg/l of organic concentration of fats oils, grease, or waxes, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit;

3.     Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;

4.     Toxic, noxious or malodorous liquid, solid, or gas deemed a public hazard and nuisance;

5.     Paints, or waste products from paint manufacture;

6.     Garbage that has not been properly shredded to a size of one-fourth inch or less so that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions in the public sewers;

7.     Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar plastics, wood, paunch manure, paper substances or normally dry, solid wastes capable of causing obstruction to the flow in or damage to sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works;

8.     Water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 11.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewerage works;

9.     Water or wastes containing any substance in sufficient quantity to discolor, injure, disrupt or interfere with the normal operation of any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to human or animal life, create a public nuisance, or significantly lower the quality of the receiving waters;

10.   Water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character or quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant;

11.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined in Section 18.01.020;

12.   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that may exceed limits established by the City Engineer in compliance with the applicable state or federal regulations;

13.   Water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which could otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations; or

14.   Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the treatment processes normally employed.

 

18.04.120 Pumping Interceptors/Grease Traps.
A.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any fats, greases, and waxes to the sewer system if their concentration and physical dispersion results in separation and adherence to sewer structures and appurtenances. If there is evidence of adherence of such materials to structures, or if such materials cause blockage in the sewer system, then the wastewater carrying such materials must be effectively pretreated by a process or device to effect removal from the flow before its discharge to the sewer system. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be installed when deemed necessary by the City Engineer for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease in excessive amounts, and flammable materials, sand, and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity acceptable to the City Engineer and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

B.     Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.

C.    All grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained in continuously efficient operation at all times by the owner at his or her expense. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the costs and the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, amounts, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

18.04.130 Surcharge.
Any person who discharges or causes to be discharged into the public sewers any water or wastes having more that 200 mg/l of inorganic or 400 mg/l of organic grease or oil shall be obligated to pay a surcharge, occasioned by the extent to which such water or waste contains an excess over the foregoing limitation of concentration, or by the estimated cost of the City services required to remedy the effect of the discharge.

 

18.04.140 Self-Regenerating or Automatic Water Softeners Prohibited.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to install or replace any plumbing equipment, including any automatic or self-regenerating water softener unit, the operation of which may result in the discharge of saline waste into the sewerage facilities, or the discharge of such wastes that might pollute any surface or underground stream, watercourse, lake or body of water, including any underground, natural or artificial storage reservoir, or which might impair or contribute to the impairment of the usefulness of such waters for human or animal consumption, or domestic, agricultural, industrial, or recreational purposes or for any other useful purpose.

B.     Self-regenerating water softener units which are found discharging to the City sewer shall be removed on demand of the City Engineer. Should any such installation not be removed on demand of the City Engineer, the City may remove such installation at the expense of the customer or take action to disconnect the premises in accordance with this title.

 

18.04.150 Septic Tanks.
See Municipal Code Section 11.04.020, subsections N and O.

 

18.04.160 Violation—Penalty.
For the failure to comply with all or any part of this title, any ordinance, resolution or order of the City pertaining to the delivery of public sewer services, in addition to any other penalty or remedy provide by law, the City may discontinue sewer service in accordance with an order of court. Any person violating any of the provisions of this title is liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage, and for any increase in the cost of maintenance or repair, occasioned by the City as a result of such violation.

Chapter 18.08 SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
18.08.010 Application for Sewer Connections and/or Monthly Sewer Service—Applicant Responsibilities.
A.     Applications. Applications for sewer connections and/or sewer service shall be submitted at the Public Works Department counter at the Civic Center on prescribed forms provided by the City.

B.     Compliance of Applicant. Application approved for sewer service and/or sewer connections will signify the applicant’s willingness and intention to comply with all ordinances and regulations relating to sewer service and/or connections and to make payment for such sewer service fees, connection/capacity fees, sewer construction permit deposits, and inspection fees, as well as other pertinent contingent fees set forth by resolution and by other applicable rules and regulations. (Ord. 97-04; Ord. 2014-12)

 

18.08.020 Sewer Connection/Capacity Fees.
A.     The sewer connection/capacity fee shall be set by ordinance. (See Health and Safety Code Section 5474.)

B.     Connection/capacity fees and inspection fees are due and payable at the time of application for a wastewater discharge permit. The number of equivalent dwelling units shall be used to compute the amount of the connection fee.

C.    If the proposed connection cannot be made, the fee will be refunded when approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 97-04)

 

18.08.025 Equivalent Dwelling Unit Determination.
A.     Residential. The number of equivalent dwelling units (EDUs) assigned to each structure is determined as follows:

 

1. Single-family residence

1.0 EDU per each individual dwelling unit, per lot (includes manufactured homes, and mobilehomes which are on private lots)

2. Residential condominiums

1.0 EDU per each individual living unit

3. All apartments and accessory units

0.8 EDU, regardless of number of bedrooms, per each individual living unit on the same lot

4. Mobile home and trailer parks, per each individual space (Any accessory facilities such as laundry, dining, recreational area, residence, etc., shall be considered separately in addition to trailer spaces, as per this chapter.)

a. Mobile home

0.5 EDU

b. Trailer space

0.5 EDU

c. Recreational vehicle park

0.5 EDU (occupied or not)

 

B.     Commercial/Industrial/School Facilities.

 

1. Food service establishments

 

a. Take-out restaurants with disposable utensils, no dishwasher, and no public restrooms

3.0 EDU

b. Miscellaneous food establishments: ice-cream/yogurt shops, bakeries, or equivalent (sales on premises only)

3.0 EDU

c. Take-out/eat-in restaurants with disposable utensils, but with minimum seating and public restrooms

3.0 EDU

d. Restaurants with re-usable utensils, seating and public minimum restrooms, includes cocktail bars

3.0 EDU

One EDU is assigned for each 6-seat unit as follows: 1-18 seats = 3.0 EDU (minimum) each additional 6-seat unit will be assigned 1.0 EDU. The number of seats will be equal to 80% of the maximum occupant load for the eating area as defined by the current Uniform Building Code.

2. Hotels and motels (any accessory facilities such as laundry, dining, recreational area, residence, etc., shall be considered separately in addition to living units, as per this chapter)

a. Per living unit without kitchen

0.38 EDU

b. Per living unit with kitchen

0.60 EDU

3. Commercial, professional, industrial buildings, to include markets, recreational facilities, full-service laundries/dry cleaners, mortuaries, and all variations thereof, and establishments not specifically listed herein

a. Any office, store, motor-vehicle wash, or industrial condominium or establishment

i. First 1,000 square feet

1.2 EDU

ii. Each additional 1,000 square feet or portion thereof

0.7 EDU

b. Where occupancy type or usage is unknown at the time of application for service, the following EDUs shall apply. This shall include, but not be limited to, shopping centers, industrial parks, and professional office buildings

i. First 1,000 square feet of gross building floor area

1.2 EDU

ii. Each additional 1,000 square feet of gross building floor area (portions less than 1,000 square feet will be prorated)

0.7 EDU

4. Self-service laundry, per washer

1.0 EDU

5. Churches, theaters, and auditoriums per each 150-person seating capacity, or fraction thereof (does not include office spaces, school rooms, day care facilities, food preparations areas, etc.; additional EDUs will be assigned for these supplementary uses)

1.5 EDU

6. Schools, to include day-care centers, boarding schools, or other combined youth educational, recreational and residential facilities

a. Elementary schools for 50 pupils or fewer

1.0 EDU

b. Junior high schools for 40 pupils or fewer

1.0 EDU

c. High schools for 24 pupils or fewer

1.0 EDU

Additional EDUs shall be prorated based on above values. The number of pupils shall be based on the average daily attendance of pupils at the school during the preceding fiscal year, computed in accordance with the education code of the State of California. However, where the school has had no attendance during the preceding fiscal year, the City Engineer shall estimate the average daily attendance for the fiscal year for which the fee is to be paid and compute the fee based on such estimate.

7. Convalescent homes (any accessory facilities such as laundry, dining, recreational area, residence, etc., shall be considered separately in addition to beds/residents, as per this chapter)

a. Skilled nursing care facilities, psychological hospitals, convalescent hospitals; licensed by the Department of Health

0.7 EDU/bed

b. Community care facilities with 16 or more beds licensed by the State Department of Health

0.5 EDU/bed

c. Small community care facilities with 7 to 15 beds licensed by the County Department of Social Services

0.5 EDU/bed

d. Community care homes with six or fewer total residents, including resident staff and housekeepers (to be the same EDU as a single-family residence)

1.0 EDU

8. Automobile service station

 

a. Four gasoline/diesel/natural gas pumps or less

2.0 EDU

b. More than four gasoline/diesel/ natural gas pumps

3.0 EDU

c. Each floor drain connected to sewer

0.5 EDU

9. Warehouse or equivalent, per four fixture unit increment

1.0 EDU

10. Other

In the case of commercial, industrial, and other establishments not included in Commercial/Industrial items (1) through (9) inclusive, or when the EDUs specified in items (1) through (9) are not representative of actual flow due to the number of employees or type of operation, the number of equivalent dwelling units shall be determined in each case by the City Engineer and shall be based upon the estimated volume and type of wastewater discharge into the sewer.

(Ord. 97-11; Ord. 98-10)

 

18.08.030 Sewer Service Charges.
A.     The sewer service charges shall be set by ordinance. (See Health and Safety Code Section 5471.)

B.     A sewer service charge is levied and charged upon each premises which discharges sewage that ultimately passes through the City’s sewer system.

C.    The property owner of record shall be responsible for payment of the sewer service charge. Any agreement between landlords and tenants to the contrary will not relieve the landlord or record owner of the property of the responsibility for payment of the sewer service charges to the City.

D.    Sewer service charges may be collected either through the tax roll of the County of San Diego, on the property’s water bill, or by issuing a manual bill for payment. The method utilized is determined by the Public Works Director or his/her designee.

E.     Payment of sewer service charges for new connections are paid for at the time the wastewater discharge permit is issued. If the permit is for an existing building the sewer service charges will be prorated for the fiscal year based upon the date the permit is issued. If the permit is for new construction or connection, then a time credit of four months shall be allowed when computing the amount of sewer service charges. This prorated amount shall be paid at the time the wastewater discharge permit is issued.

F.     Provided, however, in the case of other businesses and establishments that have unusual character insofar as sewage is concerned, the rate shall be established in each case by the City Manager or his/her designee. The rate so established shall be fixed in consideration of the estimated or actual volume of flow and suspended solids (ss) and/or biological oxygen demand (BOD) content from such.

G.    The annual sewer service charges for all properties discharging sewage that passes through the City’s sewer system, excluding schools, will be determined by applying the volume sewer charge per hundred cubic feet (HCF) for each customer classification to each parcel as determined by the water utility meter readings. The annual sewer service charges for schools shall be determined by applying the number of equivalent dwelling units (EDUs) assigned per the average daily attendance of pupils at the school at the current rate set by ordinance.

H.    The property owner of record at the time the annual sewer service charge is billed shall be responsible for the sewer service charge associated with the metered water use occurring during the time period in which it is recorded. (Ord. 98-10; Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.08.040 Sewer Service Outside City Limits.
When it appears to be in the best interest of the City and the people thereof, the City Engineer may prepare an agreement for property situated outside the City to be permitted to connect to the sewer system. The agreement may state the terms of connection, special conditions and limitations, cost for service, annexation fees, connection/capacity fees, and other conditions of sewer service. (Ord. 98-10)

 

18.08.050 Refunds, Back Charges, and Changes in Use Resulting in Different Rates, Sewer Service Charges and/or Connection/Capacity Fees.
A.     Increased Rates. Whenever the use of any premises previously connected to the City system is changed so that there is a fee applicable to such premises increased from that which existed at time original application was made, there shall immediately become due, owing and payable to the City the increase in fees applicable. The charges imposed by this regulation shall become delinquent 60 days following the date it becomes due.

B.     Back Charges for Unpaid Sewer Service. The City Engineer is authorized to require back charges in the event that a property has been discharging into the sewer system without payment of sewer service charges. The back charges may be imposed up to four years in arrears.

C.    Refund/Reduction of Sewer Service Charges and/or Connection/Capacity Fees. The Public Works Director is authorized to allow refunds of annual sewer service charges and/or connection/capacity fees to non-discharging parcel owners and to property owners which have been over-charged for sewer service and/or connection/capacity fees. The Public Works Director is authorized to discontinue charging non-discharging parcels for sewer and to reduce the sewer service charge of over-charged parcels. Only those amounts which were over-charged will be refunded, and without accrued interest. Refunds shall be issued for up to four years in arrears during which the property owner was over-charged for sewer service. (Ord. 97-04; Ord. 98-10)

 

18.08.060 Exceptions.
The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall have the power to grant exceptions and to establish policies for the granting of such exceptions from the established sewer service charges. Such exceptions shall only be granted when one or more of the following situations exist:

A.     Where the premises are not connected to the sewer system of the City.

B.     When water is supplied to premises through a separate water meter and such water is used entirely for irrigation purposes.

C.    Where the City has entered into a separate service agreement. (Ord. 98-10)

 

18.08.070 Adjustment of Sewer Service Charges Authority.
The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall have the power to adjust the annual sewer service charge when one or more of the following situations exist:

A.     When excessive water consumption is caused by unknown water pipe leaks and it is positively demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that above-mentioned water consumption is not discharged into the sewer system.

B.     Where it can be positively demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the percentage of return to sewer is less than the amount calculated for that customer classification due to a substantial portion of the water used for industrial, recreational, horticultural or agricultural purposes.

C.    When water is supplied to premises by more than one water meter and one or more of such additional water meters does not provide water which is discharged into the sewer system.

D.    When ownership of the parcel changes after the period during which the water meter readings are recorded and the amount of water used during that period is above the median annual water use for that customer classification. It must be positively demonstrated by the customer that the recorded amount is not representative of their actual consumption for the type of use. (Ord. 98-10)

 

18.08.080 Calculation of Annual Sewer Service Charge.
A.     Single-Family Residential. The annual sewer service charge for single-family residential customers shall be determined by applying the sewer charge per hundred cubic feet (HCF) to the adjusted annual water usage. For customers of the San Dieguito Water District, the service charge will be based on the two lowest bi-monthly water meter readings from December through May, multiplied by three to arrive at the annual water usage in HCF. For customers of the Olivenhain Municipal Water District, the service charge will be determined by combining monthly water meter readings from December through May to produce three bi-monthly readings. The service charge will be based on the lowest two readings multiplied by three to arrive at the annual water usage. The annual water usage is adjusted by applying a percentage return to sewer to determine the adjusted annual water usage. The minimum and maximum charges established by ordinance will apply to all single-family residential customers whose water utility meter readings fall under or over the established limits.

B.     Multifamily Residential. The annual sewer service charge for multifamily residential customers shall be determined in the same manner as for single-family residential customers. For multifamily residential customers with separate parcels sharing a single water utility meter, the annual total water usage shall be divided among the number of parcels served and applied to each parcel equally. The annual sewer service charge will be based on the adjusted annual water usage for the parcel. The minimum and maximum charges established by ordinance will apply on a per unit basis to all multifamily residential customers whose water utility meter readings fall under or over the established limits.

C.    Nonresidential. The annual sewer service charge for nonresidential customers shall be determined by applying the sewer charge per hundred cubic feet (HCF) to the adjusted annual water usage. The annual water usage is based on the prior 12 months metered water usage from May through April for the customer and is adjusted by applying a percentage return to sewer to determine the adjusted annual water usage. A minimum charge has been established for nonresidential customers.

D.    When less than two full bi-monthly billing periods (four full monthly periods for customers of the Olivenhain Municipal Water District) of metered water use is available from December through May for residential customers, the median annual water use for that customer classification, as set by ordinance, shall apply.

E.     When less than three full bi-monthly billing periods (six full monthly periods for customers of the Olivenhain Municipal Water District) of metered water use is available for nonresidential customers for the prior year, the median annual water use for that customer sub-classification, as set by ordinance, shall apply. When more than three full billing periods, but less than six full bi-monthly periods (12 full monthly periods for customers of the Olivenhain Municipal Water District) of metered water use is available for nonresidential customers for the prior year, the use shall be normalized to one year.

F.     When a single water meter serves more than one customer classification on a parcel, the highest strength classification will be used in determining the rate per 100 cubic feet of water usage.

G.    When no median annual water use exists for a nonresidential subclassification, the number of equivalent dwelling units assigned to the parcel for the purpose of determining the sewer connection/capacity fees shall be used, multiplied by the median annual sewer service charge for the single-family residential customer subclassification.

H.    When the nonresidential subclassification for a customer changes prior to the determination of the annual sewer service charge for the customer, the rate for the new subclassification shall apply and the annual water usage for each customer subclassification shall be used to determine the annual sewer service charge. (Ord. 98-10; Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.08.090 Challenge of Sewer Service Charge Determination.
A.     Administrative Review. The property owner of record or his/her designee subject to the sewer service charge may apply in writing to the Public Works Director or his/her designee for an exception or adjustment as hereinabove provided in Sections 18.08.060 and 18.08.070; however, no rebate of fees upon such exception shall be allowed for any fees paid one year or more preceding the filing of such application. The applicant shall complete an official application for review of annual sewer service charge, supplied by the Public Works Department. The applicant shall furnish necessary factual data to support such application. The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall review the application and approve or deny the application based on the information provided by the applicant.

B.     Appeal to City Manager. Upon denial or conditional approval by the Public Works Director or his/her designee, any applicant dissatisfied with such decision may appeal same to the City Manager.

C.    Appeal to City Council. Upon denial or conditional approval by the City Manager, any applicant dissatisfied with such decision may appeal same to the City Council. Such appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within 30 days after the notice of such decision. (Ord. 98-10)

 

18.08.100 Submeters.
If the property owner determines that it is in their best interest, a submeter may be used to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the percentage of return to sewer is less than the amount calculated for that customer classification.

A.     Readings obtained from submeters installed for the purpose of measuring exclusively indoor or outdoor water use in HCF may be used by the City for the purpose of calculating the annual water usage if the following conditions are met:

1.     An application requesting that the water readings from a sub-meter be considered in determining the annual sewer service charge be completed by the customer prior to the installation of a new sub-meter.

2.     The use of the submeter be pre-approved by the Public Works Director or his/her designee prior to installation.

3.     The submeter be connected to a water line exclusively used for indoor or outdoor water use.

4.     An annual service charge may be imposed by the respective water agency for the meter reading during which the usage is recorded. The above-mentioned charge shall be set by ordinance.

5.     An annual service charge may be imposed by the respective water agency for the meter reading during which the usage is recorded. The above-mentioned charge shall be set by ordinance.

B.     A penalty will be imposed by the City for any submeter found to be tampered with, adjusted, or improperly installed to produce false readings. (Ord. 2002-05)

Chapter 18.12 SEWER CONSTRUCTION REIMBURSEMENT CONNECTION FEE
18.12.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to allow a reimbursement connection fee at the time of connection when the sewer service has been made available by a private developer prior to the time that the City would have been able to make the sewer service available. The purpose of the reimbursement connection fee is to reimburse the person privately constructing the sewer main which is dedicated to the public and offered to the City. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.12.020 Procedure.
A.     The City and the developer may enter into a reimbursement agreement in which the developer agrees to dedicate the sewer main to the public and offer the main to the City.

B.     Upon acceptance of the sewer main by the City in accordance with Section 4742.3 of the Health and Safety Code, the City shall adopt an ordinance imposing a reimbursement connection fee for connections to that sewer main. The reimbursement connection fee shall be determined by the City Engineer and City’s administrative manual and shall provide funds to reimburse the developer for costs of the main which benefit other property owners which connect to the main. The reimbursement connection fee shall include a six percent per annum simple interest charge to partially compensate developer for his/her financing costs. The developer shall not be reimbursed for his/her fair share of the project costs (that portion of the improvement costs that directly benefits his or her development). The City shall return the collected reimbursement connection fees to the developer, less administration fees and any other costs or fees, in accordance with the terms of the reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.12.030 Term of Agreement.
The period over which special connection fees are collected shall be 20 years. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.12.040 Reimbursement of Costs by Benefiting Property Owners Connecting.
When a sewer main extension has been installed and a reimbursement agreement amount has been approved by the City Council, any benefiting property owner, prior to connection to the sewer main, who has not either him or herself or through his or her predecessor in interest contributed toward the cost of such installation, shall pay to the City, in addition to any sewer connection fees required by this Code or any other ordinance of the City, the reimbursement connection fee for such sewer main extension, at the rate provided for by ordinance of the City Council.

The following sewer reimbursement ordinances have been approved by the City Council. (Note: All references to “District” or “Cardiff Sanitation District” mean City or City of Encinitas.) (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.12.100 William J. Ackerman Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $7,750.00 plus six percent annual simple interest upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 92-01 (December 10, 1992), adopted by the board of the District for premises connecting directly to the sewer line (CS079) as shown on plan attached as Exhibit A to the “Reimbursement Agreement Between William J. Ackerman and the Cardiff Sanitation District,” on file in the Office of the District Clerk. The agreement states that the District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. This agreement expires on December 10, 2002. (Ord. 92-01)

 

18.12.120 Philip Boczanowski Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $1,330.00 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 89-03 (April 6, 1989), for premises connecting directly to the sewer line (PC1971) as shown on plan attached as Exhibit A to the “Reimbursement Agreement Between Philip Boczanowski and the Cardiff Sanitation District,” on file in the Office of the District Clerk. This agreement expires on April 6, 1999. (Ord. 89-03)

 

18.12.121 Raymond and Lilly Bosch and Mike and Katie Colton Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $7,112.71 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 96-01 (March 29, 1996), until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS183 located in Fortuna Ranch Road, generally west of Rancho Summit Drive and east of Akita Lane in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the District Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of Cardiff sanitation district Ordinance No. 96-01. The agreement states that the District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. This agreement expires on March 29, 2016. (Ord. 96-01)

 

18.12.122 Gary Bukamier Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $16,723.56 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 96-02 (January 17, 1997), until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting individual lateral(s) directly to the sewer facility known as CS121 running easterly in Fortuna Ranch Road, thence northerly and thence easterly in Bukamada Lane in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the District Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of Cardiff Sanitation District Ordinance No. 96-02. The agreement states that the District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. This agreement expires on January 17, 2017. (Ord. 96-02)

 

18.12.140 Reimbursement Fee—Cardiff Sanitary Division.
In addition to any other fees for connections to a public sewer main within the Division, there is established a reimbursement fee of $46,086.71 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of this Ordinance 2003-01 for each parcel which connects its lateral directly to the sewer main known as CS271 located in the vicinity of Bumann Road in Encinitas, as more fully set forth in the Notice of Competition CCE99D filed in the Office of the City Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of City of Encinitas Ordinance 2003-01, or until such time as the reimbursement agreement expires, whichever is sooner. (Ord. 2003-01)

 

18.12.160 DuVivier Company Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $1,240.00 per primary benefiting acre and $620.00 for each secondary benefiting acre that flows directly or indirectly through the sewer line (PC1846) plus six percent annual simple interest for premises connecting directly or indirectly to the sewer line as shown on plan attached as Exhibit “A” to the “Reimbursement Agreement Between Du Vizier Company and the Cardiff Sanitation District,” on file in the Office of the District Clerk. This agreement expires on January 16, 2007. (Ord. 86-58)

 

18.12.180 (Reserved: E).
 

18.12.200 (Reserved: F).
 

18.12.220 (Reserved: G).
 

18.12.240 Stephen and Karen Hoffman Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement fee of $11,140.01 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 98-03 (July 24, 1998) until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS193 located in Sereno View Lane, generally south of 9th Street and west of Rancho Santa Fe Road in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the District Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 10 years from the effective date of Cardiff Sanitation District Ordinance No. 98-03. This agreement expires on July 24, 2008. (Ord. 98-03)

 

18.12.241 Reimbursement Fee—Stephen and Karen Hoffman.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the Division, there is established a reimbursement fee of $11,140.01 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 98-03 (August 14, 1998) until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as SC193 located in Sereno View Lane, generally south of 9th Street and west of Rancho Santa Fe Road in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the Division Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 10 years from the effective date of City of Encinitas Ordinance 2008-18. (Ord. 2008-18)

 

18.12.260 (Reserved: I).
 

18.12.280 (Reserved: J).
 

18.12.300 (Reserved: K).
 

18.12.320 (Reserved: L).
 

18.12.340 Michael J. Mahon Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $2,264.16 plus six percent annual simple interest upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 91-04 (October 10, 1991), adopted by the Board of the District for premises connecting directly to the sewer line (PC1989) as shown on plan attached as Exhibit A to the “Reimbursement Agreement between Michael J. Mahon and the Cardiff Sanitation District,” on file in the Office of the District Clerk. The agreement states that the District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. This agreement expires on October 10, 2001. (Ord. 91-04)

 

18.12.341 C. Samuel and Anne Marasco Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement fee of $9,466.05 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 99-01 (July 30, 1999) until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS073 located in Cole Ranch Road, generally south of Lone Jack Road in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the District Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of Cardiff Sanitation District Ordinance No. 99-01. This agreement expires on July 30, 2019. (Ord. 99-01)

 

18.12.360 (Reserved: N).
 

18.12.380 Patrick O’Connor Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $1,900.00 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 89-02 (April 6, 1989), for premises connecting directly to the sewer line (PC1814) as shown on plan attached as Exhibit A to the “Reimbursement Agreement Between Patrick O’Connor and the Cardiff Sanitation District,” on file in the Office of the District Clerk. This agreement expires on April 6, 1999. (Ord. 89-02)

 

18.12.381 Olivenhain Sewer Joint Venture (John Cover) Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $4,012.00 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 93-01 (July 9, 1993), for premises connecting directly to the sewer line (PC1889, PC1906) as shown on plan attached as Exhibit A to the “Reimbursement Agreement,” on file in the Office of the District Clerk. The agreement states that the District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. This agreement expires on July 9, 2003. (Ord. 93-01)

 

18.12.400 (Reserved: P).
 

18.12.420 (Reserved: Q).
 

18.12.440 Michael Riley et al Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $3,966.00 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 93-06 (February 11, 1994), until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility know as CS025 running South in Rancho Santa Fe Road, thence westerly in Whisper Wind Drive in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the District Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of Cardiff Sanitation District Ordinance No. 93-06 (this agreement expires on February 12, 2014). The agreement states that the District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. (Ord. 93-06)

 

18.12.460 Schibler and Tracy Reimbursement Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the Division, there is established a reimbursement fee of $51,873.30 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 2004-01 until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS400 located in the vicinity of Fortuna Ranch Road and Akita Lane in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the Division Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of City of Encinitas Ordinance 2004-01. (Ord. 2004-01)

 

18.12.461 Reimbursement Fee—Sinnett.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the Division, there is established a reimbursement fee of $32,014.50 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 2008-17 until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS502 located in the vicinity of west side of Rancho Santa Fe Road in between Woodwind Drive and Encinitas Boulevard in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the Division Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of City of Encinitas Ordinance 2008-17. (Ord. 2008-17)

 

18.12.480 Paul Trester et al (9th Street Extension) Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $2,460.00 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from August 4, 1983 until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as PC1614 running north in Cole Ranch Road thence westerly in Ninth Street in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the District Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after August 4, 2003. The agreement states that the District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. (Ord. 93-04)

 

18.12.500 (Reserved: U).
 

18.12.520 (Reserved: V).
 

18.12.540 Ray Wakeham et al Reimbursement Connection Fee.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the District, there is established a reimbursement connection fee of $4,316.00 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 93-03 (November 12, 1993), until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS108 running West in Ninth Street, thence northwesterly in Sereno View Road in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the District Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 10 years from the effective date of Cardiff Sanitation District Ordinance No. 93-03 (this agreement expires on November 12, 2003). The agreement states that District retains an administrative fee which is five percent of the gross reimbursement connection fee. (Ord. 93-03)

 

18.12.541 Reimbursement Fee—Bruce Wiegand et al.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the Division, there is established a reimbursement fee of $10,624.50 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance 2003-02 until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS267 located in the vicinity of 5th Street and Rancho Santa Fe Road in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the Division Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of City of Encinitas Ordinance No. 2003-02. (Ord. 2003-02)

 

18.12.542 Reimbursement Fee—Walker and Harrison.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the Division, there is established a reimbursement fee of $10,861.36 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 2005-13 until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS403 located in the vicinity of Copper Crest Road in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the Division Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of City of Encinitas Ordinance No. 2005-13. (Ord. 2005-13)

 

18.12.560 (Reserved: X).
 

18.12.580 (Reserved: Y).
 

18.12.600 Reimbursement Fee—Zimdars et al.
In addition to any other fees for connections to sewer lines within the Division, there is established a reimbursement fee of $21,504 plus six percent annual simple interest computed from the effective date of Ordinance No. 2006-03 until paid for equivalent dwelling units connecting directly to the sewer facility known as CS303 located in the vicinity of Copper Crest Road in Olivenhain, as more fully set forth in the agreement filed in the Office of the Division Clerk. This section shall have no further effect on and after 20 years from the effective date of City of Encinitas Ordinance No 2006-03. (Ord. 2006-03)

Chapter 18.16 SEWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
18.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify some of the City’s requirements relating to sewer construction. (Ord. 95-16)

 

18.16.020 Sewer Utility Holes Must be Accessible by City Maintenance Vehicles.
The developer shall be required to grade an access road to maintain any public sewers constructed within easements and may be required to dedicate additional access easements to maintain the public sewers. All of the sewer utility holes must be accessible by vehicle. In order to be accepted into the City’s publicly maintained sewer system, all new sewer mains shall be constructed only within maintained roadways that have all-weather surfacing.

 

18.16.030 Installation of Sewer Lateral Connections from Main to the Property Lines are Required for Unconnected Properties When a Sewer Main is Constructed.
When a sewer main is constructed as part of a public right-of-way improvement plan, the developer is required to install sewer lateral connections to the property line for each developed, unconnected lot that could be served by that sewer main. This is to limit the construction on newly improved public roadways. In addition, the developer is required to show all the lateral locations on the improvement plan installed by the developer. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.16.040 Cost of Sewer Lateral Construction.
The expense of construction, installation, replacement, and maintenance of the sewer laterals are solely the responsibility of the applicant. Sewer lateral work in the public right-of-way requires a City permit. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.16.050 Separate Sewer Laterals.
Separate sewer laterals are required for each single-family dwelling, and condominium. However, a separate sewer lateral is not required for an approved accessory unit to a single-family dwelling, on the same lot. Every separate residential building or other building on one lot connected to the sewer main shall be separately and independently connected with the City sewer system. The exception to this rule, is the situation where there is a building in the rear of a lot without access to any other available sewer main. In this case, it may be connected with the sewer of the building in the front of the same lot. All condominiums shall have separate connections, unless a homeowner’s association is formed to manage and maintain the private sewer lateral. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.16.060 Privately Owned Sewer Pumps.
Private sewage discharge pumps may be permitted only if it can be determined that no other alternatives exists or that an unnecessary hardship is thereby created. Sewer pump proposals will require the applicants to have a civil engineer review the alternatives and submit their finds to the City Engineer for review. If the sewer pump is permitted, the property owner will assume all liability and responsibility associated with the maintenance and operation of the sewage pump. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.16.070 No Surface Water Connection Allowed to the Sewer System.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer.

 

18.16.080 Excavations to be Properly Barricaded and Noticed.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades, lights, and signage so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, sewer easements and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a timely manner, to the satisfaction of the City.

 

18.16.090 Sewer Utility Easements.
Sewer utility easements shall be obtained for all sewer main extensions, except for sewer mains to be located within a public street. Under no circumstances shall any structure be placed over or around any sewer main or extension, or within a City utility easement, unless an encroachment permit has been granted by the City Engineer.

 

18.16.100 Inspection.
Inspection of all sewer construction shall be made by personnel of the City or its authorized representative as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. Sewer construction shall include, but not be limited to sewers, pump stations, treatment plants, pretreatment facilities, food establishment facilities, or other facilities which discharge grease and oils that may cause blockages. Inspections may be made to determine that such facilities are being adequately maintained and operated and meet the provisions of this Code. Sewer facilities under construction shall be inspected periodically or as deemed necessary by the City Engineer to assure that construction conforms to the intent of the approved plans and specifications, City design standards and other applicable codes. No person shall bury or backfill new sewers or laterals until inspected by personnel of the City or its authorized representative. No person shall interfere with or delay entrance by an authorized City inspector attempting to inspect any sewer construction.

 

18.16.110 Responsibility for Damages to Sewers or Streets by Person Doing Work.
Any person who shall do or cause to be done work provided for in this chapter shall be liable for any damage to any sewer or to any public street or to any other public property.

 

18.16.120 Sewer Construction Permits.
A sewer construction permit must be issued before the material sewer connection can be made to the public sewer system. Prior to a sewer connection permit being issued the property must be within the jurisdiction of the City’s sewer system, and the wastewater discharge permit fees paid, as well as all other required sewer fees. In cases of sewer lateral installation in a new subdivision or on a public sewer main extension under construction, the issuance of wastewater discharge permits may be deferred until prior to issuance of any building permits. Right-of-way construction permits are required when sewer construction permits are issued for work in the public right-of-way. The cost of all soils and material testing, as well as the cost of any necessary special inspection, shall be directly borne by the applicant/developer. The applicant shall provide security guaranteeing proper completion of the work conforming to Section 23.36.130D of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code. A sewer construction permit shall be valid for a length of time not to exceed one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 97-04)

 

18.16.125 Requirements and Standards—City Engineer Authorization.
The City Engineer may authorize exceptions to requirements and standards contained in this chapter subsequent to issuing a finding of practicality and substantial consistency with the intent of this Code to the City Manager. The City Engineer may impose conditions on any exception necessary to preserve the intent of this Code. (Ord. 2002-05; Ord. 2017-07)

 

18.16.130 Sewer Lateral Cleanout Covers Required.
Cleanout caps or plugs are required on all cleanouts installed on sewer laterals and on all access points to the lateral. The cleanout above-ground access points shall be closed and water tight. (UPC707.1) (Ord. 97-04)

Chapter 18.20 COST RECOVERY FOR PROTECTIVE SEWER SERVICES
18.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for obtaining reimbursement from responsible persons for the expenses of any emergency response by the City to protect the public from sewage spills and other health and safety concerns related to sewage. (Ord. 95-16)

 

18.20.020 Sewage Spills are Unlawful.
In accordance with the Health and Safety Code Section 4476, a person who causes or allows to overflow, any sewage, sludge, cesspool or septic tank effluent or accumulation of human excreta, or any garbage, in or upon any street, alley, public highway, or road in common use or upon any public park or other public property, or upon any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement, license or otherwise is guilty of a misdemeanor. Section 1.08.030 of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code states that it is unlawful for any person to create, cause, commit or maintain a public nuisance within the City and that the violation of any regulatory provision of the City’s Code constitutes a public nuisance.

 

18.20.030 Reimbursements Required.
A person who acts negligently or in violation of the law and thereby requires the City to provide an emergency response to a danger posed by sewage and/or hazardous substances shall reimburse the City for the costs incurred. If the person does not immediately correct the cause and/or the resulting health and safety problem, then the City is hereby authorized to correct the problem situation at the person’s expense.

 

18.20.040 Report.
City personnel involved in an emergency response shall submit a report to the Public Works Director indicating:

A.     The costs incurred;

B.     The person or entity apparently responsible for reimbursing the City and the basis of the determination regarding responsibility.

 

18.20.050 Notice to Responsible Party.
A.     If it is reasonably likely that the party identified in the report is responsible for reimbursing the City, the Public Works Director may submit a demand to the identified party. The Public Works Director is authorized to accept a reasonable offer of reimbursement.

B.     The Public Works Director may set the matter for administrative hearing by the City Council. Notice of the date set for hearing and the report shall be sent to the person or entity to be charged together with a copy of administrative hearing procedures contained in the Municipal Code.

 

18.20.060 Action by City Council.
If the matter is referred to the City Council for administrative hearing, the City Council shall, by resolution:

A.     Confirm or disallow the charge, in full or in part;

B.     Determine the amount of the reimbursement owed by the party to the City; and

C.    Direct that the City commence collection proceedings against the party.

Chapter 18.24 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT
18.24.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Ordinance.” (Ord. 95-16)

 

18.24.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum beneficial public use of the City’s wastewater system through adequate regulation of sewer construction, sewer use, and industrial wastewater discharge, to provide for equitable distribution of the City’s costs, and to provide procedures for complying with wastewater discharge requirements placed upon the City by Encina Wastewater Authority, and other regulatory bodies.

 

18.24.030 Scope.
This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth herein and the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all waste into the City’s sewer system. This chapter provides for the regulation of sewer construction in areas within the former Encinitas Sanitary District boundaries, the quantity and quality of discharged wastes, the degree of wastewater pretreatment required, provision for fees and charges, the issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge, and the establishment of penalties for violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

 

18.24.040 Adherence to Pretreatment Ordinance of Encina Wastewater Authority.
The City of Encinitas is a member of the Encina Wastewater Authority and therefore has adopted the Encina Wastewater Authority’s Pretreatment Ordinance. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any such influent that is inconsistent with the Encina Wastewater Authority’s Pretreatment Ordinance, on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Encinitas, and any amendments thereto. In the event of any inconsistencies between regulations approved by Encina Wastewater Authority, the City Council and other regulations adopted by the City, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.

 

18.24.045 Adherence to Pretreatment Sections of the Encinitas Municipal Code.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any such influent that is inconsistent with the Encinitas Municipal Code sections on pretreatment, on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and any amendments thereto. In the event of any inconsistencies between regulations approved by the City of Encinitas Municipal Code sections on pretreatment, and San Elijo Joint Powers Authority, and other regulations adopted by the City, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.24.050 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Required.
No person shall connect to or otherwise discharge, or cause to be discharged into the sewer system of the City, any industrial waste unless the City Engineer determines that such discharge meets the industrial waste discharge standards established by the rules or regulations adopted as herein provided, in which case no industrial waste permit shall be required. If the discharge does not meet the industrial waste discharge standards established by this title, then an industrial waste discharge permit is required.

 

18.24.060 Issuance of Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit.
Industrial wastewater permits may be co-issued by the City and the Encina Wastewater Authority or by the City and San Elijo Joint Powers Authority, according to this Code and Encina Wastewater Authority or San Elijo Joint Powers Authority regulations. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly to sewerage facilities without first obtaining a permit for industrial wastewater discharge. The permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require pretreatment of industrial waste before discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, prohibition of discharge of certain waste components, restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs created by the waste discharge, and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.

No permit shall be issued to any person to discharge industrial waste into the sewer system of the City if such discharge will be a hazard or danger to the health or safety of any person or to the property of any person or if such discharge will result in a danger to the capacity, construction, use or proper performance or utilization of the sewer system or be otherwise detrimental or injurious to such systems or either of them, and unless the applicant has complied with all state, federal, and local laws and with all the provisions of this Code and with all applicable rules and regulations adopted as provided for in this title. (Ord. 2002-05)

 

18.24.070 Fees for Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits.
Fees may be charged by the City for industrial wastewater discharge permits, for both the issuance of original permits and renewals.

 

18.24.080 Pretreatment Plans Required.
In the event the City Engineer determines that pretreatment is required to make the waste acceptable, the applicant shall be so notified and shall submit suitable engineering plans and specifications showing in detail the proposed pretreatment facilities and pretreatment operational procedures which shall be included within and become a part of the original application. A permit shall not be issued until such plans, specifications and operational procedures have been reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.

 

18.24.090 Access for Monitoring.
When required by the City Engineer, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastewater shall install monitoring and recording equipment, and a suitable control access hole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such access hole shall be readily accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans by the City Engineer. The access hole shall be installed and maintained by the owner at the owner’s expense. If no special access hole is available, the sampling location shall be determined by the City Engineer, which may be the nearest downstream utility hole from the point at which the building sewer is connected.

 

18.24.100 Self-Monitoring and Reporting.
All industrial users shall be subject to self-monitoring and reporting requirements. The requirements for each applicable user shall be determined by the City Engineer and included in the user’s discharge permit.

 

18.24.110 Public Access to Information.
Information and data provided by an industrial user identifying the nature and frequency of a discharge shall be available to the public without restriction. Any information or data which is submitted or which may be furnished by a user in connection with required periodic reports shall also be available to the public unless the user or other interested person specifically identifies and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the disclosure of such information or a particular part thereof to the general public would divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets.

 

18.24.120 Revisions to Permits.
The City Engineer shall be empowered to revise discharge permit requirements to comply with evolving federal, state, and local laws. Permit revisions or modifications shall not be inconsistent with applicable federal pretreatment standards.

 

18.24.130 Permit Expiration, Transference, Revocation or Suspension.
Any permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a specified period, and is not transferable unless such permit is revoked or suspended as provided in this title and in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

 

18.24.140 Violation—Disconnection of Facilities—Reconnection Charge.
The City Engineer may revoke or suspend the permit issued to any person in the event of a violation by the permittee of any provision of any applicable state, federal or local laws or this chapter or of any of the rules and regulations adopted in the manner provided for herein. The City Engineer, in accordance with the law, may disconnect from the public sewer any connection to a sewer, main line sewer, or other facility which is constructed, connected or used without a permit, or constructed, connected or used contrary to any of the provisions of any applicable federal, state, or local law or this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted as provided for in this chapter. When a premises has been disconnected, it shall not be reconnected until the violation for which it was disconnected has ceased or been remedied and a reasonable charge for such disconnection and reconnection, as established by the City Engineer, has been paid.

 

18.24.150 Notice of Intention to Disconnect Premises.
The City Engineer shall give not less than five days notice of intention to disconnect the premises or to suspend or revoke a permit, stating the reasons therefor, and may grant a reasonable time for elimination of the violation; provided, however, that if the City Engineer determines that the danger is imminent and such action is necessary for the immediate protection of the health, safety or welfare of the persons or property or for the protection of the sewer system, any premises may be disconnected and service terminated concurrently with the giving of such notice. Notice shall be given to the occupant of the premises, if any, and to the record owner of the property as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll of the County of San Diego by United States mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, or by posting such notice on the premises.

 

18.24.160 Enforcement.
The City Engineer is charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted as provided in this chapter. The City Engineer and the City/Encina Wastewater Authority’s duly authorized agents and employees are authorized and shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at all reasonable times, and during operating hours of businesses for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, or other reasons to assure the enforcement and proper application of all the provisions, rules and regulations as provided in this chapter.

Title 19 RESERVED

Title 20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 20.08 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT

Chapter 20.08 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ord. No. 2008-07.

 

20.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Ordinance.” (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.020 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by regulating all discharges into the stormwater conveyance system and the Waters of the State in order to preserve and enhance water quality for beneficial uses by:

A.     Prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system;

B.     Eliminating pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable, including pollutants from both point and non-point sources;

C.    Prohibiting activities which cause, or contribute to, exceedance of state and federal receiving water quality objectives;

D.    Protecting watercourses from disturbance and pollution.

The intent of this chapter is to use the police power of the city to protect, enhance, and regulate water quality in a manner which complies with all applicable laws related to water quality, including the federal Clean Water Act, the state Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and the California Regional Water Quality Control Board San Diego Region Order No. R9-2013-0001 adopted on May 8, 2013, NPDES No. CAS0109266 and any subsequent amendments, revisions, or reissuance of the permit. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter only, the terms below have the following meaning:

“Beneficial uses” means uses of water necessary for the survival or well-being of humans, plants, and wildlife. These uses of water serve to promote the tangible and intangible economic, social, and environmental goals. Beneficial uses of the Waters of the State that may be protected against include, but are not limited to, domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply; power generation; recreation; aesthetic enjoyment; navigation; and preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources or preserves. Existing beneficial uses are uses that were attained in the surface or groundwater on or after November 28, 1975; and potential beneficial uses are uses that would probably develop in future years through the implementation of various control measures. Beneficial uses are equivalent to designated uses under federal law. [California Water Code Section 13050(f)].

“Best management practices” or “BMPs” means schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, operation and maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or the stormwater conveyance system. BMPs may be structural or non-structural. Best management practices include, but are not limited to, site design, source control, treatment control, natural design methods, low flow diversions to the sewer, and structures such as infiltration basins, clarifiers, oil and grease separators, and filters. BMPs may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure that can help to achieve compliance with this chapter.

“BMP maintenance” refers to the regular action taken to maintain the as-designed performance and functionality of a permanent or temporary BMP, and includes, but is not limited to, repairs to the BMP as necessary, and replacement of the BMP by an equally effective or more effective BMP at the end of its useful life.

“City” means the City of Encinitas.

“Clean Water Act Section 303(d) Impaired Water Body” or “impaired water body” means an impaired water body in which water quality does not meet applicable water quality standards and/or is not expected to meet water quality standards, even after the application of technology based pollution controls required by the Clean Water Act. The discharge of urban runoff to these water bodies is significant because these discharges can cause or contribute to violations of applicable water quality standards.

“Discharge” when used as a verb, means to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter stormwater, or to allow stormwater or non-stormwater to directly or indirectly enter the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters, from an activity or operations. When used as a noun, “discharge” means the pollutants, stormwater and/or non-stormwater that is discharged.

“Discharger” means any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities, which may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters. “Dischargers” include, but are not limited to, real and personal property owners, occupants, tenants, lessees, contractors, developers, managers and employees.

“Enforcement staff” means any City employee or authorized contractor hired by the City who is assigned to duties involving permits and other City approvals, inspections, or enforcement related to this chapter.

“Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs)” include, but are not limited to, all Clean Water Act Section 303(d) impaired water bodies; areas designated as Areas of Special Biological Significance by the State Water Resources Control Board (Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994) and amendments); water bodies designated with the RARE beneficial use by the State Water Resources Control Board (Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin (1994) and amendments); areas designated as preserves or their equivalent under the Multi-Species Conservation Program within the cities and County of San Diego; and any other similar environmentally sensitive areas which have been identified by the City. “Directly adjacent” means situated within 200 feet of the Environmentally Sensitive Area. “Discharging directly to” means outflow from a drainage conveyance system that is composed entirely of flows from the subject development or redevelopment site, and not commingled with flows from adjacent lands.

“Groundwater” means subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated. Water table is the depth or elevation at which soil pore spaces or fractures and voids become completely saturated with water.

“Illegal connection” means a physical connection to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters, which has not been reviewed and authorized by the City; or a permitted connection, which conveys illegal discharges.

“Illegal discharge” is any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that is not composed entirely of stormwater or is not discharged in compliance with this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, discharges of non-stormwater that are not exempt as defined by this chapter, discharges of irrigation runoff to the MS4, any discharge from an illegal connection, and any discharge that contains additional pollutants due to the absence of a required BMP or the failure of a BMP. Discharges that require a City permit or a RWQCB permit that has not been issued or has not been acknowledged by the discharger to be applicable are illegal discharges. Discharges regulated under an applicable NPDES permit are illegal discharges for purposes of this chapter unless compliance with all applicable permit conditions is maintained.

“Impervious surface” means constructed or modified surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall such as building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.

“Impervious surface area” means the ground area covered or sheltered by an impervious surface, measured in plan view, i.e., as if from directly above. For example, the “impervious surface area” for a pitched roof is equal to the ground area it shelters, rather than the surface area of the roof itself.

“Maximum extent practicable” or “MEP” refers to the standard established by Congress in Clean Water Act Section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) that municipal dischargers of stormwater must meet; MEP is an acceptability standard for best management practices based on a level of pollutant reduction that can be achieved by the most effective set of BMPs that can be implemented and still remain practicable; MEP generally emphasizes pollution prevention and source control BMPs as the first line of defense in combination with treatment methods as a backup.

“Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)” (see also, “stormwater conveyance system”) means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains): (1) owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; (2) designated or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; (3) which is not a combined sewer; (4) which is not part of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.26.

“MS4 permit” refers to RWQCB Order No. R9-2013-0001, and any subsequent amendments, revisions, or reissuance of the permit.

“Non-point source” refers to diffuse, widespread sources of pollution. These sources may be large or small, but are generally numerous throughout a watershed. Non-point sources include, but are not limited to, urban, agricultural, or industrial areas, roads, highways, construction sites, communities served by septic systems, recreational boating activities, timber harvesting, mining, livestock grazing, as well as physical changes to stream channels, and habitat degradation. Non-point source pollution can occur year round any time rainfall, snow melt, irrigation, or any other source of water runs over land or through the ground, picks up pollutants from these numerous, diffuse sources and deposits them into rivers, lakes, and coastal waters or introduces them into groundwater.

“Non-stormwater discharge” is any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

“NPDES permit” means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board (“SWRCB”), or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego Region (“RWQCB”).

“Permanent BMP” means a structural, source control, or treatment control best management practice designed to detain, retain, filter, remove and/or prevent the release of pollutants to surface waters from development projects and required to remain in perpetuity, after construction of a project is completed.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, non-profit organization, trust, association, or governmental agency.

“Point source” means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operations, landfill leachate collection systems, vessel, or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.

“Pollutant” is broadly defined as any agent that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality such that a condition of pollution or contamination is created or aggravated.

“Pollution” is the alteration of the quality of the receiving waters to a degree that unreasonably affects the beneficial use of the receiving waters or the facilities that serve the beneficial uses. “Pollution” also includes contamination which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or the spread of disease.

“Receiving waters” means all waters that are “Waters of the State” within the scope of the State Water Code, including, but not limited to, natural streams, creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, ponds, water in vernal pools, lagoons, estuaries, bays, the Pacific Ocean, and groundwater.

“RWQCB” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego Region.

“Stormwater” means runoff which originates from precipitation events. “Stormwater” is that portion of precipitation that flows across a surface to the storm drain system or receiving waters. Examples of this phenomenon include: the water that flows off a building’s roof when it rains (runoff from an impervious surface); the water that flows into streams when snow on the ground begins to melt (runoff from a semi-pervious surface); and the water that flows from a vegetated surface when rainfall is in excess of the rate at which it can infiltrate into the underlying soil (runoff from a pervious surface). During precipitation events in urban areas, rain water picks up and transports pollutants through stormwater conveyance systems, and ultimately to receiving waters.

“Stormwater conveyance system” (see also, “MS4”) means private and public drainage facilities within the City of Encinitas by which stormwater may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including, but not limited to, streets, roads, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, natural and artificial drainage features, aqueducts, canyons, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, and storm drains. Historic and current development makes use of natural drainage patterns and features as conveyances for urban runoff. Urban streams used in this manner are part of the stormwater conveyance system regardless of whether they are natural, man-made, or partially modified features. In these cases, the urban stream is both a stormwater conveyance system and a receiving water.

“Structural BMP” means a BMP that relies on either a physical condition (other than an entirely natural and undisturbed condition), or on a constructed or installed device to reduce or prevent pollutants in stormwater discharges and exempt non-stormwater discharges. Constructed or enhanced BMPs that depend on natural materials and processes (e.g., constructed drainage swales or buffers, or constructed wetlands), that require periodic maintenance to function as designed, are structural BMPs.

“SWRCB” means the State Water Resources Control Board.

“Treatment control best management practice (TCBMP)” is a permanent BMP designed to remove pollutants by gravity settling, filtration, biological uptake, media absorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process.

“Waters of the State” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of California. The definition of the “Waters of the State” is broader than that for the “Waters of the United States” in that all water in the state is considered to be a “Waters of the State” regardless of circumstances or condition. Under this definition, a municipal storm sewer system (MS4) is always considered to be a “Waters of the State” (California Water Code Section 13050(e)).

“Waters of the United States” means water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the Federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. In general, this includes “navigable” waters, waters tributary to “navigable” waters, and adjacent wetlands. (40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 122.2). (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.040 Discharge Prohibitions.
A.     Discharge of Stormwater. No person shall discharge stormwater directly or indirectly into the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters, unless discharged in compliance with this chapter.

B.     Discharge of Non-Stormwater Prohibited. No person shall discharge non-stormwater directly or indirectly into the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters, except as provided below in Section 20.08.050.

C.    Liability for Illegal Discharge. Liability for any illegal discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing, contributing, or responsible for the illegal discharge, and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharges.

D.    Prevention of Illegal Discharges. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place that results in or contributes to a violation of the MS4 permit is unlawful.

E.     Violations of the MS4 permit. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or threaten to cause, either individually or jointly any discharge into or from the MS4 that results in or contributes to a violation of the MS4 permit. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.050 Exemptions to Discharge Prohibitions.
A.     Permitted Discharges. Any discharge to the MS4 that is regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California pursuant to Division 7 of the California Water Code is allowed, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations.

B.     Groundwater Discharges Typically Requiring Permits. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from the following categories are allowed if: (i) the discharger obtains coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2008-0002, or subsequent order) for discharges to surface waters other than San Diego Bay, and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the applicable NPDES permit and all other applicable laws and regulations; or (ii) the RWQCB determines in writing that coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (or subsequent permit) is not required. Otherwise, non-stormwater discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges:

1.     Discharges from uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

2.     Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year;

3.     Discharges from water from crawl space pumps;

4.     Discharges from water from footing drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year.

C.    Discharges from Water Lines. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from water line flushing and water main breaks are allowed if the discharges have coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG679001 (Regional Water Quality Control Board Order No. R9-2010-0003, or subsequent order), and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of that NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. This category includes water line flushing and water main break discharges from water purveyors issued a water supply permit by the California Department of Public Health or federal military installations. Discharges from recycled or reclaimed water lines to the MS4 are allowed if the discharges have coverage under an NPDES permit, and the discharger is in compliance with the applicable NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. Otherwise, discharges from water lines are illegal discharges.

D.    Allowable Discharges. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from the following categories are allowed, unless the authorized enforcement staff or the Regional Water Quality Control Board identifies the discharge as a source of pollutants to receiving waters, in which case the discharge is considered an illegal discharge:

1.     Discharges from diverted stream flows;

2.     Discharges from rising groundwater;

3.     Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the MS4;

4.     Discharges from springs;

5.     Discharges from flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

6.     Discharges from potable water sources, except as set forth in Encinitas Municipal Code Section 20.08.050 and except that irrigation runoff discharges are considered illegal discharges and are not allowed;

7.     Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-stormwater discharges under unusual circumstances; and

8.     Discharges from footing drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-stormwater discharges under unusual circumstances.

E.     Conditionally Allowed Discharges. Non-stormwater discharges from the following categories are allowed if they are addressed as follows. Otherwise, non-stormwater discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges:

1.     Air Conditioning Condensation. Air conditioning condensation shall be directed to landscaped areas or other pervious surfaces, or to the sanitary sewer, where feasible, as determined by the authorized enforcement staff.

2.     Individual Residential Vehicle Washing. Wash water from individual residential vehicle washing should be directed to landscaped areas or other pervious surfaces, where feasible as determined by the authorized enforcement staff. Minimizing water use, detergent, and other vehicle wash products, and other BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 are encouraged. Non-commercial car washes, such as fundraisers and other similar activities, are not considered individual residential vehicle washing, and are therefor considered illegal discharges.

3.     Water From Swimming Pools.

a.     Chlorinated Swimming Pool Water. Chlorine, algaecide, filter backwash, and other pollutants shall be eliminated prior to discharging swimming pool water to the MS4.

b.     Saline Swimming Pool Water. Saline swimming pool water must be directed to the sanitary sewer, landscaped areas, or other pervious surfaces that can accommodate the volume of water, unless the saline swimming pool water can be discharged through a pipe or concrete channel directly to a naturally saline water body.

F.     Firefighting Activities. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from firefighting activities are allowed if they are addressed as follows:

1.     Non-Emergency Firefighting Discharges. Non-emergency firefighting discharges, including building fire suppression system maintenance discharges (e.g. sprinkler line flushing), controlled or practice blazes, training, and maintenance activities shall be addressed by BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4.

2.     Emergency Firefighting Discharges. BMPs are encouraged to prevent pollutants from entering the MS4. During emergencies, priority of efforts should be directed toward life, property, and the environment (in descending order). BMPs shall not interfere with emergency response operations or impact public health and safety.

G.    Conditionally Allowed Discharges Not Absolute. Any conditionally allowed discharge described above which the enforcement staff determines is a significant source of pollutants to receiving waters shall be prohibited unless the discharger complies with additional BMPs imposed by the enforcement staff to reduce pollutants in the discharge to the maximum extent practicable and the BMPs are effective. Such prohibitions shall take effect after written notice to the discharger by the enforcement staff containing a schedule for compliance based on the necessity to protect public health and safety or the environment. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.060 Notification and Mitigation of Illegal Discharges.
A discharger shall immediately notify enforcement staff of an illegal discharge and take immediate action to control and contain the illegal discharge. The discharger shall also mitigate any damage caused by the illegal discharge.

The enforcement staff may order the discharger to prepare and implement an approved mitigation plan with a time schedule for completion. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.070 Illegal Connections.
No person shall establish, use, or maintain an illegal connection to the stormwater conveyance system or the receiving waters. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.080 Littering and Sweeping.
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, pet waste, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, in or upon any street, alley, parking lot, sidewalk, curb, gutter, storm drain, catch basin, conduit, or other drainage structure or lot except in receptacles maintained for the regular disposal of garbage. Impervious surfaces which drain directly or indirectly into the stormwater conveyance system shall be kept free of dirt and debris by regular sweeping. The sweepings shall be placed in garbage receptacles and shall not be allowed to enter the stormwater conveyance system. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.090 Compliance with Best Management Practices (BMPs).
No discharger shall fail to implement, install, use, or maintain best management practices pursuant to the Stormwater Standards Manual and to this chapter. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.100 Conclusive Determination of Maximum Extent Practicable.
The best management practices established pursuant to the Stormwater Standards Manual and to this chapter shall reduce pollutants from the use or activity to the maximum extent practicable. For purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the enforcement staff’s determination of the maximum extent practicable shall be conclusive. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.110 Best Management Practices (BMP) Requirements for All Dischargers.
Best Management Practices. Any person engaged in activities which may result in discharges to the stormwater conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, undertake all measures to reduce the risk of non-stormwater discharges and pollutant discharges. The following requirements shall apply:

A.     Every person undertaking any activity or use of a premises that may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, or non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 shall comply with BMP guidelines or pollution control requirements, as may be established by the authorized staff. BMPs shall be maintained routinely throughout the life of the activity. Such BMPs include the minimum BMPs set forth in the Stormwater Standards Manual.

B.     Authorized enforcement staff may require any business or operation that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to the MS4 to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, which must include an employee training program and the applicable minimum BMPs from the Stormwater Standards Manual.

C.    Each discharger that is subject to any NPDES permit shall comply with all requirements of all such permits. The discharger must also make reports submitted to the RWQCB or other permitting agency, including monitoring data, available to the City upon request.

D.    Parties undertaking land disturbance activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter, the Stormwater Standards Manual, Engineering Design Manual and Encinitas Municipal Code Chapter 23.24 (Grading and Erosion Control). (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.120 BMP Requirements for Land Disturbance Activity.
A.     Permit Issuance. No landowner or development project proponent shall receive any City grading, clearing, building or other land development permit required for land disturbance activity without first meeting the requirements of this chapter and the Stormwater Standards Manual with respect to the portion of the development project and the land disturbance activity to which the permit at issue would apply.

B.     Owners and Operators both Responsible and Liable. Persons or entities performing land disturbance activities (including, but not limited to, construction activities) in the City, and the owners of land on which land disturbance activities are performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

C.    Plan Submittals. All applications to the City for a permit or approval associated with a land disturbance activity must demonstrate how the proposed activity will comply with all applicable requirements in a format specified by the City. The submitted materials shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the BMPs required by this chapter and the Engineering Design Manual for the activity at issue. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.130 Requirements for Development and Redevelopment Projects.
A.     Application to Development and Redevelopment Projects. No landowner or development project proponent in the City shall receive any City grading, clearing, building or other land development permit required for land development activity or redevelopment activity unless the project meets or will meet the requirements of this chapter and the applicable requirements defined in the Engineering Design Manual.

B.     Owners and Developers Responsible and Liable. Developers, development project proponents, and landowners for land on which development activities are performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

C.    Permanent Best Management Practices Required. Land development and redevelopment activities with the potential to add pollutants to stormwater or to affect the flow rate or velocity of stormwater runoff after construction is completed, shall be designed to include and shall implement BMPs to ensure that pollutants and runoff from the development will be reduced to the MEP, will not significantly degrade receiving water quality, and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards in accordance with the requirements defined in the Engineering Design Manual. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.140 Maintenance of BMPs.
A.     Existing Development. Dischargers shall maintain the designed functionality of the BMPs they rely upon to achieve and maintain compliance with this chapter.

B.     Permanent BMPs. The owners and occupants of lands on which permanent BMPs have been installed to meet the requirements of this chapter shall ensure the maintenance of those BMPs pursuant to this chapter, and shall themselves maintain those BMPs if other persons or entities who are also obliged to maintain those BMPs (by contract or covenant, or pursuant to this chapter) fail to do so.

C.    Maintenance Obligations Assumed by Covenant or Other Agreement. Primary responsibility to maintain a BMP may be transferred through a covenant or other agreement. If that covenant provides that it will be submitted to the City pursuant to this chapter as part of a development permit application, and if that covenant is so submitted, the person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a covenant or agreement will also be legally obliged to maintain that BMP pursuant to this chapter.

D.    Obligation to Maintain BMPs not Avoided by Covenants or Other Agreements. For purposes of City enforcement, no covenant or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by this chapter.

E.     Disclosure of Maintenance Obligations. Any developer who transfers ownership of land on which a BMP is located or will be located, or who otherwise transfers ownership of a BMP or responsibility for the maintenance of a BMP to another person or entity, shall provide clear written notice of the maintenance obligations associated with that BMP to the new or additional responsible party prior to that transfer.

F.     Maintenance Plans for Land Development Activities. The proponents of any land development activity or redevelopment activity that requires installation of permanent BMPs shall provide to the City for review and approval prior to issuance of permits for the project, a plan for maintenance of all permanent BMPs associated with the project in accordance with the Engineering Design Manual. The plan shall specify the persons or entities responsible for maintenance activity, the persons or entities responsible for funding, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the BMPs, worker training requirements, and any other activities necessary to ensure BMP maintenance. The plan shall provide for servicing of all permanent BMPs, at least annually, and for the retention of inspection and maintenance records for at least three years.

G.    Access for Maintenance. Permanent BMPs shall be provided adequate access for long-term inspection and maintenance purposes.

H.    Assurance of Maintenance for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development activity or redevelopment activity that requires a City permit shall provide to the City, prior to issuance of permits for the project, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the City which will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all permanent BMPs associated with the proposed project. The proponents shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless, and until, an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the City and becomes effective.

I.      Permanent BMP Inspection and Maintenance Verification. The owners and occupants of lands on which permanent BMPs have been installed to meet the requirements of this chapter shall maintain records of routine inspection and maintenance of permanent BMPs. Records shall be submitted to the City upon request. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.150 Discharger Sampling, Testing, Monitoring, and Reporting.
A.     The enforcement staff may require dischargers to perform sampling, testing, monitoring and reporting of results as a best management practice. In addition, the enforcement staff may order a discharger to conduct testing or monitoring and to report the results to the City in any of the following scenarios:

1.     The enforcement staff determines that testing or monitoring is needed to determine whether BMPs are effectively preventing or reducing pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable, or to determine whether the facility is a significant source of contaminants to Waters of the State; or

2.     The enforcement staff determines that testing or monitoring is needed to assess the impacts of an illegal discharge on health, safety or the environment; or

3.     An illegal discharge has not been eliminated after written notice by the enforcement staff; or

4.     The discharger is in violation of any provision of this chapter, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board requires the City to provide information on the discharger’s activities.

B.     Testing and monitoring ordered pursuant to this section may include the following:

1.     Visual monitoring of dry weather flows, wet weather erosion, or BMPs;

2.     Visual monitoring of premises for spills or discharges;

3.     Laboratory analyses of stormwater or non-stormwater discharges for pollutants;

4.     Background or baseline monitoring or analysis; and

5.     Monitoring of receiving waters or sediments that may be affected by pollutant discharges by the discharger.

C.    The enforcement staff may direct the time and manner in which the results of required testing and monitoring are reported, and shall determine when required sampling, testing or monitoring may be discontinued. The sampling, testing, monitoring and reporting shall be at the expense of the discharger. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.160 City Authority to Sample, Inspect and Monitor.
A.     Regulatory Inspections. The enforcement staff or designee may inspect the premises of any discharger at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to carry out the purposes of this chapter. If a discharger refuses to allow entry for an inspection, an inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to inspection.

B.     Scope of Inspections. Inspections may include all actions necessary to determine whether any illegal discharges or illegal connections exist, whether the BMPs installed and implemented are adequate to comply with this chapter, whether those BMPs are being properly maintained, and whether the discharger complies with other requirements of this chapter. This may include sampling, metering, monitoring, visual inspections, and records review. Where samples are collected the discharger may request and receive split samples. Records, reports, analyses, or other required information may be inspected and copied, and photographs taken for purposes of enforcement of this chapter.

C.    Installation of Sampling Devices. As part of the inspection, the enforcement staff may authorize the installation of sampling or metering devices. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.170 Establishment of a Fee.
The City Council may establish a fee by resolution to recover the cost of inspection, sampling, metering, or monitoring by the enforcement staff. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.180 Violation of a State NPDES Permit.
A violation of an NPDES stormwater permit other than the MS4 permit that results in or threatens to result in a discharge of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system shall also be considered a violation of this chapter and may be enforced as such. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.190 Permits and Approvals.
Compliance with this chapter shall be a condition of every permit or approval granted or issued by the City. Failure to comply with this chapter shall be grounds for revocation of any such permit or approval. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.200 Violation is a Nuisance.
The City Council hereby declares that any violation of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.210 Enforcement of this Chapter.
A.     Misdemeanor Violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or both fine and imprisonment. Any such violation may be charged as an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for a first or second offense in one year, and not to exceed $1,000.00 for a third violation in one year.

B.     Orders of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director is authorized to issue cease and desist orders or stop work orders to any person who is in violation of this chapter. Failure to comply with a written order of the Public Works Director shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for the imposition of the civil penalties described in this section.

C.    Civil Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, for each day the violation is committed, continued, permitted or maintained. The civil penalties may be imposed by the enforcement staff after written notice and a hearing before the City Manager or his/her designee at which the person may present evidence and cross examine the witnesses in support of the charges. Civil penalties may also be assessed by the court in a civil action filed by the City to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Abatement. Any violation of this chapter may be abated as a public nuisance and costs of abatement may be recovered by the City as allowed by law.

E.     Administrative Fines. Any violation of this chapter is subject to administrative fines as provided by this Code.

F.     Judicial Action. This chapter is enforceable by any judicial action allowed by law, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief.

G.    Liens. Costs of enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, sampling and monitoring costs, and unpaid administrative fines and civil penalties, shall constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation occurs and on the real property of any person who violates this chapter until such lien is satisfied. The lien may be recorded and executed in the same manner as a judgment lien. Prior to the recordation of the lien, the property owner shall be given written notice of the lien and an opportunity to contest the validity of the lien and the amount at a hearing held by the City Manager or his/her designee.

H.    Remedies Not Exclusive. Remedies under this chapter shall be in addition to each other, and in addition to any other legally available remedy, and do not limit or supersede any other enforcement action, civil, criminal or administrative. (Ord. 2015-07)

 

20.08.220 Severability.
If any section, subsection, or part of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue to be valid and enforceable so as to effectuate the purpose and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-07)

Title 21 RESERVED

Title 22 RESERVED

Title 23 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 23.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 23.06 CITIZEN PARTICIPATION PLANS
Chapter 23.08 DESIGN REVIEW
Chapter 23.12 UNIFORM CODES FOR CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 23.13 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
Chapter 23.24 GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Chapter 23.26 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
Chapter 23.28 PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 23.36 RIGHT-OF-WAY STANDARDS, STREET IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS, AND BUILDING LINE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 23.40 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 23.80 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Chapter 23.90 EXACTIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 23.92 FIRE MITIGATION FEE
Chapter 23.94 TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE
Chapter 23.96 FLOOD CONTROL FEES
Chapter 23.98 PARKLAND ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENTS

Chapter 23.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
23.04.010 Purpose.
The erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion, demolition, equipping, using, occupying or maintaining of any building or structure within the City shall comply with the provisions of this title. Notwithstanding the provisions of this title, proposed activities and development shall be subject to zoning regulations and coastal development requirements, pursuant to Title 30 of this Code. (Ord. 94-06)

 

23.04.020 Violations and Penalty.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this title.

B.     Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued or permitted.

 

23.04.030 Public Nuisance.
A.     Any building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, demolished, equipped, used, occupied or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.

B.     Any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit, as required by this title, shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a public nuisance has been committed.

Chapter 23.06 CITIZEN PARTICIPATION PLANS
23.06.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the citizen participation plan is to:

A.     Ensure that applicants pursue early and effective citizen participation in conjunction with their applications, giving them the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts their application may have on the community;

B.     Ensure that citizens have an adequate opportunity to learn about applications that may affect them and to work with applicants to resolve concerns at an early stage of the review and decision-making process;

C.    Facilitate ongoing communication between the applicant, interested citizens, city staff, appointed and elected officials throughout the applicant review process.

D.    The citizen participation plan is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to allow for informed decision-making. (Ord. 2002-11)

 

23.06.020 Applicability.
A.     Every application for development or construction that requires a discretionary permit or administrative review shall include a citizen participation plan that must be implemented prior to the first public hearing or notice of public review and comment period on an administrative application. Every City-sponsored capital improvement project shall also include a citizen participation plan that must be implemented before final approval or award of a construction bid.

B.     When in compliance with all other City ordinances and regulations, the following projects are exempted from the other provisions of this chapter:

1.     Construction of one single-family detached dwelling, not within the Coastal Appeal Zone, provided that no discretionary permit or administrative review is required other than a coastal development permit.

2.     Signs.

3.     Sign programs.

4.     Certificates of compliance.

5.     Extension requests.

6.     Lot line adjustments.

7.     Ministerial applications. (Ord. 2002-11)

 

23.06.030 Plan Contents.
A.     The citizen participation plan shall include the following information:

1.     Which residents, property owners, interested parties, political jurisdictions and public agencies may be affected by the application;

2.     How those parties identified in paragraph 1 of this subsection will be notified that an application has been made;

3.     How those parties identified in paragraph 1 of this subsection will be informed of the substance of change, amendment, or development proposed by the application;

4.     How those identified in paragraph 1 of this subsection will be provided an opportunity to discuss the applicant’s proposal with the applicant and express any concerns, issues, or problems they may have with the proposal in advance of the public hearing or public review and comment period;

5.     The applicant’s schedule for completion of the citizen participation plan;

6.     How the applicant will keep the Planning and Building Department informed as to the status of his/her citizen participation efforts.

B.     The level of citizen interest and area of involvement will vary depending on the nature of the application and the project’s location. The applicant will determine the target area for early notification after consultation with and approval of the Planning and Building Department.

1.     In no case shall the notification area be less than that required in other sections of the Municipal Code.

2.     The applicant shall notify registered neighborhood or homeowners’ associations within the public notice area required by other sections of the Municipal Code.

3.     The applicant shall notify other interested parties who have requested in writing that they be placed on the interested parties notification list maintained by the Planning and Building Department.

4.     The applicant shall notify any other persons, organizations or agencies as deemed appropriate after consultation with the Planning and Building Department.

C.    These requirements apply in addition to any notice provisions required elsewhere in the Municipal Code.

D.    At the applicant’s discretion, applicant may submit a citizen participation plan, along with the required processing fee, and begin implementation prior to the formal application submittal. However, this shall not occur until after the required pre-application consultation with Planning and Building Department staff. (Ord. 2002-11; Ord. 2008-21)

 

23.06.040 Citizen Participation Report.
A.     When a citizen participation plan is required, the applicant shall provide a written report, satisfactory to the Planning and Building Director, documenting the results of the citizen participation effort prior to the notice of public hearing or notice of public review and comment period on the application. This report shall be made a part of the administrative record.

B.     The citizen participation report shall describe the methods the applicant employed to involve the public, including:

1.     Dates and locations of all meetings where citizens were invited to discuss the applicant’s proposal;

2.     The content, dates mailed, and number of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other writings;

3.     A description of where residents, property owners and other interested parties receiving notices, newsletters, or other written materials are located;

4.     The number of people who participated in the process; and

5.     Comment sheets and sign-in sheets shall be provided by the applicant to all interested parties who choose to participate in the process.

C.    The report shall summarize the substance of concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process.

D.    The report shall describe how the applicant has addressed, or intends to address the concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process.

E.     The report shall identify which concerns, issues and problems the applicant is unwilling or unable to address, if any, and shall state why.

F.     The report shall include all sign-in sheets and comment sheets provided to all interested parties by the applicant. (Ord. 2008-21)

Chapter 23.08 DESIGN REVIEW
23.08.010 Purpose.
A.     This chapter is adopted pursuant to, and to implement provisions of, the Encinitas General Plan and certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan (LUP). It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the natural beauty of the City of Encinitas as well as create an attractive and functional man-made environment. These are both essential assets for the welfare of the City’s residents and visitors. It is a further purpose of this chapter to accomplish the following:

1.     Determine compliance of development projects with the provisions of this chapter and the design review guidelines of the City of Encinitas as well as other regulations regarding the physical development of the City.

2.     Assure a high degree of aesthetic and functional excellence in the physical development of the City of Encinitas through the prudent and timely review of development projects.

3.     Encourage the preservation of the distinct and individual character of the various neighborhoods and communities through the prudent administration of this chapter and the design review guidelines.

B.     For purposes of this chapter “Director” shall mean “Director of Planning and Building.” (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2003-10)

 

23.08.015 Amendment.
An amendment to any portion of this chapter constitutes a proposed amendment to the implementing regulations of the City’s Local Coastal Program (LCP). A proposed LCP amendment shall comply in form, content and procedure with the provisions of Chapter 30.82 of the Municipal Code. An amendment to this chapter shall not become effective until certified by the Coastal Commission pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 30514. (Ord. 94-06)

 

23.08.020 Prohibitions.
A.     Without first having obtained a design review permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, grade for, relocate, alter, remodel or otherwise modify the exterior of any structure, when such activity is required by this chapter to have a design review permit.

B.     No building permit, grading permit or other development permits shall be issued relating to a structure or site development for which a design review permit is required until the design review permit is obtained. (Ord. 2003-10)

 

23.08.030 General Scope and Exemptions.
A.     All buildings, grading, landscaping or construction projects, whether they require any other City permit or not, are subject to design review unless exempted by this chapter.

B.     When in compliance with all other City ordinances and regulations, the following projects are exempted from the other provisions of this chapter:

1.     Walls and fences of six feet or less in height.

2.     Construction underground, which will not leave any significant, permanent marks on the surface after completion. Utility boxes, pipes and poles shall be considered “significant permanent marks,” unless 48 inches in height or less and appropriately screened and color compatible with buildings or landscaping. Street furniture shall be exempt unless part of a development proposal or City streetscape project requiring discretionary approval.

3.     Maintenance work on buildings, landscaping or grounds which does not significantly alter the appearance or function of the building, landscaping or grounds.

4.     Minor exterior alterations to buildings which do not result in an increase in floor area of more than 20% or 500 square feet (whichever is less) and are substantially consistent with the existing building design and character. This includes commercial building awnings which are consistent with established design and color criteria for the commercial district or center.

5.     Signs which are exempted from the provisions of the Municipal Code change of message/copy, and signs attached to a building for single uses or within a commercial center with six or fewer tenants that are compatible with other signs in the commercial district.

6.     Interior remodeling work on any existing building.

7.     Custom Home Exemption. The construction or landscaping of a project consisting of not more than one single-family detached dwelling submitted for plan check on the same application which is substantially dissimilar in design to any other proposed dwelling within the immediate neighborhood. A dissimilar design shall include different building footprints, orientation and elevations; architectural features; and exterior materials.

8.     Accessory buildings and additions for existing attached and detached single-family homes and duplexes on a separate legal lot provided that it is substantially consistent with the existing building, color, design and character.

9.     All new or replacement landscaping unless part of a development proposal requiring design review.

10.   Swimming pools, spas, patio covers, lath houses, decks, and balconies provided that zoning standards are met.

11.   Temporary facilities as defined in the City’s adopted building code.

12.   Tennis courts (including permitted fencing) and similar recreational facilities.

13.   Satellite antennas adequately screened pursuant to Section 23.08.090 of the Municipal Code.

14.   Grading provided it is consistent with Municipal Code Section 23.24.490, Rounding and Blending of Slopes, consistent with the topography of adjacent property, and the proposed pad elevation is not more than four feet higher or eight feet lower than the natural or existing grade unless it is determined by the Director that such slopes will not have significant visibility from adjoining properties or the public right-of-way. New grading associated with public or private streets shall be subject to such review. Design review for graded slopes shall not subject other aspects of the project otherwise exempt from design review (e.g., a custom single-family home) to design review. Grading solely for basements is exempt. (Ord. 90-26; Ord. 92-13; Ord. 93-19; Ord. 2003-10)

 

23.08.040 Authority to Grant Permit.
A.     The Director has authority to render a final determination on applications for a design review permit for the following categories of projects:

1.     Fences, walls and landscaping projects not exempted by this chapter.

2.     Outdoor storage facilities of less than 1,000 square feet in area.

3.     Agricultural buildings which are the primary use of the parcel 2,000 square feet or less.

4.     Exterior additions to existing buildings and structures where the proposed project will involve less than 500 square feet in area and which are otherwise not exempted by this chapter.

5.     Signs and awnings which are placed under the design review jurisdiction of the Director by other provisions of this Code (Chapter 30.60) and not otherwise exempted by this chapter. Review shall be without notice.

6.     Satellite Antennas. However satellite antennas which are visually screened, per Section 23.08.090, shall be exempt from design review.

7.     Grading unless otherwise exempted by Section 23.08.030B14.

B.     The Planning Commission is authorized to render a final determination on an application for a design review permit for a project that does not contain a component which requires a final determination by the City Council.

1.     That is outside the jurisdiction of the Director;

2.     That has one or more components that require a final determination by the Planning Commission and does not contain any component which requires a final determination by the City Council.

C.    Upon receipt of an advisory recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council is authorized to render a final determination on an application for a design review permit for a project which contains one or more components that require a final determination by the City Council. (Ord. 90-26; Ord. 93-19; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2017-03)

 

23.08.050 Notice.
When notice is required by the provisions of this chapter, notice shall be made in accordance with Chapter 30.01 as modified by the following:

A.     If the Director is authorized to render a final determination, the notice shall indicate the time prior to which written objections must be filed and notice shall be made to adjacent property owners in accordance with Chapter 30.01 as modified by this section.

B.     An application for a design review permit for a project which requires an application for a tentative map, zone change, conditional use permit or any other planning permit, shall be noticed as part of the noticing procedures required by this Code for such other applications.

C.    If the date, time and place of a subsequent hearing or a continued hearing is announced at the noticed time and place, no additional notice is required for the second or continued hearing, unless required by law. If no such announcement is made at the noticed time and place, the second or continued hearing shall be noticed in accordance with Chapter 30.01 as modified by this section. (Ord. 92-13)

 

23.08.060 Procedure.
A.     The owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, of the real property on which the construction activity is proposed shall make application for a design review permit to the Director on a form approved by the Director. The application must be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council, together with whatever additional plans and information the Director deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. Application shall include the necessary sets of plans, maps, and displays in sufficient detail to explain the proposed project’s compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter.

B.     Any application for a new nonresidential project in excess of 2,000 square feet of building area and any residential project resulting in five or more units, shall submit a traffic study to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. The traffic study shall be completed by a City-approved traffic engineer.

 

C.    When the application has been received and properly noticed, the Director shall render a final determination or the Director shall place the matter on the agenda of the Planning Commission.

D.    Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission may, by majority vote, approve, disapprove in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or conditionally approve or continue the application for a design review permit. A maximum of two hearings may be held but additional hearings can be held if requested or agreed to by the applicant.

E.     If the Planning Commission is required to make an advisory recommendation to the City Council or render a final determination on the application for a design review permit, the Director shall submit the matter to the Planning Commission at a noticed, public hearing.

F.     Upon receipt of the advisory recommendations from the Planning Commission, the Director shall set the application for a design review permit at a noticed, public hearing for the next available meeting of the City Council. Following the public hearing, the City Council may, by majority vote, approve, disapprove in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or conditionally approve the application for design review permit. (Ord. 89-17; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2003-10)

 

23.08.070 Final Determination.
A.     A final determination by the Planning Commission or the City Council on the application for a design review permit shall be made by written resolution, setting forth the facts which support the action. A final determination by the Director for design review shall be by written notice of determination setting forth the facts to support the action.

B.     An application for a design review permit shall be approved unless findings of fact are made based upon the information presented in the application or during the deliberations which support one or more of the regulatory conclusions contained in this chapter. The decision maker shall elaborate on each of the regulatory conclusions made in support of a denial in sufficient detail to explain as clearly as possible the reasons for the denial.

C.    The final determination shall be mailed by first class mail or delivered in person to the applicant and shall become final 15 calendar days after the date of the final determination unless an appeal is filed. (See Chapter 1.12.) (Ord. 90-26; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2003-10)

 

23.08.080 Regulatory Conclusions—Generally.
A.     The project design is inconsistent with the general plan, a specific plan or the provisions of this Code.

B.     The project design is substantially inconsistent with the design review guidelines.

C.    The project would adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. (Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2019-04)

 

23.08.090 Satellite Antennas.
A.     The intent of this section is to provide locational criteria for the placement of satellite antennas, and to regulate their placement so as to minimize the potential visual impacts associated with the antennas. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit the use of satellite antennas, nor to add excessive additional expense to their installation.

B.     The installation of a satellite antenna is permitted either by right, or by the approval of an administrative design review permit application, depending upon the antenna’s location and screening, as discussed below.

1.     A satellite antenna shall be defined as any system of wires, cables, amplifiers, reflecting discs or other devices which are used for the transmission or reception of satellite related signals.

2.     An administrative design review permit shall be required for a satellite dish antenna unless it is screened from adjacent properties and public streets with a wall, fence, hedge or other material such that no more than 25% of the satellite antenna is visible (from any of the antenna’s functional positions), as viewed from the ground level of any adjacent property or public right-of-way, as determined by the Director of Planning and Building. The screening material shall be kept in good condition so long as the antenna is in place. The screening material shall be visually compatible with the main structure and with other fences or materials which occupy the property. Any fences and walls used for screening purposes shall comply with standard fence height requirements.

C.    Should an administrative design review permit be required, the proposed satellite antenna will be approved so long as the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the antenna are compatible with and do not adversely affect, in a material manner, adjacent uses, residences, structures or natural resources, with consideration given to, among other things, the following:

1.     The effect upon the character of the neighborhood;

2.     The effect upon views from public and private vantage points;

3.     The effect upon environmental quality or natural resources; and

4.     Any other relevant impact of the proposed use on the surrounding area.

D.    The following setback limitations shall apply to satellite antennas (residential and commercial zones):

1.     The satellite antenna may be located to within three feet of an interior side or rear property line, as measured from the outer edge of the antenna dish, as measured from any of its functional positions. This setback may be reduced to zero through the design review process.

2.     Satellite antennas proposed to be located within a front or street side yard setback shall require an administrative design review permit, unless the antenna is completely (100%) screened from any adjacent property and from any adjacent public right-of-way, as viewed from ground level.

E.     The following height limitations shall apply to satellite antennas:

 

1.     Residential Zones. Outside of the standard building envelope (i.e., within the front, side, or rear yard setbacks), the maximum height of a satellite antenna shall be 12 feet in height. Property owners may request greater heights through the administrative design review process.

Satellite antennas located within the standard building envelope (i.e., outside of the front, side, or rear yard setbacks) shall not exceed the standard residential height limit. (See residential height regulations in Section 30.16.010B6 of the Municipal Code.)

2.     Commercial Zones. The maximum height of a satellite antenna in a commercial zone is 30 feet.

In any case, a design review permit will be required for any satellite antenna unless visually screened in accordance with paragraph B2 of this section.

F.     Design review shall be required if more than one satellite antenna is proposed on any given lot.

G.    Some antennas require building permits for their foundation or mounting, and electrical permits may be required for power driven dishes. The applicant shall be responsible for securing all necessary building permits prior to the installation of a satellite antenna.

H.    Notwithstanding the above, the regulations of this section shall not be administered so as to:

1.     Prevent the reception of satellite delivered signals from major communications satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations; or

2.     Impose costs on the potential user of the antenna that are excessive in light of the purchase and installation costs of the equipment.

I.      If an applicant claims that an imposed regulation violates the stated intent of the provisions of the City’s satellite regulations, the applicant may deposit with the City a sum determined by the Planning and Building Director to obtain an independent expert evaluation and opinion of the claim. (Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2010-13)

 

23.08.100 Guidelines.
The City Council shall adopt by resolution design review guidelines setting forth the policies and criteria for this chapter. The person or body authorized to render a final determination shall comply with these guidelines when reviewing applications for permits and shall ensure that the spirit intent of the guidelines are upheld in all design review actions. The City Council may amend the design review guidelines by resolution to keep the guidelines in compliance with the latest City policies.

 

23.08.110 Imposition of Conditions.
A.     The person or body authorized to render a final determination shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect and enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding area, and to insure that the proposed project for which design review approval is sought, fully meets the criteria as set forth in this chapter.

B.     No design review permit shall require a condition which is not reasonably related to the project for which the design review permit is requested.

 

23.08.120 Posting of Security.
Whenever a design review permit is granted upon any condition or limitation, the person seeking the design review permit may be required to furnish security in a form satisfactory to the Director in an amount sufficient to insure compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which such design review permit is granted. Every such form of security shall be in a form satisfactory to the Director, shall be payable to the City, and shall be conditioned upon compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which the design review permit is granted. (Ord. 90-26)

 

23.08.125 Landscape Security Deposit.
Where a landscape plan has been approved for a project, a security deposit may be required for a period not to exceed one year after final inspection approval to insure plant material has adequate time to become established and that the approved landscape design is not altered. (Ord. 90-26)

 

23.08.130 Covenant.
At the discretion of the Director, to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, the design review permit may be issued in the form of a covenant to be signed by the permittee and recorded with the County Recorder.

 

23.08.140 Conformance with Design Review Permit.
A.     Prior to the issuance of a building permit or any other permit required for the construction of a project for which a design review permit has been issued, the Director shall determine whether the plans submitted for such construction permit are in substantial conformance with the design review permit.

B.     The Director shall find project plans in substantial conformance if:

1.     No project condition is changed or deleted;

2.     No feature, facility or amenity is deleted or substantially altered which had been considered essential to the project’s quality, safety or function by the decision making body;

3.     The area of any residential floor plan or any nonresidential building is not decreased or increased by more than five percent;

4.     No additional lots or dwelling units are added;

5.     No private or public open space is reduced in area or in its potential for use and enjoyment;

6.     The shape and bulk of structures, exterior building materials, landscaping, parking and access are substantially in conformance with the spirit and intent of the design review decision;

7.     The grading plan will not increase or decrease the final grade on any part of the site by more than three feet over or under the plan approved by the design review decision, unless the Director finds that (1) the design is substantially altered by the grading change, (2) the design review approval specifically prohibits variation to the elevation of the pads, or (3) the change in pad elevation impacts surrounding views, and/or substantially increases the bulk and mass of a building; and

8.     No significant changes are made which, in the opinion of the Director, should be reviewed by the body which approved the original design review application.

C.    The final determination made under this section shall be effective 15 calendar days after the date of the final determination, unless an appeal is filed. (See Chapter 1.12.) Notification of the final determination shall be posted on the City’s website. If the determination is that the proposed construction is in conformance, the proponent may proceed, at the proponent’s own risk, during the appeal period. The proponent or any aggrieved person may appeal, or may apply for a modification of the design review permit. (Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2017-03)

 

23.08.150 Modification of Design Review Permit.
A proponent may apply for a modification of a valid design review permit. The application procedures, hearings and notifications for any modification shall be the same as for a new application. If the Director finds that the modification is minor, and is required due to circumstances beyond the proponent’s control, the application for modification shall be given priority in scheduling for public hearings.

 

23.08.160 Expiration and Extension of Permit.
A.     The design review permit approval shall be valid for two years after the effective date of the permit. A building permit and any other permit required for the construction of the project shall be obtained within the two-year period. If construction has not started within the time period specified in the City’s adopted building code, and is not diligently pursued thereafter, the design review permit shall be deemed null and void.

B.     The Director may, upon written request by the proponent, grant reasonable extensions of up to a total of two years for the design review permit; provided no change in City policies has occurred which would be in conflict with the project. A request for such an extension shall be filed with the Director at least 15 days prior to the expiration of the design review permit, together with the required application fee. Upon proper filing of an application of extension, public notice shall be made according to the provisions of Chapter 30.01 as modified by this chapter. A public hearing is not required. (Ord. 92-13; Ord. 2010-13)

 

23.08.170 Suspension of Design Review Permit.
A.     The Director shall suspend any design review permit and issue no certificate of occupancy if the project is not constructed in compliance with the design review permit. The notice of suspension shall be mailed to the proponent by certified mail and posted on the project site.

B.     The proponent or any aggrieved person may request a meeting of the arbitration committee to settle any dispute regarding the suspension, may appeal, or may apply for a modification of the design review permit.

C.    The suspension of the design review permit and the suspension of all related permits shall be lifted by the Director if:

1.     The applicant has completed all necessary changes to bring the project into compliance with the original design review permit, or with the design review permit as amended by an appeal or modification; or

2.     The arbitration committee or the final appeals body has determined that no violation of the original design review permit exists.

 

23.08.180 Reapplications.
At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of a disapproval of an application before filing a new application seeking substantially the same design review permit for any of the same property.

Chapter 23.12 UNIFORM CODES FOR CONSTRUCTION
23.12.010 Purpose.
Any person, firm, or corporation that proposes to construct a project subject to the provisions of this Code shall first obtain permits required herein, together with any other licenses, permits, or approvals required by this Code. (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.020 Adoption of the 2019 California Administrative Code, Part 1, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
The California Administrative Code, 2019 Edition, is adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.030 Adoption of the 2019 California Building Code, Part 2, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
A.     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings and structures, the 2019 California Building Code, Part 2, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California State Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., based on the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, including specified appendices. Except as otherwise provided by the City of Encinitas Municipal Code, all erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures within the City of Encinitas shall be in conformance with the California Building Code which is based on the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and the adopted appendix chapters, published by the International Code Council, Inc. 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor Washington, D.C. 20001

B.     Deletions, revisions and additions to the California Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition, shall be as follows:

1.     Section 101.1 is hereby revised to read:

 

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Encinitas, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

2.     Section 105.3.1.1 is hereby added to read:

 

105.3.1.1 Action on application with grading permit or public improvements. Permits shall not be issued for construction on a site where the Development Services Director or designee determines that a grading permit or public improvements is required until the Building Official is notified in writing that the grading or public improvements work has been satisfactorily completed to allow building permits to be issued.

 

3.     Section 105.3.1.2 is hereby added to read:

 

105.3.1.2 Action on application with flooding or geologic conditions. Permits shall not be issued if the City Engineer determines that flooding or geologic conditions at the site may endanger the public safety or welfare.

 

4.     Section 109.1.1 is hereby added to read:

 

109.1.1 No fees for specific governmental organizations. The United States, the State of California, school districts, the County of San Diego, or the City of Encinitas shall not be required to pay any fees for filing an application for a building permit pursuant to this Code unless City of Encinitas building inspection services are requested. If so requested, the regular fee schedules in this Code shall apply.

 

5.     Section 109.2 is hereby revised to read:

 

109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the fee schedule established by the City Council of the City of Encinitas.

 

6.     Section 109.6 is hereby revised to read:

 

109.6 Refunds. Refunds of fees paid shall in accordance with the refund policy adopted by the City Council of the City of Encinitas.

 

7.     Section 113.1 is hereby revised to read:

 

113.1 General. The City Council shall serve as the Board of Appeals to hear appeals of any code interpretation by the City Building Official.

 

8.     Section 113.3 is hereby deleted.

9.     Table 1505.1 is hereby amended to read:

 

TABLE 1505.1

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

 

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

 

10.   Appendices C & I of the California Building Code, 2019 Edition, are adopted. (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.040 Adoption of the 2019 California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
A.     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Residential Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas for construction, alteration, enlargement or repair of detached one- and two-family dwellings, townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane with a separate means of egress and structures accessory thereto, the 2019 California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code based on the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this section of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code, the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration or use and occupancy of one- and two-family dwellings, townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane and structures accessory thereto within the City of Encinitas shall be in conformance with the 2019 California Residential Code published by the California Building Standards Commission, 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833-2936.

B.     Deletions, revisions and additions to the 2019 California Residential Code shall be as follows:

1.     Section R101.1 is hereby revised to read:

 

R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Encinitas, and shall be cited as such and hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

2.     Section R105.3.1.2 is hereby added to read:

 

R105.3.1.2 Action on application with grading permit or public improvements. Permits shall not be issued for construction on a site where the Director of Development Services or designee determines that a grading permit or public improvements is required until the Building Official is notified in writing that the grading or public improvements work has been satisfactorily completed to allow building permits to be issued.

 

3.     Section R105.3.1.3 is hereby added to read:

 

R105.3.1.3 Action on application with flooding or geologic conditions. Permits shall not be issued if the City Engineer determines that flooding or geologic conditions at the site may endanger the public safety or welfare.

 

4.     Section R108.1.1 is hereby added to read:

 

R108.1.1 No fees for specific governmental organizations. The United States, the State of California, school districts, the County of San Diego, or the City of Encinitas shall not be required to pay any fees for filing an application for a building permit pursuant to this Code unless City of Encinitas building inspection services are requested. If so requested, the regular fee schedules in this Code shall apply.

 

5.     Section R108.2 is hereby revised to read:

 

R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the fee schedule established by the City Council of the City of Encinitas.

 

6.     Section R108.3 is hereby revised to read:

 

R108.3 Building permit valuation. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuation shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official.

 

7.     Section R108.5 is hereby revised to read:

 

R108.5 Refunds. Refunds of fees paid shall in accordance with the refund policy adopted by the City Council of the City of Encinitas.

 

8.     Section R112.1 is hereby revised to read:

 

R112.1 General. The City Council shall serve as the Board of Appeals to hear appeals of any code interpretation by the City Building Official.

 

9.     Section R112.3 is hereby deleted.

10.   Section R313.1, Exception is hereby amended to read:

 

R313.1 Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system may be required by the fire code official when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.

 

11.   Section R313.2, Exception is hereby amended to read:

 

R313.2 (1) An automatic residential fire sprinkler system may be required by the fire code official when additions or alterations are made to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.

 

12.   Section R332 is hereby added to read:

 

R332 SOLAR- AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE-READY BUILDINGS

 

R332.1 General. Solar- and electric vehicle-ready construction shall be provided as specified in Sections 23.12.080 City Energy Code, and 23.12.110 City Green Building Code.

 

13.   Section R902.1.3 is hereby revised to read:

 

R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50% of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.

(Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.050 Adoption of the 2019 California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Electrical Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems and permit requirements and inspection thereof, the 2019 California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code based on the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this section of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code, all installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems within the City of Encinitas shall be in conformance with 2019 California Electrical Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission, which is based on the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Battery March Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269. (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.060 Adoption of the 2019 California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Mechanical Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas for the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances, the 2019 California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., which is based on the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code, all erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances shall be in conformance with 2019 California Mechanical Code, and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, including the Uniform Mechanical Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission, and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, which is based on the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 4755 E. Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA 91761-2816. (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.070 Adoption of the 2019 California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
A.     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Plumbing Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas for the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment in or on any building or structure or outdoors on any premises or property, the 2019 California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., which is based on the Uniform Plumbing Code 2018 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this section of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code, all construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment within the City of Encinitas shall be in conformance with 2019 California Plumbing Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission, which is based on the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 4755 E. Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA 91761-2861.

B.     Section 1503.1.1(14) is hereby added to the 2019 California Plumbing Code to read:

 

(14)  A clothes washer system consists solely of one single domestic clothes washing machine in a one- or two-family dwelling.

(Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.080 Adoption of the 2019 California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Energy Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas for the conservation of energy, the 2019 California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. Except as otherwise provided by this section of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code, all construction of buildings where energy will be utilized shall be in conformance with 2019 California Energy Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, including the California Energy Code, 2019 Edition, published by the California Energy Commission. (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.090 Adoption of the 2019 California Historical Building Code, Part 8, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Historical Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas to provide alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of designated historic buildings, the 2019 California Historical Building Code, Part 8, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. (authorized by Health and Safety Code Sections 18950 through 18961). (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.100 Adoption of the 2019 California Existing Building Code, Part 10, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Existing Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas to provide alternative building regulations for the rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of existing buildings, the 2019 California Existing Building Code, Part 10, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. (Ord. 2019-21)

 

23.12.110 Adoption of the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
A.     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City’s Green Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Encinitas for enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact and encouraging sustainable construction practices the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code, Part II, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Buildings Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq., and the California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition. Except as otherwise provided by this section of the City of Encinitas Municipal Code, all construction of buildings shall be in conformance with the 2019 California Building Standards Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, including the California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition, published by the California Building Standards Commission.

B.     Section 4.304.2 is hereby added to the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code to read:

 

4.304.2 Graywater systems. Newly constructed single-family dwelling units shall be pre-plumbed for a graywater system permitted and constructed in accordance with Chapter 15 of the California Plumbing Code and including a stub-out in a convenient location for integration of the graywater system with landscape irrigation systems and accepting graywater from all sources permissible in conformance with the definition of graywater as per Section 14876 of the California Water Code.

Exception: A graywater system shall not be permitted where a qualified soils engineer determines in a written, stamped report, or a percolation test shows, that the absorption capacity of the soil at the project site is unable to accommodate the discharge of a graywater irrigation system.

 

C.    Sections A4.106.8 and A5.106.5.3 are hereby added to the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code to read:

 

A4.106.8 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for new construction. New construction shall comply with Sections A4.106.8.1 and A4.106.8.2 to facilitate the installation and use of electric vehicle chargers. Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) shall be installed in accordance with the California Electrical Code, Article 625.

 

Exceptions: On a case-by-case basis, where the local enforcing agency has determined EV charging and infrastructure are not feasible based upon one or more of the following conditions:

1.     Where there is no commercial power supply.

2.     Where there is evidence substantiating that meeting the requirements will alter the local utility infrastructure design requirements on the utility side of the meter so as to increase the utility side cost to the homeowner or the developer by more than $400.00 per dwelling unit.

3.     Where there will be an impact to existing parking requirements for hotel, motel and nonresidential additions and alterations greater than 10,000 square feet.

4.     Or other conditions as determined by the City.

 

A4.106.8.1 New one- and two-family dwellings and townhouse with attached private garages.

 

Tier 1. For each dwelling unit, a dedicated 208/240-volt branch circuit shall be installed in the raceway required by Section 4.106.4.1. The branch circuit and associated overcurrent protective device shall be rated to 40 amperes minimum. Other electrical components, including a receptacle or blank cover, related to this section shall be installed in accordance with the California Electrical Code.

 

A4.106.8.1.1 Identification. The service panel or subpanel circuit director shall identify the overcurrent protective device designated for EV charging purposes as “EV READY” in accordance with the California Electrical Code. The receptacle or blank cover shall be identified as “EV READY.”

 

A4.106.8.2 New multifamily dwellings. For any new multifamily dwelling, at least 15 percent of the total number of parking spaces provided for all types of parking facilities, but in no case less than one, shall be electric vehicle charging spaces (EV spaces). Each EV space shall be equipped with fully operational electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). Calculations for the required number of EV spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

 

A4.106.8.2.1 Technical requirements. The EV spaces required by Section A4.106.8.2 shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 4.106.4.2.1, 4.106.4.2.2, 4.106.4.2.3, 4.106.4.2.4, and 4.106.4.2.5.

 

A4.106.8.3 Hotels and motels. Construction shall comply with Section A4.106.8.3 to facilitate the installation of electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). When EVSE(s) is/are installed, it shall be in accordance with the California Building Code and the California Electrical Code and as follows:

 

A.4.106.8.3.1 For any new hotel or motel, including non-residential portions of mixed use projects, at least eight percent of the total number of parking spaces provided for all types of parking facilities, but in no case less than one, shall be electric vehicle charging spaces (EV spaces). Each EV space shall be equipped with fully operational electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). Calculations for the required number of EV spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Refer to Section 5.106.5.3 for design requirements.

 

A.4.106.8.3.2 For any alteration or addition to a hotel or motel that requires a building permit with square footage larger than 10,000 square feet as determined by the local enforcing agency, at least eight percent of the total number of parking spaces provided for all types of parking facilities, but in no case less than one, shall be electric vehicle charging spaces (EV spaces). Each EV space shall be equipped with fully operational electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). Calculations for the required number of EV spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Refer to Section 5.106.5.3 for design requirements.

 

A5.106.5.3 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for non-residential buildings. Construction shall comply with Section A5.106.5.3.1 and A5.106.5.3.2 to facilitate the installation of electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). When EVSE(s) is/are installed, it shall be in accordance with the California Building Code and the California Electrical Code and as follows:

 

A.5.106.5.3.1 For any new non-residential buildings, including non-residential portions of mixed use projects, at least eight percent of the total number of parking spaces provided for all types of parking facilities, but in no case less than one, shall be electric vehicle charging spaces (EV spaces). Each EV spaces shall be equipped with fully operational electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). Calculations for the required number of EV spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Refer to Section 5.106.5.3 for design requirements.

 

A.5.106.5.3.2 For any non-residential alteration or addition that requires a building permit with square footage larger than 10,000 sq. ft. as determined by the City of Encinitas Development Services Department, at least eight percent of the total number of parking spaces provided for all types of parking facilities, but in no case less than one, shall be electric vehicle charging spaces (EV spaces). Each EV spaces shall be equipped with fully operational electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). Calculations for the required number of EV spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Refer to Section 5.106.5.3 for design requirements.

(Ord. 2019-21; Ord. 2019-22)

 

23.12.120 Adoption of the 2019 California Referenced Standards Code, Part 12, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
The California Referenced Standards Code, 2019 Edition, Section 23.12.130 is adopted and hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof the same as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2019-21)

Chapter 23.13 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
23.13.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city and facilitating property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve those goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 2015-13)

 

23.13.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

A.     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1.     E-mail;

2.     The Internet;

3.     Facsimile.

B.     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City of Encinitas.

C.    “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

 

D.    “Eligibility checklist” means the submittal checklist required by the City of Encinitas to be submitted with the small residential rooftop solar energy system demonstrating compliance.

E.     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

F.     “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

G.    “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

1.     For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding 10% of the cost of the system, but in no case more than $1,000.00, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10%, as originally specified and proposed.

2.     For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10% as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 2015-13)

 

23.13.030 Applicability.
A.     This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

B.     Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 2015-13)

 

23.13.040 Solar Energy System Requirements.
A.     All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city.

B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C.    Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.

D.    Solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable height limits, except that solar panels may be added to a previously conforming structure that does not conform to the existing height limit if the proposed solar panels do not exceed the height of the existing structure, consistent with the California Solar Rights Act. (Ord. 2015-13)

 

23.13.050 Applications and Documents.
A.     All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city website.

B.     Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, fax, or the Internet shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

C.    The Planning and Building Department shall adopt an eligibility checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

D.    Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

1.     Verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

2.     At the applicant’s cost, verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

E.     The permit application and associated documentation may be submitted to the Building Division in person, by mail, or by electronic submittal together with required permit processing and inspection fees.

F.     The small residential rooftop solar system permit process and eligibility checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. (Ord. 2015-13)

 

23.13.060 Permit Review and Inspection Requirements.
A.     The Planning and Building Department shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems.

B.     Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official’s review of whether the application meets local, State, and Federal health and safety requirements.

C.    If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

D.    Upon confirmation by the Building Official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the eligibility checklist, the Building Official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.

E.     The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a minor use permit if the Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city Planning Commission. If a minor use permit is required, the city may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city Planning Commission.

F.     Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

G.    “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

H.    Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. A separate fire inspection may be performed if necessary.

I.      The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections.

J.     If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2015-13)

Chapter 23.24 GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
23.24.010 Chapter Cited.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance” and may so be cited. (Ord. 88-16)

 

23.24.020 Purpose and Goals.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for grading, excavating and filling of land, to provide for the issuance of grading permits and to provide for the enforcement of the requirements. This chapter is adopted pursuant to, and to implement provisions of, the Encinitas General Plan and certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan (LUP). It is the intent of the City to protect life and property and promote the general welfare; enhance and preserve the physical environment of the community; and maintain the natural scenic character of the City. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered to achieve, to the extent possible, appropriate goals and policies of the General Plan/LUP as well as the following goals:

A.     Ensuring that future development of lands occurs in the manner most compatible with surrounding areas and so as to have the least effect upon other persons or lands, or upon the general public;

B.     Ensuring that soil will not be stripped and removed from lands in the City, leaving the lands barren, unsightly, unproductive, and subject to erosion and the hazards of subsidence and faulty drainage;

C.    Encouraging the planning, design and development of building sites in such fashion as to provide the maximum in safety and human enjoyment, while adapting development to and taking advantage of the best use of the natural terrain;

D.    Ensuring that soil erosion, sedimentation, and stormwater runoff are regulated to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutants entering wetlands, the stormwater conveyance system and Waters of the State to protect water quality;

E.     Encouraging and directing special attention toward the retention insofar as practical, of the natural landscaping, especially with regard to existing trees and native plant materials. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.030 Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

“Applicant” means any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, nonprofit entity, joint venture, association or any type, public entity or any other legal entity which submits an application to the City Engineer for a permit pursuant to this chapter.

“Approved grade” means the grade/earth surface that complies with all sections of the Encinitas Municipal Code and at least one or more of the following criteria as determined by the City Engineer:

1.     The natural grade created by natural geological events unaffected by construction techniques such as cutting, filling, landscaping or berming.

2.     A grade created by excavation into a natural grade as defined under paragraph 1 above.

3.     The grade created by grading activities before 1986 provided that the grade was shown on one or more of the following: approved grading plans, historical photographs that have not been modified, historical topographic surveys and/or in geotechnical reports prepared by certified professionals. Under this subsection, the City Engineer may, following a review of supporting evidence, determine that evidence submitted to support the pre-1986 grade is adequate.

4.     Grade created after 1986 in accordance with an approved grading permit, grading permit as per an approved tentative map or other permit issued in accordance with the Encinitas Municipal Code.

“As-graded” means the surface conditions extant on completion of grading.

“Bedrock” means in-place solid rock.

“Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on a slope on which fill is to be placed.

“Best management practices” or “BMPs” means schedules of activities, practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, site designs, procedures, and other methods to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, the stormwater conveyance system, or Waters of the State. BMPs may be structural or nonstructural. BMPs may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure which the City Engineer finds is necessary to reduce pollutants entering the Waters of the State to the maximum extent practicable.

“Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

“Certify” means a signed, written statement that the specific inspections and tests that were required have been performed and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.

“Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the State of California to practice in the field of civil works.

“Civil engineering” means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind.

“Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

“Cross lot drainage” means runoff that directly flows on the surface of the ground and across lot lines to a neighboring property.

“Drainageway” means a natural or man-made channel which collects and intermittently or continuously conveys stormwater runoff.

“Earth material” means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or combination thereof.

“Engineering geologist” means a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology and certified by the State of California to practice engineering geology.

“Erosion” means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice.

“Excavation or cut” means any earth, sand, gravel, rock or similar material that is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, or relocated by man and the conditions resulting therefrom.

“Fill or embankment” means deposits, removal and recompaction of soil, rock or other similar irreducible materials placed by man.

“Final erosion and sediment control plan (final plan)” means a set of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site after all other planned final structures and permanent improvements have been erected or installed.

“Grade” means the vertical location of the ground surface.

“Existing grade” means the grade prior to grading. (Also see “natural grade” and “approved grade.”)

“Rough grade” means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. Rough grades shall be within 0.2 feet of finish grades.

“Finish grade” means the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

“Grading” means any land disturbance or land fill, or removal and recompaction, or combination thereof that results in the displacement, removal, excavation, import, export or recompaction of soil.

“Interim erosion and sediment control plan (interim plan)” means a set of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site during the period in which pre-construction and construction-related land disturbances, fills and soil storage occur, and before final improvements are completed.

“Key” means a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.

“Land fill” means any human activity depositing soil or other earth materials.

“Maximum extent practicable” or “MEP” means the technology-based standard established by Congress in CWA Section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) that operators of MS4s must meet. Technology-based standards establish that level of pollutant reductions that dischargers must achieve, typically by treatment or by a combination of source control and treatment control BMPs primarily (as the first line of defense) in combination with treatment methods serving as a backup on a permanent basis after completion of construction (additional line of defense).

“Natural grade” is the grade/earth surface that complies with all other sections of the Encinitas Municipal Code and at least one or more of the following criteria as determined by the City Engineer:

1.     The grade created by natural geological events unaffected by construction techniques such as cutting, filling, landscaping or berming.

2.     A grade created by excavation into a natural grade as defined under paragraph 1 above.

3.     “The grade created by grading activities before 1986 provided that the grade was shown on one or more of the following” means approved grading plans, historical photographs that have not been modified, historical topographic surveys and/or in geotechnical reports prepared by certified professionals. Under this paragraph, the City Engineer may, following a review of supporting evidence, determine that evidence submitted to support the pre-1986 grade is adequate.

“Nuisance runoff” means runoff generated from sources other than stormwater.

“Permittee” means the applicant in whose name a valid permit is duly issued pursuant to this chapter and his/her agents, employees and others acting under his/her direction.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, non-profit entity, joint venture, association of any type, or any other legal entity.

“Pollutant” means any agent that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality, including, but not limited to, earth materials.

“Post-construction BMPs” means combinations of site design, erosion control, waste management, and mechanical and bio-filtration devices, intended to limit discharge of pollutants into the municipal storm sewer systems (MS4) on a permanent basis after completion of construction.

“Priority project” means a project identified by criteria used by the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board, the City of Encinitas Stormwater Ordinance, the City of Encinitas BMP Manual Part II or the Encinitas Local Coastal Program as a priority project for the purpose of post-construction stormwater pollution control.

“Road maintenance” means work that is required to keep a public or private access road in proper and functioning order and in the approved completed condition. Typical road maintenance includes overlays and repair of cracks for paved roads. For nonpaved roads, typical maintenance includes leveling and smoothing the surface, dust control treatment, and/or replacement of granular materials on the road surface. Road maintenance work shall not include: construction of new paving, road widening, replacement of pavement sections or change of grade in excess of six inches.

“Runoff” or “stormwater runoff” means that portion of water generated from natural sources, such as from rain or melted snow that flows over the ground.

“Sediment” means earth material deposited by water or wind.

“Site” means a parcel or parcels of real property owned by one or more than one person which is being or is capable of being developed as a single project.

“Slope” means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

“Soil” means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bed rock.

“Soil engineer” means a civil engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soil engineering.

“Soil engineering” means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.

“Stormwater conveyance system” means private and public drainage facilities within the City of Encinitas by which stormwater may be conveyed to Waters of the United States, including but not limited to, streets, roads, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, natural and artificial drainage features, aqueducts, canyons, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, and storm drains. Historic and current development make use of natural drainage patterns and features as conveyances for urban runoff. Urban streams used in this manner are part of the stormwater conveyance system regardless of whether they are natural, man-made, or partially modified features.

“Uncontrolled stockpiles” means any fill placed on land for which no soil testing was performed or no acceptable compaction reports or other acceptable soil reports were prepared or submitted. Also referred to as “uncontrolled embankment” or “undocumented fill.”

“Waters of the State” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of California. The definition of the “Waters of the State” is broader than that for the “Waters of the United States” in that all water in the state is considered to be a “Waters of the State” regardless of circumstances or condition. Under this definition, a municipal storm sewer system (MS4) is always considered to be a “Waters of the State.”

“Waters of the United States” means water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the Federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. In general, this includes “navigable” waters, waters tributary to “navigable” waters, and adjacent wetlands.

“Wet season” or “rainy season” means the period from October 1st through April 30th. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.040 Public Health, Safety, and Welfare.
Whenever the City Engineer determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a threat to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, or discharges pollutants into Waters of the State, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agency in control of the property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the City Engineer, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this Code. (Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2017-03)

 

23.24.050 Other Laws.
Neither this chapter nor any administrative decision made under it:

A.     Exempts the permittee from procuring other required permits or complying with the requirements and conditions of such a permit; or

B.     Limits the right of any person to maintain, at any time, any appropriate action, at law or inequity, for relief or damages against the permittee arising from the permitted activity.

 

23.24.055 Amendment.
An amendment to any portion of this chapter constitutes a proposed amendment to the implementing regulations of the City’s Local Coastal Program (LCP). A proposed LCP amendment shall comply in form, content and procedure with the provisions of Chapter 30.82 of the Municipal Code. An amendment to this chapter shall not become effective until certified by the Coastal Commission pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 30514. (Ord. 94-06)

 

23.24.060 Landscape Guidelines Manual.
The City Council may by resolution adopt a landscape guidelines manual to provide for plans, programs and standards for landscaping, fire suppression, open space easement maintenance, erosion control, planting and irrigation. Upon adoption by the City Council the contents of that manual shall be part of the requirements of this chapter but the manual is not incorporated into the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program. Any permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of that manual; and, in the case of any conflict between the provisions of this manual and the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program, the provisions of the Local Coastal Program shall be binding. (Ord. 2010-16)

 

23.24.071 BMP Manual, Part II.
Upon adoption by the City Council the contents of that manual shall be part of the requirements of this chapter but the manual, as a whole, is not incorporated into the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program. The City Council adopted the City of Encinitas Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual Part II in Ordinance No. 2002-14 on December 11, 2002. This manual provides design, construction, and operation requirements for minimizing stormwater pollution, and its content shall be part of the requirements of this chapter. Any permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of the Best Management Practices Manual Part II; and, in the case of any conflict between the provisions of this manual and the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program, the provisions of the Local Coastal Program shall be binding. (Ord. 2010-16)

 

23.24.072 Engineering Design Manual.
The City Council may by resolution adopt an engineering design manual, which will include standards and requirements for grading permits and grading plan preparation. Upon adoption by the City Council the contents of that manual shall be part of the requirements of this chapter but the manual is not incorporated into the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program. Any permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with provisions of that manual; and, in the case of any conflict between the provisions of this manual and the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program, the provisions of the Local Coastal Program shall be binding. (Ord. 2010-16)

 

23.24.073 Contaminated Soils.
The City Council may by resolution adopt a policy to provide guidance on the testing, handling and disposal of contaminated soils that will include requirements that will be necessary for applicants to comply with prior to issuance of grading permits. Any permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of that policy. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.080 General Requirements.
No person may grade, fill, excavate, store or dispose of soil and earth materials, clear existing vegetation or perform any other land-disturbing or land filling activity without first obtaining a permit as set forth in this chapter. Any removal of BMPs that were required for a priority project will require a grading permit for corrective or other action. If applicable, a requirement may be imposed to replace the BMP with equivalent water quality protection. If the grading is taking place in the Coastal Zone, a coastal development permit may also be required. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.090 General Exemptions.
All land-disturbing or land-filling activities or soil storage shall be undertaken in a manner designed to minimize surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation and to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public welfare. A person performing such activities need not apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter, if all the following criteria are met:

A.     The land area which is disturbed or filled is 10,000 square feet or less.

B.     The affected natural and finished slopes are less than 25% gradient and the grading could not result in an adverse condition to existing or proposed structures, neighboring properties, public rights-of-way or stormwater pollution control devices.

C.    The volume of soil or earth materials stored, graded, moved, replaced, imported, exported or otherwise disturbed is 50 cubic yards or less.

D.    Rainwater runoff is diverted, either during or after construction, from an area smaller than 5,000 square feet.

E.     An impervious surface, if any, of less than 5,000 square feet is created.

F.     No drainageway is blocked or has its stormwater carrying capacities or characteristics modified.

 

G.    The activity does not take place on an inland or coastal bluff, within 100 feet by horizontal measurement from the top of an inland or coastal bluff, the bank of a watercourse, the mean high water mark (line of vegetation) of a body of water or within the wetlands associated with a watercourse or water body, whichever distance is greater.

H.    Retaining wall constructed six feet or lower measured from the top of the wall to the lowest adjacent grade.

I.      Grading is proposed for a development that is not classified as a priority project for post construction stormwater pollution control.

J.     No clearing and grubbing of vegetation and no disturbance of land within an environmentally sensitive area are proposed. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.095 Agricultural Exemptions.
The exemption applies to urban agricultural operations, including disking, harrowing, terracing, leveling, and soil preparation. Urban agricultural activities are exempt from a grading permit if all the following criteria are met:

A.     Shall employ proper erosion and sediment control to ensure that there is no discharge of sediment and other pollutants from the site.

B.     Shall store and use pesticides, composts, organics, and nutrients in conformance with the applicable local, state and federal codes.

C.    Shall prevent irrigation runoff leaving the site.

D.    Shall safeguard life, limb, property, and the public welfare.

E.     The volume of soil or earth materials stored, graded, replaced, imported, exported or otherwise disturbed is 250 cubic yards or less. Soil placed in contained planters that are structurally safe, designed to fully contain planting soils, and do not pose drainage, stormwater pollution, or stability hazards would not be added to the grading quantities, provided that these soils are removed from the site if/when the subject urban agricultural operations are terminated.

F.     Proposed land disturbance area is less than 10,000 square feet or the proposed land disturbance area is between 10,000 square feet and less than one acre and an erosion control permit is obtained from the City.

G.    Proposed new and replaced impervious area is less than 500 square feet or between 500 square feet to less than 5,000 square feet if a construction permit for construction of stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) is obtained.

H.    Rainwater runoff is diverted, either during or after construction, from an area smaller than 5,000 square feet.

I.      The activity will not encroach or impact either directly or indirectly an environmentally sensitive area or wetlands.

J.     The activity does not take place on an inland or coastal bluff; within 100 feet by horizontal measurement from the bluff top edge of an inland or coastal bluff; the bank of a watercourse; or within 100 feet of any wetlands; or within 50 feet from riparian areas.

Should the agricultural areas be utilized for any other use, the Public Works Director may require that a grading permit be obtained to ensure that the agricultural land is mitigated properly to support any fill or structures.

Normal agricultural crop management practices, including disking, harrowing, terracing, leveling, and soil preparation that take place on land that has been farmed are exempt pursuant to Section 23.24.100D of this Code. (Ord. 2016-05)

 

23.24.100 Categorical Exemptions.
Other sections of this chapter notwithstanding, the following activities are exempt from the permit requirements:

A.     An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of the structure.

B.     Cemetery graves.

C.    Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

D.    Normal and customary agricultural and crop management practices on properties that are zoned agricultural or in active agricultural production prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section.

E.     Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or substantial flood or fire hazards. Emergency shall be as defined in the CEQA Guidelines as published by the State of California Office of Planning and Research. However, a grading permit will be required if the emergency work completed does not otherwise qualify as a general exemption or categorical exemption. If a grading permit is required, the grading permit must be obtained once the emergency work is completed. No final inspection or other permits will be issued for the project site unless and until the required grading permit is issued and all work required by the grading permit is completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer in conformance with this chapter.

F.     Excavations within public right-of-way covered by a public improvement or construction permit issued by the Public Works Department.

G.    Road maintenance that meets all state and City requirements for stormwater pollution control and is not adversely impacting any natural or manmade drainage. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2014-15; Ord. 2016-13)

 

23.24.105 Impervious Surface and Drainage.
A project that proposes to create over 500 square feet of new impervious surface area will need to obtain a construction permit and adhere to all standards for drainage and best management practices as contained in the Manual of Best Management Practices, Part II as adopted and amended by the City Council. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.110 Environmental Protection Procedure.
A.     Planning and Building Department Review. Prior to issuing a grading permit, the applicant shall fulfill all environmental protection requirements contained in this Code. All applications shall be reviewed by the Planning and Building Department, whereupon a determination will be made as to whether further environmental review will be required.

B.     Coastal Development Permit Review. No grading permit shall be issued for any project or development within the California Coastal Zone until the applicant has presented an approved coastal development permit or a certificate of exemption from coastal development permit requirements granted by the Planning and Building Director or if applicable, the California Coastal Commission. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.115 Application Form.
The applicant shall provide all requested information on the application form. The application form shall be signed and dated by the owner of the site or by an authorized representative of the owner. The application form shall be submitted with the applicable permit application, required items listed for the permit application, appropriate studies and appropriate fees and deposits. The City Engineer may require additional information in accordance with the Municipal Code prior to issuance of the grading permit or granting final approval of the grading at the property. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.120 Permit Application.
The application for any grading permit (regular or minor) must include all of the following items unless a specific item is waived in writing by the City Engineer following a review of the project application:

A.     Application form.

B.     Site map and grading plan.

C.    Interim erosion and sediment control plan.

D.    Final erosion and sediment control plan.

E.     Drainage study.

F.     Engineering geotechnical report.

G.    Title report.

H.    Landscape and irrigation plan, or other erosion control measure as approved by the City Engineer.

I.      Work schedule (prior to issuance of permit).

J.     Application fees.

K.     Acceptable security (prior to issuance of permit).

L.     Any supplementary material required by the City Engineer.

M.    Applicants subject to the Statewide General NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activities must provide evidence of existing coverage under the general construction permit and submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan to the City for review and approval as required by the general NPDES permit for construction.

N.    Demonstration of compliance with City and state codes for post construction stormwater treatment and pollution control, including, but not limited to, depiction of all the existing and proposed BMPs, depiction of how all the runoff generated on impervious areas will be routed to BMP areas and treated before discharge, signed maintenance agreements and signed covenants for post-construction BMPs.

O.    Demonstration of compliance with Municipal Code requirements, including, but not limited to, Chapters 23.06 and 23.08, which require that certain grading activities complete a citizen participation program and obtain a design review permit. If grading is proposed in the Coastal Zone, a coastal development permit may also be required.

P.     Upon completion of plan-check and approval of grading plans, the applicant’s engineer shall prepare photo-mylars for signatures of the City Engineer and any other city or agency official that has reviewed the grading plans for conformance with City of Encinitas and agency codes. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.125 Minor (Simplified) Grading Permit.
A.     A minor (simplified) grading permit may be authorized by the City Engineer if paragraphs 1 through 7 of this subsection, are met to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

1.     The proposed grading is between 50 and 250 cubic yards. The City Engineer may authorize a minor grading permit in accordance with paragraph 8 of this subsection. If the City Engineer authorizes a minor grading permit for removal and recompaction grading in excess of 250 cubic yards, additional inspection fees will be assessed for grading in excess of 250 cubic yards.

2.     The grading does not propose to create slopes more than six feet high.

3.     The grading is proposed on an existing slope less than six feet high.

4.     The grading is not proposed within any environmentally sensitive areas, floodplain, floodway, within 100 feet of any coastal or inland bluffs, or area with geologic or slope stability problems, and does not divert or adversely impact any drainage flow.

5.     The grading or other aspects of the development do not require any discretionary permit review by the Planning and Building Department other than a coastal development permit.

6.     The grading or other aspects of the development neither proposes nor is required to provide public improvements.

7.     The grading or other aspects of the development do not proposed cross lot drainage or major drainage improvements.

8.     If the proposed grading is for removal and recompaction of unsuitable soils under a building footprint, and the proposed depth of excavation is four feet or less, a simplified grading permit may be issued for grading up to 750 cubic yards.

B.     It is the intent of this section to simplify issuance of grading permits for proposed grading meeting the requirements described in subsection A of this section. The application for a minor grading permit must include all of the following items:

1.     Three copies of the grading plan prepared on a standard D-size sheet. The plan must be prepared, stamped and signed by a California Registered Civil Engineer. At a minimum, the grading plan shall include:

a.     Existing and proposed ground contours and spot elevations;

b.     Cross sections (to scale) showing existing and proposed grading, property lines, adjacent properties and improvements on adjacent properties, and any adjacent public improvements;

c.     Existing and proposed drainage;

d.     Proposed Best Management Practice stormwater pollution control measures for both construction and post-construction phases of the project in conformance with the City standards contained within City of Encinitas BMP Manual, Part II;

e.     Existing and proposed hard surface areas;

f.      Existing and proposed landscape materials, including any trees or vegetation proposed for removal;

g.     Existing and proposed building footprints, including any buildings proposed for removal; and

h.     Interim erosion control measures.

2.     Payment of applicable fees or deposits for plan-check, permit issuance and inspection.

3.     Any additional items required by the City Engineer in order to verify compliance with applicable City codes and regulations.

C.    The application and grading plan for a minor grading permit must also be in compliance with all applicable City codes, regulations and procedures, including those contained within this chapter.

D.    The City Engineer may require a full grading permit in addition to a minor grading permit if it is discovered during construction that one or more of the requirements under subsection A of this section are not satisfied. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.126 Precise Grading Plan.
A.     A precise grading plan with the following elements shown must be submitted for review and approval of the City Engineer if the approved grading plan does not show in sufficient detail any existing and/or proposed structures, building pad elevations and building footprints, existing and proposed drainage and post-construction BMPs. The precise grading plan must be approved by the City Engineer prior to the issuance of any building permits for the property. If a precise grading plan is consistent with the standards for a minor grading permit, the precise grading plan may be processed in accordance with Section 23.24.125.

B.     In addition to the requirements contained in Section 23.24.120, the following information must be accurately depicted on the precise grading plan:

1.     Building footprint;

2.     Hardscape, existing and proposed;

3.     Landscaping, existing and proposed;

4.     Invert elevations in their exact locations must be shown for area drains, swales and sewer;

5.     Post-construction BMPs;

6.     Sewer and water laterals, any hydrants, dry utilities and any other subsurface construction must be shown in the exact locations;

7.     Any walls, freestanding and/or retaining must be shown in their exact locations;

8.     Pools and spas, if applicable;

9.     Any other existing or proposed structures not listed above;

10.   Detention basins;

11.   Driveways/easements;

12.   Setbacks in accordance with Encinitas Municipal Code Title 30 (Zoning Ordinance); and

13.   Reference to any previous permits for the property, including coastal development permits, use permits or variances. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.140 Grading Plan.
The grading plan shall be prepared and signed by a California registered civil engineer and if a soils and geology report is required, the grading plan shall also be signed by a registered soils engineer and a certified engineering geologist. The grading plan shall contain the following information:

A.     Existing and proposed topography of the site taken at a contour interval sufficiently detailed to define the topography over the entire site. The contour elevation, pad and finished floor elevations, and all other elevations shown on the Grading Plan shall be based upon the most recent vertical datum approved by the City Engineer. The plan shall provide benchmark information and description used for preparation of the grading plan. The plan shall also provide the engineering scale and north arrow pointing to the top or right on appropriate sheets of the plan.

B.     Cross sections (to scale) showing existing and proposed grading, property lines, adjacent properties and improvements on adjacent properties, and any adjacent public improvements.

C.    Contours shall extend a minimum of 50 feet off-site, or a sufficient distance to show on- and off-site drainage.

D.    Site’s property lines and existing and proposed easements shown in true location with respect to the most recent horizontal control monuments approved by the City Engineer. If easements or property lines are not correctly shown, the grading permit may be revoked by the City Engineer.

E.     Location and graphic representation of all existing and proposed natural and man-made drainage facilities.

F.     Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drain.

G.    Location and graphic representation of proposed excavations and fills, of onsite storage of soil and other earth material, and of onsite disposal.

H.    Location of existing trees with trunks greater than four inches three feet above natural grade and the location and type of vegetation to be left undisturbed.

I.      Location of proposed final surface runoff, erosion and sediment control measures.

J.     Quantity of soil or earth material in cubic yards to be excavated, filled, removed or recompacted, stored or otherwise utilized onsite.

K.     Outline of the methods to be used in clearing vegetation, and in storing and disposing of the cleared vegetation.

L.     Proposed sequence and schedule of excavation, filling and other land-disturbing and filling activities, and soil or earth material storage and disposal. Grading shall be phased whenever the City Engineer finds that phasing is feasible and necessary to protect the Waters of the State. Areas that are cleared and graded shall be minimized to only portions of the site that are necessary for construction, and the exposure time of disturbed soil areas shall be minimized.

M.    Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within 15 feet of the property or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations.

N.    An estimate of the cost of implementing all grading improvements submitted in a form acceptable to the City Engineer.

O.    100-year floodplain as shown on the most recent FEMA flood insurance rate map (FIRM), if applicable.

P.     Location, design, detail, and cross section of all proposed post-construction BMPs.

Q.    If applicable, location, design, detail, and cross section of any proposed shoring.

R.    Setbacks in accordance with Encinitas Municipal Code Title 30 (Zoning Ordinance); and

S.     Reference to any previous or existing permits for the property, including coastal development permits, use permits or variances. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.150 Interim Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
All the following information shall be provided on the grading plan by a California registered civil engineer with respect to conditions existing on the site during land disturbing or filling activities or soil storage:

A.     A plan and schedule to reduce erodible soil exposure in the event of rain must be graphically and verbally described on the grading plan. The plan and schedule to reduce erodible soil exposure must include, but may not be limited to, a phased grading schedule, consultation with the National Weather Service to determine the forecast during the wet season and plans to have erosion control measures in place on the site no later than 24 hours prior to the forecasted rain event.

B.     Erosion control measures must be graphically and verbally described on the grading plan. The description of erosion control measures may include, but may not be limited to, geotextile material, mats, bonded fiber matrix, hydro seeding, vegetation stabilization, preservation of existing vegetation on site, seeding and planting of ground cover and permanent landscaping and necessary irrigation.

C.    Flow control measures must be graphically and verbally described on the grading plan. The description of flow control measures may include, but may not be limited to: dikes made of gravel bags, fiber rolls, use of stabilized earth to reduce flow velocity and trap sediments and energy dissipaters.

D.    Diversion of runoff and nuisance flow around the areas subject to construction must be graphically and verbally described on the grading plan. The diversion of runoff may include, but may not be limited to: runoff from off-site, conveyance of concentrated flows via lined ditches or pipes, flows directed away from the construction area and away from and over slopes via installation of pipes and lined ditches.

E.     Sediment control devices must be graphically and verbally described on the grading plan. The description of sediment control devices may include, but may not be limited to: storm drain inlet protection by installation of check dams around, but not blocking the inlets, silt fences, gravel bags, berms, fiber rolls, desilting and sediment basins and stabilized construction entrances/exits.

F.     The management of waste on the construction site must be graphically and verbally described on the grading plan. The description of the waste management plan may include, but may not be limited to: inclusion of a 24-hour emergency contact plan, spoil prevention and control, solid waste management, hazardous waste management, liquid waste management, concrete wash outs, and storage of minimum qualities of material on site for spill control.

G.    Any additional measures as required by the City Engineer to temporarily stabilize and reseed disturbed soil areas to protect the Waters of the State.

H.    For bonding purposes, an estimate of the cost of implementing and maintaining all interim erosion and sediment control measures must be submitted in a form acceptable to the City Engineer. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.160 Final Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
All the following information shall be provided by a California registered civil engineer with respect to conditions existing on the site after final structures and improvements (except those required under this section) have been completed and where these final structures have not been covered by an interim plan:

A.     Maximum runoff from the site shall be calculated using the method approved by the City Engineer.

B.     The final plan shall also contain the following information:

1.     A description of and specifications for sediment retention devices;

2.     A description of and specifications for surface runoff and erosion control devices;

3.     A description of vegetative measures prepared by a landscape architect;

4.     A description and illustration of permanent landscape and irrigation for grading of slopes four feet or higher or where erosion potential exists, based upon a review of the plans by the City Engineer;

5.     A graphic representation of the location of all items in paragraphs 1 through 4 of this subsection; and

6.     A description of the maintenance necessary for proper functioning of the stormwater runoff and erosion control methods used for the site, a maintenance schedule, and names and addresses of the persons who will perform the maintenance.

C.    For bonding purposes, an estimate of the costs of implementing all final erosion and sediment control measures must be submitted in a form acceptable to the City Engineer.

D.    The required elements of the grading plan and the final erosion and sediment control plan must be combined onto one plan. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.170 Soil Engineering Report.
A soil engineering report, when required by the City Engineer, shall be prepared and certified by a California registered soils engineer and shall be based on adequate and necessary test borings, and shall, unless otherwise stipulated in Municipal Code Chapter 30.34, contain all the following information:

A.     A description of site conditions addressing on-site soils and geological conditions.

B.     A description of site geology and seismic and regional geology.

C.    Information relative to current and past use of the site if applicable.

D.    Evaluation and description of on-site soils and geological problems including, but not limited to fill, undocumented fill, compressible material, groundwater seepage, slope stability, liquefaction, collapsible soils, landslide and erosion. A minimum factor of safety of 1.5 shall be used for static slope stability analysis.

E.     Evaluation and description of subsurface soil conditions based upon excavation of adequate numbers of boreholes and/or trenches. Results of laboratory soil tests providing adequate information on soil type and strength.

F.     Conclusions and recommendations addressing grading procedures, soil stabilization during and post-construction, foundation design, and slope stability.

G.    Recommendations for corrective measures relative to other potential site geotechnical issues such as temporary shoring, interim slopes during construction, expansive soils, liquefaction, collapsible soils, consolidation, undocumented fill, compressible material, soil erosion, seepage, and landslide.

H.    All recommended measures shall be shown on the proposed grading plans or improvement plans.

Recommendations included in the report and approved by the City Engineer shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.180 Engineering Geology Report.
In addition to a soils report, an engineering geology report will be required when the City Engineer determines that the proposed development is located within an existing or a potential geologic hazardous area. Geological hazardous area is referred to as areas subject to landslide, faulting, or other hazards identified by the City Engineer. The report shall be prepared by a California certified engineering geologist and California certified civil engineer or geotechnical engineer and shall be based on adequate and necessary test borings and shall, unless otherwise stipulated in Municipal Code Chapter 30.34, contain the following information.

A.     An adequate description of the geology of the site and its effect on the proposed grading/development of the site.

B.     Conclusions and recommendations regarding the mitigation of geologic conditions on the proposed development.

C.    Faulting and seismic evaluation of the site.

D.    Opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading.

E.     The report shall contain a geologic map and cross-sections.

F.     Large diameter boring and downhole logging of boring will be required to evaluate landsliding and slope stability issues.

G.    Recommendations included in the report and approved by the City Engineer shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. (Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2017-03)

 

23.24.190 Landscape and Irrigation Plan.
A landscape and irrigation plan and cost estimate, when required by the City Engineer, shall be prepared by a person authorized by the State of California Business and Professions Code to prepare landscape and irrigation plans. All landscape and irrigation plans prepared shall conform to all the requirements set forth in the City landscape guidelines manual. All landscaping and irrigation shall be completed as early as feasible. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.200 Work Schedule.
The applicant must submit a master work schedule showing the following information prior to issuance of permit:

A.     Proposed grading schedule.

B.     Proposed schedule for installation of all interim erosion and sediment control measures.

C.    Schedule for construction of final improvements, if any.

D.    Schedule for installation of permanent erosion and sediment control devices where required. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.210 Security.
A.     The City Engineer shall only require security to be posted for items of work which, if not completed by the applicant, may impact public health, safety, erosion control, stormwater pollution control or result in a visual impact as determined by the City Engineer. For purposes of inspection fee calculations, all engineering work shall be included. The security shall be in the form of one or more of the following as determined by the City Engineer:

1.     A deposit of money or negotiable securities of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.

2.     An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the permitted works are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.

3.     A performance bond with an automatic renewal provision from an approved bonding company. Bonding may be for up to a maximum of 80% of the total security required by the permit with the remaining portion of the required security in the form of cash or approved instrument of credit.

B.     The security shall be conditioned upon the payment to the City of any costs incurred by the City in completing the required work or in employing a contractor to complete such work. Whenever the City Engineer finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of work authorized by a permit, written notice shall be given of such default to the permittee by the City Engineer. Such notice shall state the work remaining to be done, and the time estimated by the City Engineer to be necessary for the completion of work. After receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within the time specified, satisfactorily complete the permitted work.

C.    If the default is not corrected by the permittee within the time specified, the City Engineer shall proceed without delay and without further notice of proceedings to use the security or any portion thereof to complete the required work. The balance, if any, of any cash deposit shall, upon completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or to appropriate successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.220 Fees and Deposits.
A.     Before accepting a grading permit application and plans and specifications for checking, the City Engineer shall collect a plan checking and application processing fee or deposit, as approved by resolution of the City Council.

B.     A fee for each grading permit shall be collected by the City Engineer prior to issuance of a grading permit as approved by resolution of the City Council.

C.    If a deposit account is established, any portion of the deposit not used to cover the actual costs of the City in processing a permit application will be refunded, but no funds will be released until all billings are in, and until final acceptance of the work by the City Engineer. In determining the actual costs incurred by the City in connection with the processing of grading permits, the costs as recorded by the Director of Finance shall be prima facie evidence of actual costs of services performed by the City.

D.    Failure to pay fees and obtain a permit before commencing work shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, except when it can be proven to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that an emergency existed which made it impractical to first obtain the permit. A violation shall result in an assessment of double permit fees for work done prior to permit issuance. Payment of a double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.

E.     Additional fees approved by resolution of the City Council shall be collected as required by the City Engineer.

F.     If the City Engineer performs emergency work on private property, the City shall charge the property owner all direct and indirect costs that are necessary to complete the work in the quality expected by standard engineering practices. In addition, the City Engineer may charge a mobilization cost equal to 10% of the cost for performing the work.

G.    The State of California, its political subdivisions or other governmental agencies shall file applications for permits and shall be issued permits as required by this chapter; provided, however, that no fees shall be required for work to be performed directly by the State of California, its political subdivisions or other governmental agencies. Contractors working for the State of California, its political subdivisions, or other governmental agencies shall obtain a permit and shall pay all applicable permit fees. (Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2017-03)

 

23.24.230 Permit Limitations and Conditions.
All grading permits shall be subject to the following limitations and conditions:

A.     General Conditions. The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the permit, or on the grading plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. If a grading plan shows work beyond the property, or the work proposed impacts adjacent properties, appropriate agreements/easements shall be secured to the satisfaction of the City Engineer by the applicant prior to commencement of construction.

B.     Jurisdictions of Other Agencies. Permits issued under the provisions of this Code shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility for securing permits or licenses that may be required from other City departments or other governing agencies. All grading plans and grading operations shall comply with the State Water Resources Control Board regulations in effect at the time of the grading.

Within the Coastal Zone, any permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall, at the minimum, comply with the San Diego County Municipal Stormwater NPDES Permit (San Diego RWQCB Order No. R9-2007-0001) dated January 24, 2007 and the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activity (99-08-DWQ). All permits issued within the Coastal Zone pursuant to this chapter must also comply with all other provisions of the certified LCP.

C.    Conditions of Approval. In granting any permit under this Code, the City Engineer may attach such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or threat to public or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:

1.     Improvements of any existing grading to bring it up to the standards of this Code;

2.     Requirements for fencing of excavations of fills which would otherwise be hazardous if not fenced.

D.    Modification of Approved Plans. Any modifications of or changes to the approved grading plans must be approved by the City Engineer. Modifications which significantly affect the tract layout, land use, or conditions of approval must have the approval of the appropriate authorizing agency. Approval shall only be considered at a properly noticed public meeting. All property owners within 500 feet of the permit site shall be notified of the meeting.

E.     It shall be a condition of every permit issued under this chapter that the applicant shall comply with all the provisions of the City of Encinitas Watercourse Protection, Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Ordinance in Chapter 20.08 of this Code and City of Encinitas BMP Design Manual, Part II. (Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2009-03)

 

23.24.240 Permit Duration.
A.     The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work required to be done pursuant to the grading permit within the time limit specified therein or, if no time is so specified, within 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit. The time limit specified may be extended by the City Engineer upon written request of the permittee, owner or surety, if in the discretion of the City Engineer, good and sufficient cause has been shown.

B.     Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 90 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period on 90 days.

C.    In order to revalidate an expired permit the permittee shall resubmit all required application forms, maps, plans, reports, schedules, and security to the City Engineer except where an item to be resubmitted is waived by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may require additional fees to be paid.

D.    If a permit is not issued in accordance with the approved plans within 90 days from the date of such approval by the City Engineer, the applicant shall resubmit updated application forms, maps, plans, reports, schedules, and security to the City Engineer for review and re-approval. The City Engineer may waive the resubmittal if the original material is found by the City Engineer to meet necessary standard engineering practices. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.250 Assignment of Permit.
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be assigned, provided:

A.     The permittee notifies the City Engineer of the proposed assignment.

B.     The proposed assignee:

1.     Submits an application form pursuant to this chapter; and

2.     Agrees in writing to all the conditions and duties imposed by the permit; and

3.     Agrees in writing to assume responsibility for all work performed prior to the assignment; and

4.     Provides security pursuant to this chapter; and

5.     Agrees to pay all applicable fees.

C.    The City Engineer approves the assignment.

The City Engineer shall set forth in writing the reasons for his/her approval or disapproval of an assignment. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.260 Permit Denial, Suspension, Revocation and Default.
A.     Unless approved corrections are made to the grading plan, a grading permit shall not be issued if any of the conditions under paragraphs 1 through 3 of this subsection are found to exist.

1.     Hazardous Grading. The City Engineer finds that the work, as proposed by the applicant, will damage any private or public property, or interfere with any existing drainage course in a manner which may cause damage to any adjacent property, or result in the depositing of debris on any public way, or create an unreasonable hazard to person or property, or cause or contribute to an exceedance of state water quality objectives, or fails to reduce pollutants from the site to the maximum extent practicable. If it can be shown, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, that the hazard can be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress fills, drainage structures, construction and post construction BMPs, or by other facilities and means, the City Engineer may issue the grading permit on the condition that such construction work is shown on the grading plans and installed as part of the grading permit.

2.     Geological Hazard. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to person or property, the grading permit shall be denied.

3.     Flood Hazard. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to flood hazard, the plans showing the corrective work proposed to be done must be approved by the City Engineer before issuance of a permit.

4.     Subdivision or Use Permit. Under either of the following circumstances, a grading permit shall not be issued unless and until a Tentative Map or subdivision has been approved or conditionally approved or a use permit issued:

a.     If the purpose of the proposed grading as stated in the application is to prepare the land for subdivision or for some use for which a use permit is required; or

b.     Notwithstanding the purpose of the proposed grading, as stated in the application, if the City Engineer and the Director of Planning and Building find that the purpose of the proposed grading is to prepare the land for subdivision, or for some use for which a use permit is required.

B.     Permit Suspension. The City Engineer shall suspend the grading permit and issue a stop work order, and permittee shall cease all work on the work site, except work necessary to remedy the cause of the suspension, upon notification of such suspension when:

1.     The City Engineer determines that the permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or the provisions of this chapter.

2.     Permittee fails to submit reports when required under this chapter.

3.     Inspection by the City Engineer reveals that the work or the work site:

a.     Is not in compliance with the conditions set forth in this chapter; or

b.     Is not in conformity with the grading plan, or the interim or final erosion and sediment control plans, as approved or as modified under this chapter; or

c.     Is not in compliance with an order to modify under this chapter.

4.     Permittee fails to comply with an order to modify the grading and/or grading plan within the time limits imposed by the City Engineer.

5.     Permittee fails to properly provide for wet season activity, as required by this chapter, or fails to comply with all of the provisions of the City of Encinitas Watercourse Protection, Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Ordinance in Chapter 20.08 of this Code, the Best Management Practice Manual, and the State Regional Water Quality Board Permit.

6.     Permittee fails to construct grading and improvements consistent with the approved grading plan and approved revisions to the plan.

7.     The City Engineer shall reinstate a suspended permit upon permittee’s correction of the cause of the suspension.

C.    Permit Revocation. The City Engineer shall first have resort to the procedures set forth in this section before any other enforcement procedure set forth in this chapter.

1.     The City Engineer shall revoke the grading permit if permittee fails or refuses to perform corrective grading work, as required under subparagraphs a through c below.

a.     Permittee refuses to stop work after suspension of the permit and receipt of a stop work order or work suspension notification.

b.     Permittee stops construction for a cumulative total of 90 days or longer. For the purpose of this section, “stops construction” shall mean that the City Engineer finds that no significant construction activities have taken place on the project site.

c.     Permittee has failed to remedy the cause of a work suspension within 90 days following the work suspension.

2.     The City Engineer shall not reinstate a revoked permit.

3.     When a grading permit is revoked in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the City Engineer shall utilize the project security to remedy the causes of the permit revocation. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.270 No Improvements Planned.
Where an applicant does not plan to construct permanent improvements on the site, or plans to leave portions of the site graded but unimproved, applicant shall:

A.     Meet all the requirements of this chapter, including an interim plan designed to control runoff and erosion on the site for the period of time during which the site, or portions thereof, remain unimproved, and also shall include a description of the maintenance necessary for proper functioning of the stormwater runoff and erosion control methods used for the site, a maintenance schedule, and names and addresses of the persons who will perform the maintenance; and

B.     Submit an executed contract, secured by the methods described in Section 23.24.210 of this chapter, for maintenance of interim plan runoff and erosion control measures for the period of time that the site remains graded but unimproved. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.280 Issuance of Permits.
The City Engineer shall issue a permit upon approval of a grading plan, and where required, interim plan, final plan, soil engineering report, and engineering geology report, deposit of appropriate security and payment of fees. A permit shall be issued subject to the following conditions:

A.     The permittee shall maintain a copy of the permit, approved plans and reports required under this chapter on the work site and available for public inspection during all working hours.

B.     The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity with approved grading plan, interim and final plans. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.290 Grading Inspection and Supervision.
A.     All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer or authorized representative.

B.     Prior to the approval of any building or grading plans and specifications, the City Engineer may inspect the site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions.

C.    The permittee, or authorized agent, shall notify the City Engineer when the following grading operations are ready for inspection:

1.     Pre-job Inspections and Meetings. Prior to any grading, brushing, or clearing, there shall be a pre-grading meeting held on the site. Prior to construction of any public improvements, there shall be a pre-construction meeting held on the site. If required by the City, as applicable to the specific construction of the project, the project geologist, civil engineer of record, contractor, and owner or developer must be in attendance. The permittee, or authorized agent, shall notify the City Engineer at least two working days prior to the meetings and shall be responsible for notifying all principals responsible for grading or paving related operations.

2.     Grading Operation Inspections. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the City Engineer at least 24 hours prior to the work being ready for the following inspections:

a.     Excavation and Fill Inspection.

i.      Canyon Cleanout. After all brush and unsuitable material has been removed and an acceptable base has been exposed, but before any fill is placed.

ii.     Toe Bench and Key. After the natural ground or bed rock is exposed and prepared to receive fill, but before fill is placed.

iii.     Over-Excavation. After the area has been excavated but before fill is placed.

iv.    Excavation. After the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation exceeds 10 feet, and every 10 feet interval thereafter. Continuation of this excavation operation need not await the arrival of the grading inspector provided that proper notification has been made to the City Engineer.

v.     Fill. After the fill has started, but before the vertical height of the fill exceeds 10 feet, and every 10 feet interval thereafter. Continuation of this fill operation need not await the arrival of the grading inspector provided that proper notification has been made to the City Engineer.

vi.    Rough grade inspection shall include inspection by City geologist on geologic related items, if required.

vii.    The site geologist or geotechnical engineer shall provide documentation of the acceptability of all excavations prior to fill.

viii.   Adequate time shall be allowed for City inspectors, the project civil engineer and project geotechnical engineer to perform all required inspections.

b.     Concrete or Gunite Drainage Device Inspection.

i.      Alley Gutter and/or Concrete Device Draining Asphalt.

(A)   Subgrade (Prior to Placement of Concrete). Subgrade is to be prepared and required reinforcement placed. The civil engineer shall provide a field memo that line and grade is set in accordance with the approved plans. The geotechnical engineer shall provide a field memo documenting that subgrade soils have been properly prepared.

(B)   Concrete Placement. Concrete placement need not await the arrival of the grading inspector provided proper notification has been made to the City Engineer.

ii.     Curb and Gutter (Private Property).

(A)   Subgrade (Prior to Placement of Concrete). Subgrade is to be made, forms and reinforcement are to be placed. The civil engineer shall provide a field memo that line and grade is set in accordance with the approved plans. The geotechnical engineer shall provide a field memo documenting that subgrade soils have been properly prepared.

(B)   Concrete Placement. Concrete placement need not await the arrival of the grading inspector provided proper notification has been made to the City Engineer.

iii.     Terrace Drains, Down Drains, and All Other Paved Drainage Devices.

(A)   Subgrade (Prior to Placement of Welded Wire Mesh or Reinforcing Steel). The civil engineer shall provide a field memo that line and grade is set in accordance with the approved plans.

(B)   Reinforcement. Reinforcing steel or welded wire mesh are to be installed but prior to placement of gunite or concrete.

(C)   Concrete Placement. Concrete placement need not await the arrival of the grading inspector provided proper notification has been made to the City Engineer.

c.     Drainage Device Other Than Concrete or Gunite Inspection.

i.      Subdrains.

(A)   After excavation but prior to placement of filter material and pipe. The subdrain pipe and filter material shall be onsite for inspection.

(B)   After filter material and subdrain has been placed but prior to covering with backfill. The project civil engineer shall survey and verify the location and grade of all subdrains prior to backfill.

ii.     Storm Drains and Inlets.

(A)   After placement of storm drains but prior to covering with backfill. The civil engineer shall provide a field memo that line and grade is set in accordance with the approved plans.

(B)   After placement of inlet forms, but prior to pouring concrete. The civil engineer shall provide a field memo that line and grade is set in accordance with the approved plans.

iii.     Earth Swales.

(A)   Prior to rough grading approval or lumber drop.

(B)   Prior to final grading approval.

d.     Rough Grade Inspection. When all rough grading has been completed. Under normal circumstances, all subdrains and slope drains shall be in place and approved as a condition for rough grading approval.

e.     Final Inspection. After all work, including installation of all drainage structures and other protective devices, has been completed and all written professional approvals and the required reports have been submitted. An as-built plan will be required to document any changes made to the project in the field.

f.      Erosion Control Facilities.

i.      After excavation of desilting basins, but prior to fill placement. Prefabricated devices are to be available onsite for inspection.

ii.     After fill placement for desilting basins, but prior to placement of concrete or other non-erosive materials.

iii.     After completion of an erosion control system in accordance with an approved erosion control plan and the requirements of the City Engineer.

D.    If the inspector finds the soil or other conditions not as stated in the approved plans and soil or geology reports or as in additional information which was required for issuance of the grading permit, the inspector may, using reasonable judgment, refuse to allow further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the conditions.

E.     The provisions of the Uniform Building Code regulating stop orders shall apply to all grading work and whenever the City Engineer determines that any work does not comply with the terms of a permit, or this chapter, or that the soil or other conditions are not as stated on the permit, the City Engineer may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing of such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the City Engineer to proceed with the work.

F.     Prior to the issuance of building permits for a graded site, the rough grading shall be completed in accordance with this section and to the satisfaction of the responsible civil engineer, or architect, engineering geologist, soil engineer, and the City Engineer.

G.    Whenever any work on which inspections are required is covered or concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the City Engineer may require by written notice, that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall not entail or be subject to expense by the City. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.300 Implementation of Permits.
A.     It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer, who prepares the grading plan approved by the City Engineer to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. The civil engineer of record shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within the civil engineer’s approved area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the development area. The project civil engineer and/or general contractor shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the project professional grading contractor, and the City Engineer. The civil engineer who prepares and signs the grading plan shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans, erosion control plans, and the submission of as-graded grading plans when required by the City Engineer upon completion of the work. The soil engineer and engineering geologist shall review and sign the grading plans, if required by the City Engineer to assure inclusion of the recommendation.

B.     Soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in this chapter. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data, soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the owner by the soil engineer and engineering geologist. The owner shall submit copies of the report to the civil engineer and two copies of all reports to the City Engineer.

C.    The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all final slopes, design of buttress fills, subdrain installation and incorporation of data supplied by the engineering geologist.

D.    The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and written approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. The engineering geologist shall report professional findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis. The engineering geologist shall inspect unsuitable soil removal, placement of subdrain and preparation of benching prior to placement of fill.

E.     The City Engineer or authorized representative shall inspect the project work at various stages in accordance with the Municipal Code and standard engineering practices. The number and frequency of inspections may be modified by the City Engineer if the work involved requires additional or fewer inspections.

F.     When preliminary soil engineering reports are not required by the City Engineer, inspection and testing by a certified testing agency shall be required if grading is proposed. The testing agency’s responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, approval of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and the compaction of fills.

G.    If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with the provisions of the approved specifications and grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted to the owner. The owner shall submit two copies of all recommendations and reports to the City Engineer.

H.    Protection of Utilities. During grading operations the permittee shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services both within the limits of grading and along any routes of travel of equipment.

I.      Protection of Adjacent Property. The permittee, under the grading permit, is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property and no person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking, or other damage which might result.

J.     Cross Lot Drainage. Cross lot drainage is not allowed unless, based on evidence submitted and reviewed, the City Engineer finds that the runoff has historically crossed the property lines and construction of a drainage system to receive and convey runoff is not economically feasible. If cross lot drainage is found to be allowable by the City Engineer, the applicant is responsible for providing a design that complies with the State of California and City of Encinitas drainage codes, practices and procedures. The design of cross lot drainage shall include flow control and a discharge system that mimics pre-development conditions of the project site and the receiving site or sites. The City Engineer may also require installation of an infiltration system to reduce nuisance flow and runoff volume. Refer also to Municipal Code Chapter 30.34 for additional requirements pertaining to properties located on or adjacent to bluffs. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.310 Completion of Work.
Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work under the grading permit but prior to the issuance of building permits or release of grading securities or issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy, the City Engineer may require:

A.     An as-graded grading plan prepared by the civil engineer, which shall include corrected original ground surface elevations, if necessary, graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, manufactured slope inclination, and location of all drainage facilities and subdrains.

B.     A written approval by the civil engineer approving the grading as being substantially in conformance with the approved grading plan and which specifically approves the following items as appropriate to the project and stage of grading:

1.     Construction of line and grade for all engineered drainage devices and retaining walls (rough and final grading releases).

2.     Staking of property corners for proper building location if appropriate (rough grading release).

3.     Setting of all monuments in accordance with the recorded tract map if applicable (rough or final grading release).

4.     Location of permanent walls or structures on property corners or property lines where monumentation is not required (final grading release).

5.     Location and inclination of all manufactured slopes (rough and final grading release).

6.     Construction of earthen berms and positive building pad drainage (rough and final grading releases).

7.     Construction of all post-construction BMPs in accordance with the approved grading plans.

C.    A soil engineering report prepared by the soil engineer, including type of field testing performed, suitability of utility trench and retaining wall backfill, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation report. Each field density test shall be identified, located on a plan or map, the elevation of test and finish grade elevation shown, and the method of obtaining the in-place density described, either ASTM Soil Compaction Test D-1557-70 or the approved equal shall be so noted. The soil engineer shall provide a written approval as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use, as affected by soil engineering factors. The City Engineer may require that the soil tests or testing be performed by an approved testing agency under the supervision of a licensed civil engineer.

D.    A geology report if required prepared by the engineering geologist, including a final description of the geology of the site including any new information disclosed during the grading, and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The engineering geologist shall provide a written approval as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors and when required by the City Engineer, shall submit an as-built geologic map.

E.     An executed contract, secured by the methods described in Section 23.24.210 of this chapter, for maintenance of final erosion control plan runoff and erosion control measures for up to a three year period.

F.     Partial Release. The City Engineer may, following review of the project, allow rough and final grading releases for portions of the project. Prior to partial release of any work, the appropriate items listed in subsections A through E of this section shall be provided.

G.    The permitted grading work will not be considered complete until all requirements of this section have been fulfilled and the grading permit receives a final approval signature by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.320 Time of Grading Operations.
Grading and equipment operations within one-half mile of a structure for human occupancy shall not be conducted between the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. nor on Saturdays, Sundays, and City recognized holidays. The City Engineer may, however, permit grading or equipment operations during specific hours after 5:30 p.m. or before 7:30 a.m. if the City Engineer determines that such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of such a structure and that the modified hours are consistent with Chapter 9.32 of the Municipal Code regulating times of construction and use of construction equipment.

Permitted hours of operation may be shortened by the City Engineer’s finding of a previously unforeseen effect on the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding community. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.330 Violations.
A.     Any grading commenced or done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or other violation of this chapter, shall be, and the same is declared to be, a public nuisance. Upon order of the City Council, the City Attorney shall commence necessary proceedings for the abatement of any such public nuisance in the manner provided by law. Any failure, refusal, or neglect to obtain a permit as required by this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a public nuisance has been committed in connection with any grading commenced or done contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     In the event that grading is commenced without a permit, the City Engineer shall cause such work to be stopped until a permit is obtained. The permit fee, in such instance, shall then be double that which would normally be required. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter and the performance of the work. Such fee shall not be construed to be a penalty, but for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter in such cases.

In the event that any grading is commenced or done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or of the grading permit, the City Engineer may cause to be recorded with the County Recorder a notice of grading violation for the property. The City Engineer shall cause the notice of grading violation to be removed when the City Engineer determines that the violation no longer exists.

C.    Any person who commences or does any grading in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Every day that a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted to exist is a separate violation, punishable as provided in this Code (see Chapter 1.08).

D.    Any grading or clearing which has been verified by a city field inspection of the property to be in violation of this chapter, may be grounds for denying all applications for grading permits, use permits, major and minor subdivisions, rezones, specific plans, specific plan amendments, and general plan amendments proposed for the property on which the violation occurred until the land and vegetation unlawfully disturbed are, as feasible, restored to their pre-grading/clearing condition. In-lieu of a restoration grading plan, the City Engineer may authorize submittal of a grading plan showing grading and corrective measures necessary to bring the unauthorized grading into conformance with the Municipal Code. No other City permits, unless the permits are needed for correcting the unauthorized grading or clearing, may be issued on the property unless the unauthorized grading or clearing has been properly permitted. The permitting process to correct the unauthorized grading may include, but may not be limited to, review by the Planning Department, the Planning Commission or other authorized body of an application for a coastal development permit, a review under the California Environmental Quality Act, a permit for development of constrained property or other required permits for the intended use of the property. The City Engineer may not issue a grading permit to correct the unauthorized grading until all other Encinitas Municipal Code requirements have been satisfied to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.340 Action Against Security.
The City Engineer may act against the appropriate security if any of the conditions listed in subsections A through D of this section exists. The City Engineer shall use funds from the appropriate security to finance remedial work under taken by the City or a private contractor under contract to the City, and to reimburse the City for all direct costs incurred in the process of the remedial work.

A.     The permittee ceases land-disturbing activities and/or filling and abandons the work site prior to completion of the grading plan.

B.     The permittee fails to conform to the interim plan or final plan, as approved or as modified under this chapter and has had his/her permit revoked under provisions of this chapter.

C.    The techniques utilized under the interim or final plan fail within one year of installation, or before a final plan is implemented for the site or portions of the site, whichever is later.

D.    The City Engineer determines that action by the City is necessary to provide for the public safety, to prevent excessive erosion from occurring on the site or to otherwise protect water quality. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.350 Release of Security.
Security deposited with the City for faithful performance of the grading and erosion control work and to finance necessary remedial work shall be released according to the following schedule:

A.     Securities held against the successful completion of the grading plan and the interim erosion control plan shall be released to the permittee at the completion of work, provided no action against such security is filed prior to that date.

B.     Securities held against the successful completion of the final erosion control plan shall be released to the permittee one year after completion of work, provided no action against such security has been filed prior to that date.

C.    Securities held for maintenance of runoff and erosion control measures shall be held for the period required by this chapter. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.360 Transfer of Responsibility for Approval.
If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, the testing agency or the grading contractor of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped unless and until: (1) the owner submits a letter of notification verifying the change of the responsible professional; and (2) the new responsible professional submits in writing that all prior reports and/or plans (specified by date and title) and work performed by the prior responsible professional have been properly reviewed and all findings, conclusions, and recommendations are appropriate, and the work performed is consistent with standard engineering practices. The new responsible professional may modify or revise recommendations, specifications or work performed if accompanied by supporting data and approved by the City Engineer. The new responsible professional must state that all responsibility within the purview of the area of professional responsibility is assumed as of a specified date. All exceptions must be justified in writing to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.370 Wet Season Work.
A.     Grading shall be minimized during the wet season to the extent feasible. Grading operations shall be phased as necessary to allow minimal exposure of disturbed soils during the grading operation. If grading does occur during the wet season, the City Engineer may require the applicant to implement additional best management practices for any rain events that may occur. No grading permit shall be issued for work occurring from October 1st to April 30th unless the plans include details of protective measures, including de-silting basins or other temporary drainage control measures, or both, as may be deemed necessary by the City Engineer to protect adjoining public and private property or the Waters of the State from damage by erosion, flooding, or the deposit of mud or debris which may originate from the site or result from grading operations.

B.     If grading is begun prior to October 1st, all protective measures shall be installed prior to October 1st. If grading is begun on or after October 1st, all protective measures shall be installed before grading is begun. All protective measures shall be maintained in good working order until April 30th of the succeeding year, where grading is done between October 1st and December 31st, or until April 30th of the same year where grading is done between January 1st and April 30th, unless their removal at an earlier date is approved by the City Engineer.

C.    Where a grading permit is issued and the work is commenced after April 15th and before September 15th of any year, and the permit was issued without an interim erosion and sediment control plan, and it appears that the grading and installation of the permanent drainage devices as authorized by the permit will not be completed prior to October 1st, then on or before September 15th, the owner of the site on which the grading is being performed shall file or cause to be filed with the City Engineer an interim erosion and sediment control plan as provided for in this chapter and shall implement the measures contained in the approved plan by October 1st.

The plan check fee for the interim erosion and sediment control plan shall be paid at the time of plan submittal and shall be in the amount provided for in this chapter.

D.    For continuation of grading activities, other than installation, maintenance, or repair of measures on the erosion control plans, during the wet season, permittee must apply for and receive, every seven days, special permission to proceed.

E.     The City Engineer shall grant permission under this section on the basis of weather forecasts, site conditions, experience and other pertinent factors which indicate the activity may commence or continue without excessive erosion occurring.

F.     Should the permittee fail to submit the plans, fail to provide the protective measures or fail to obtain permission for wet season activities as required by this chapter by the dates specified therein, it shall be deemed that a default has occurred under the conditions of the grading permit security. Thereupon the City Engineer may enter the property for the purpose of installing, by City forces or by other means, the drainage and erosion control devices shown on the approved plans, or if there are not approved plans, as may be deemed necessary to protect adjoining property from storm damage, or the City Engineer may cause the owner of the site to be prosecuted as a violator of this Code, or both actions may be taken.

G.    The City Engineer shall have the authority to require implementation of all erosion control systems and requirements at any time of the year. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.380 Erosion Control System.
A.     Erosion prevention shall be considered the most important erosion control measure, with sediment controls as a necessary backup. The faces of cut and fill slopes and the project site shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion and runoff in accordance with this chapter. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted only upon approval of the City Engineer.

B.     Paved streets, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition free of loose soil, construction debris and trash. Street sweeping or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to prevent storm flows from carrying sediment and debris outside the project boundaries. Watering shall not be used to clean streets except for fine material not otherwise removed by sweeping or other mechanical means.

C.    The registered civil engineer who prepared the grading plan and designed the erosion control devices shall be responsible for modification of the design of devices, as necessary, during the rainy season.

D.    Desilting facilities shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded site.

E.     Desilting basins shall be designed in accordance with City standards. Permanent desilting facilities shall be designed and constructed as to be aesthetically compatible with the surrounding development and terrain.

F.     Desilting basins constructed of compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative compaction of 90% of maximum density. A soil engineering report, prepared by the soil engineer, which includes the type of field testing performed, location and results of testing shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval upon completion of the desilting basins.

G.    Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times during the rainy season. Necessary materials shall be available onsite and stockpiled at convenient locations to facilitate rapid construction of temporary device when rain is imminent.

H.    Erosion protection shall consist of effective planting of all cut slopes in excess of three feet high and fill slopes more than three feet high unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Slopes exceeding five feet high will require an approved sprinkler system, as determined by the City Engineer.

I.      Protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable which may be prior to rough grade approval. Effective planting shall be installed, fully germinated and effectively cover the required slopes prior to final approval unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.

J.     The erosion control provisions shall take into account drainage patterns during the current and future phases of grading throughout the rainy season.

K.     All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when the five-day rain probability forecast exceeds 40%.

L.     Unvegetated slopes shall be protected in accordance with the guidelines set forth by the Erosion and Sediment Control Manual or in accordance with other requirements set forth by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.390 Erosion Control Maintenance.
A.     After each rainstorm exceeding one-quarter inch in a 12-hour period, silt and debris shall be removed from all temporary check berms and desilting basins and the basins pumped dry. The requirement to clean and pump permanent desilting basins will be addressed on a case by case basis. No person shall allow the removed silt and debris to enter the stormwater conveyance system.

B.     After each rainstorm, the performance of the erosion control system shall be evaluated and revised and repaired as necessary.

C.    Devices shall not be moved or modified without the approval of the City Engineer.

D.    The contractor shall be responsible and shall take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass onto areas where impounded water creates a threat to public health, safety and welfare.

E.     The contractor, the permittee, and project owner shall be jointly and severally responsible for the continued maintenance of the devices during the wet season. In the event of failure or refusal by the contractor, permittee or project owner to maintain the devices, the City Engineer may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect adjacent private property, public property or the Waters of the State. The cost shall be charged to the owner and shall include an initial mobilization cost plus the cost of doing the work as provided for in this chapter.

F.     In the event the City Engineer must cause emergency maintenance work to be done, the grading permit may be revoked in writing. The permit shall not be renewed until an erosion control system approved by the City Engineer is installed and a fee of one-half the amount required for the original permit is paid by the owner. The City Engineer may waive installation of an erosion control system after April 15th.

G.    If any grading subject to the provisions of this chapter has commenced on private property without a valid grading permit, the property owner shall be required to prepare and implement an erosion control plan which has been approved by the City Engineer. In the event of failure by the property owner to install an approved erosion control system, the City Engineer may cause emergency work to be done to protect adjacent private property, public property or the Waters of the State. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.400 Dry Season Work.
The permittee conducting any earth moving operations under this chapter shall be responsible for controlling dust at all times. Provisions for dry season dust control shall be included in the grading plan. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.410 Import and Export of Materials.
Where transport of earth is proposed on public roadways from or to the site of an earth grading operation, the following requirements in subsections A through D of this section shall apply. In those instances where an excess of 2,000 cubic yards of earth per project site is transported on public roadways, in addition to the requirements of subsections A through D of this section, the requirements of subsections E through G of this section shall also apply.

A.     Either water or dust palliative, or both, must be applied for the alleviation or prevention of excessive dust resulting from the loading or transportation of earth from or to the project site on public roadways. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining public rights-of-way used for handling purposes in a condition free of dust, earth, or debris attributed to the grading operation.

B.     Loading and transportation of earth from or to the site must be accomplished within the time of operation limitations established in this chapter.

C.    Access roads to the premises shall be only at points designated on the approved grading plan.

D.    The last 50 feet of the access road, as it approaches the intersection with the public roadway, shall have a grade not to exceed three percent. There must be 300 feet clear, unobstructed sight distance to the intersection from both the public roadway and the access road. If the 300 foot sight distance cannot be obtained, contractor personnel for traffic control shall be posted in the locations approved by the City Traffic Engineer.

E.     A stop sign conforming to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code shall be posted at the entrance of the access road to the public roadway.

F.     An advance warning sign must be posted on the public roadway 400 feet on either side of the access intersection, carrying the words “truck crossing.” The sign shall be diamond shape, each side being 30 inches in length, shall have a yellow background, and the letters thereon shall be five inches in height. The sign shall be placed six feet from the edge of the pavement and the base of the sign shall be five feet above the pavement level. The advance warning sign shall be covered or removed when the access intersection is not in use.

G.    Appropriate security as determined by the City Engineer may be required to guarantee maintenance and repair of City streets used during grading and moving of import or export materials. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.420 Haul Routes.
Where excavation or embankment material is imported or exported from one grading site to another over public streets, whether or not either site is otherwise subject to grading permit requirements, the City Engineer may specify the route to be used in transporting the materials upon public streets.

Deviation from this designated haul route shall constitute a violation of the conditions of the permit issued under this chapter. When the City Engineer does specify a route, the route shall be specified in writing on the permit document, and the Traffic Division of the Sheriff’s Department shall immediately be notified that the haul route has been specified.

The City Engineer may further specify load limits where, in his or her opinion, the standard load capacity of vehicles used in such hauling would cause excessive damage to streets on the designated route. Any grading or hauling contractor moving earth materials in violation of this chapter shall be financially responsible for any damage to the public streets done by the hauling vehicles, and shall pay to the City of Encinitas the cost, as determined by the City Engineer, of repairing such damage. At least 24 hours before hauling is to commence, the applicant shall also be required to notify the Traffic Division of the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department and the City Engineer. The Sheriff’s Department and/or City Engineer may require traffic control devices to be provided by the applicant where reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 2008-03; Ord. 2017-03)

 

23.24.430 Depositing Materials on Public or Private Property.
A.     Where Prohibited. No person shall dump, move or place any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone, or other graded, filled or excavated material, or leave any bank, slope or other excavated surface unprotected so as to cause any of such materials to be deposited upon or to roll, blow or wash upon or over the premises of another without the express consent of the owner of each such premises so affected or upon or over any public property, place or way. Such consent shall be in writing and in a form acceptable to the City Engineer.

B.     Spilling, etc., Loads. No person shall, when hauling any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material over any place, allow such materials to blow or spill over and upon such street, alley or place or adjacent private property.

C.    Removal of Deposits from Public Places. When, due to a violation of subsection A of this section, any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material is caused to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon any public place or way, the person responsible shall inform the City Engineer and cause the same to be removed from such public place or way immediately. The City Engineer shall determine the urgency of the clean-up operation and in no case shall the clean-up operation take more than 24 hours. In the event it is not so removed, the City Engineer shall cause such removal and the cost of such removal by the City Engineer shall be paid to the City by the person who failed to so remove the material. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.450 Cuts.
A.     General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soil engineering and/or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section.

B.     Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical. Slopes steeper than two to one may be permitted under special circumstances where the intent of the steeper slope is to provide a slope of varying steepness to order to more closely approximate a natural appearing embankment. All proposed deviations from the two to one limit shall be accompanied by a soils report containing the results of surface and subsurface exploration and analysis and certification from the soils engineer and engineering geologist that in their professional opinions the underlying bedrock and soil supporting the slope have strength characteristics sufficient to provide a stable slope and will not pose a danger to persons or property. In no case shall the average slope exceed two to one. All slopes shall be protected against erosion and any unstable slopes shall be stabilized.

C.    Drainage and Terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided as required by this section.

D.    Buttress Cuts. All proposed buttress cuts that would exceed a vertical depth of 25 feet, a horizontal dimension of 100 feet or are proposed to remain exposed for more than five working days and would lie immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way or offsite structures shall receive special, specific approval from the City Engineer. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.460 Fills.
A.     General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soil engineering report and/or engineering geology report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section.

B.     Slope. Fill slopes shall not be constructed steeper than is safe for intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical. Slopes steeper than two to one may be permitted under special circumstances where the intent of the steeper slope is to provide a slope of varying steepness to order to more closely approximate a natural appearing embankment. All proposed deviations from the two to one limit shall be accompanied by a soils report containing the results of surface and subsurface exploration and analysis and certifications from the soils engineer and engineering geologist that in their professional opinions the underlying bedrock and soil supporting the slope have strength characteristics sufficient to provide a stable slope and will not pose a danger to persons or property. In no case shall the average slope exceed two to one. All slopes shall be protected against erosion and any unstable slopes shall be stabilized.

C.    Preparation of Ground. The existing ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill or other incompetent material. No compacted fill shall be placed unless the underlying soil or bedrock has been investigated by the soil engineer or geologist and found to be capable of safely supporting the additional weight. Where the slope of the existing ground surface is five horizontal to one vertical, or steeper, the fill shall be supported on level benches cut into competent material. Except where recommended by the soils engineer or geologist as not being necessary, subdrains shall be provided under all fills placed in natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage is evident. Such subdrainage systems shall be of a material and design approved by the soil engineer and acceptable to the City Engineer. The location of the subdrains shall be recorded in plan and elevation by the soil engineer and shown on all as-built plans.

D.    Fill Material. No organic or other reducible material shall be incorporated in fills. Except as recommended by the soils engineer and approved by the City Engineer, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches shall be buried or placed in compacted fills. No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than six inches shall be buried within 10 feet of finished grade in public or private right-of-ways.

E.     Drainage and Terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided as required by this chapter.

F.     Slopes to Receive Fill. Where fill is to be placed above the top of an existing or proposed cut or natural slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, the toe of the fill shall be set back from the top edge of the slope a minimum distance as may be specifically recommended by a soils engineer or engineering geologist and approved by the City Engineer. Fills shall not toe out on slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

G.    Inspection and Testing. The soil engineer shall provide sufficient inspection during fill placement and compaction operations to determine that such work is being performed in accordance with conditions of plan approval and requirements of this Code. Continuous inspection shall be provided by the soil engineer, or responsible representative, for all fills that will exceed a vertical height or depth of 30 feet. Tests to determine density of the compacted fill soils shall be made on the basis of not less than one test for each two-foot vertical lift of the fill but not less than one test for each 1,000 cubic yards of material placed. In addition, density tests at a point approximately one foot below the fill slope surface shall be made on the basis of not less than one test for every 5,000 square feet of slope face. All such density tests shall be reasonably uniformly distributed within the fill or fill slope surface. Results of such testing and location of tests shall be presented in the soil engineer’s report.

H.    Compaction. All fills shall be compacted throughout their full extent to a minimum of 90% of the maximum density as determined by ASTM Soil Compaction Test D1557-70. Field density shall be determined by a method acceptable to the City Engineer.

1.     Compaction may be less than 90% of maximum density, as determined by the above test, within six inches of the slope surface when such surface material is placed and compacted by a method acceptable to the City Engineer.

2.     Slope surfaces may be prepared for planting by scarifying by methods approved by the geotechnical engineer provided such slopes when so prepared otherwise comply with the requirements of this section.

3.     The field representative for the City may require the use of sand cone density tests in combination with nuclear device tests. There shall be at least one sand cone test in every five total density tests.

I.      Construction on Cut/Fill Boundaries. The construction of structures across the line separating cut areas from fill areas shall be allowed only when mitigation measures to avoid differential settlements are implemented in accordance with an approved grading plan. The depths of fill under building envelopes on graded pads should be uniform. Uniform depths of fill should be obtained by over-excavating and blending the fill material prior to replacement and recompaction. The soils engineering report shall make specific recommendations regarding the treatment of the cut/fill transition zone. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.470 Setbacks.
A.     General. The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section are minimum and may be increased by the City Engineer or by the recommendations of a civil engineer, soil engineer or engineering geologist, if necessary for safety and stability, or to prevent damage of adjacent properties from deposition or erosion, or to provide access for slope maintenance and drainage. Retaining walls may be used to reduce the required setbacks when approved by the City Engineer.

B.     Setback Requirement. Any structure shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the top of a slope. The setback may be reduced to a minimum of seven feet by the City Engineer following the review of recommendations from the project’s qualified geotechnical consultant. As an alternative to the required setback from the top of slope for the structure, the structure’s footings may be deepened to provide a minimum horizontal distance of 10 feet from the edge of footing to daylight. All structures shall maintain a minimum setback of five feet from the toe of slope.

C.    The setback requirements contained in subsection B of this section, are for the structural and geotechnical stability of building foundations and shall not reduce any setback requirements in other sections of the Municipal Code. The setback mentioned here does not apply to dynamic slopes with active erosion such as coastal bluffs, creek or river banks, or canyons as specified in Chapter 30.34 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.480 Drainage and Terracing.
A.     General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provision of this section.

B.     Terrace. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris except that where only one terrace is required, it shall be at mid-height. For cut or fill slopes greater than 60 feet and up to 120 feet in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height shall be 12 feet in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than 120 feet in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the City Engineer. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.

Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of five percent, a maximum gradient of 12%, and shall be constructed per adopted standards.

A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding 13,500 square feet (projected) without discharging into a downdrain.

C.    Subsurface Drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

D.    Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainageway approved by the City Engineer and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive downdrains or other devices.

Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by the City Engineer.

Exception: The gradient from the building pad may be one percent if all the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:

1.     No proposed fills are greater than 10 feet in maximum depth,

2.     No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of 10 feet,

3.     No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than 10 horizontal to 1 vertical, have a vertical height in excess of 10 feet.

Finish grades, other than above, shall conform to the following minimum drainage gradient standards:

Minimum Gradient

a.     Earth swales: two percent.

b.     Earth (sheet flow): two percent.

c.     Asphalt pavement (sheet flow): one percent.

d.     Concrete drain in earth area: one-half percent.

e.     Concrete gutter in asphalt paved area: one-quarter percent.

E.     Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes towards the cut and has a drainage path greater than 40 feet measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of three inches of concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches and a minimum paved width of 30 inches measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of drain shall be approved by the City Engineer.

F.     Overflow Protection. Berms, swales or other devices shall be provided at the top of cut or fill slopes to prevent surface waters from overflowing onto and damaging the face of the slope. Special drainage provisions shall be made where a building or structure exists within five feet of the top of a slope. (Ord. 2008-03)

 

23.24.490 Rounding and Blending of Slopes.
Grading plans shall be reviewed to insure compliance with all of the following:

A.     All slopes greater than 10 feet high shall be rounded into the existing terrain to create an undulated condition and to produce a naturally appearing contoured transition from slope face to natural ground and abutting cut or fill surfaces where conditions permit.

B.     In order to avoid a man-made appearance and avoid straight, uniform slopes, every effort shall be made to construct slopes that appear natural in character. In order to accomplish this, the steepness of slopes should vary and slope faces should undulate in an effort to produce a more natural appearing slope and avoid sharp, angular changes in the direction of slope faces.

C.    Grading shall be designed to retain natural topography and vegetation and cause the least amount of disturbance while allowing development.

D.    Uniform “stair-stepping” of building pads shall be avoided where feasible. Diversity in building and subdivision design solutions, including but not limited to pad shape and location/offsets and the shape of slopes, which add to the variety of hillside development, shall be encouraged.

E.     Whenever possible, use of existing building sites and pads shall be encouraged. Proposed development shall be designed to conform to the existing site conditions and terrain where feasible.

F.     Use of engineered vertical walls, including keystone and other block or masonry walls, shall be avoided where possible and minimized where necessary in order to avoid visual impact. Consideration should be given to rounding of walls and use of offset walls softened with landscape treatment. This provision is not intended to apply to sea walls regulated pursuant to Chapter 30.34 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2003-10)

 

23.24.500 Clearing of Vegetation and Other Surface Materials.
The clearing of vegetation from an area shall not be undertaken until both of the following have occurred:

A.     All discretionary approvals have been issued if the clearing of vegetation is taking place in preparation for land development, and

B.     A grading permit has been issued if the site to be cleared exceeds 10,000 square feet.

 

23.24.510 Planting of Slopes.
A.     Planting. The surface of slopes shall be protected against damage from erosion by planting with grass or ground cover plants. If grass or ground cover is not established by the beginning of the wet season, temporary erosion control measures such as erosion control mats or blankets shall be installed on the slopes. All permanent (inactive) slopes shall be protected by groundcover or grass. Temporary slopes shall be stabilized during the rainy season and during storm events in the dry season. Slopes exceeding 15 feet in vertical height shall also be planted with shrubs, spaced at not to exceed 10 feet on centers; or trees, spaced at not to exceed 20 feet on centers; or a combination of shrubs and trees at equivalent spacings, in addition to the grass or ground cover plants. The plants selected shall be from a list of plants approved by the City Engineer and planting methods used shall be suitable for the soil and climatic conditions of the site. Plant material shall be selected which will produce a permanent planting coverage effectively controlling erosion. Consideration shall be given to deep-rooted plant material needing limited watering; to low maintenance during the lifetime of the project; to high root to shoot ratio (weight above ground parts versus root system); wind susceptibility and fire retardant characteristics. Planting need not be provided for cut slopes rocky in character and not subject to damage by erosion and any slopes protected against erosion damage by other methods when such methods have been specifically recommended by a soils engineer, engineering geologist, or equivalent authority and found to offer erosion protection equal to that provided by the planting specified in this section. Planting shall be done as early as feasible.

B.     Irrigation. Slopes required to be planted by subsection A of this section shall be provided with an approved system of irrigation, designed to cover all portions of the slope and plans therefor shall be submitted and approved prior to installation. A functional test of the system will be required. The requirements for permanent irrigation systems may be modified upon specific recommendation of a landscape architect or equivalent authority that because of the type of plants selected, the planting methods used and the soil and climatic conditions of the site, irrigation will not be necessary for the maintenance of the slope planting.

C.    Release of Security. The planting and irrigation systems, required by this section, shall be installed within 30 days after rough grading. Prior to final approval of grading and before the release of the grading security, the planting shall be well established and growing on the slopes. Well established shall mean that at least 80% of the slope area has germinated and is in a healthy, actively growing state. (Ord. 2008-03)

Chapter 23.26 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
23.26.010 Chapter Cited.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Encinitas Water Efficient Landscape Regulations” and may be so cited. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.020 Purpose.
The State Legislature determined in the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (the “Act”), Government Code Section 65591 et seq., that the state’s water resources are in limited supply. The Legislature also recognized that while landscaping is essential to the quality of life in California, landscape design, installation, maintenance and management must be water efficient. Consistent with the Legislature’s findings, the purpose of this chapter is to:

A.     Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water in a manner at least as effective as the Act and implementing regulations.

B.     Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and projects and modified landscapes.

C.    Promote the use, when available, of tertiary treated recycled water for irrigating landscaping.

D.    Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use for landscaping to the lowest practical amount.

E.     Encourage water users of existing landscapes to use water efficiently and without waste.

F.     Encourage landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and maintained to improve environmental conditions, provide benefits and realize sustainability goals by:

1.     Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen production, shade, habitat and aesthetic benefits.

2.     Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements, reducing reliance on petroleum-based fertilizers and pesticides and planting climate-appropriate shade trees in urban areas.

3.     Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and graywater wherever possible and selecting climate-appropriate plants that need minimal supplemental water after establishment.

4.     Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally-sourced materials and using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion.

5.     Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing local native plants and climate-adapted, non-native plants, avoiding invasive plants and utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first course of action. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.030 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

“Automatic irrigation controller” means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers shall be able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (ETo) (weather-based) or moisture sensor data.

“Building permit” means a permit to engage in a certain type of construction on a specific location.

“Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Designer Certification Program and the Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer Program.

“Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Auditor Certification Program and the Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor Program.

“Common-interest development” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments and stock cooperatives as per Civil Code Section 4100.

“Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

“Developer” means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activities who is not a single-family homeowner. Developer includes a developer’s partner, associate, employee, consultant, trustee or agent.

“Director” means the Director of Planning and Building or anyone whom the Director has designated or hired to administer or enforce this chapter.

“Discretionary permit” means any permit requiring a decision-making body to exercise judgment prior to its approval, conditional approval or denial.

“Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

“Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

“Establishment period of plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment.

“Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the estimated total water use in gallons per year for a landscape area.

“ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas that when applied to reference evapotranspiration (ETo), adjusts for plant water requirements and irrigation efficiency, two major influences on the amount of water that is required for a healthy landscape.

“Evapotranspiration (ETo)” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time period.

“Flow sensor’’ means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operation master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.

“Grading” means any importation, excavation, movement, loosening or compaction of soil or rock.

“Hardscape” means any durable surface material, pervious or non-pervious.

“Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

“Invasive species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and may damage environmental or economic resources.

“Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to, inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification Program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “WaterSense” labeled auditing program.

“Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. Irrigation efficiency for purposes of this ordinance are 0.75 for overhead spray and 0.81 for drip systems.

“Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code Section 5615.

“Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

“Landscaped area” means an area with outdoor plants, turf and other vegetation. A landscaped area includes a water feature either in an area with vegetation or that stands alone. A landscaped area may also include design features adjacent to an area with vegetation when allowed under Section 23.26.110(B)(6). A landscaped area does not include the footprint of a building, decks, patio, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot or other hardscape that does not meet the criteria in Section 23.26.110(B)(6). A landscaped area also does not include an area without irrigation designated for non-development such as designated open space or area with existing native vegetation.

“Landscape design manual” means the manual, approved by the City that establishes specific design criteria and guidance to implement the requirements of this chapter.

“Landscape water meter” means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.

“Low head drainage” means a sprinkler head or other irrigation device that continues to emit water after the water to the zone in which the device is located has shut off.

“Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip lines or bubblers.

“Mass grading” means the movement of soil per the Grading, Erosion, and Sediment Control Ordinance, Municipal Code Chapter 23.24.

“Master shut-off valve” means an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system.

“Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscape area based on the reference evapotranspiration (ETo), the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) and the size of the landscape area.

“Median” means an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted.

“Mulch” means an organic material such as leaves, bark, straw or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation, suppress weeds, moderate soil temperature or prevent soil erosion.

“New construction” means, for the purpose of this ordinance, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

“Nonresidential landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common-interest developments with designated recreational areas.

“Overspray” means the water from irrigation that is delivered outside an area targeted for the irrigation and makes contact with a surface not intended to be irrigated.

“Parkway” means the area between the curb or the edge of the traffic lane where there is no curb to the property line or easement line of a public or private roadway. It may be planted or unplanted and with or without pedestrian egress.

“Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into underlying soil.

“Plant factor” means a factor that when multiplied by the ETo, estimates the amount of water a plant needs.

“Public water purveyor” means a public utility, municipal water district, municipal irrigation district or municipality that delivers water to customers.

“Recreation area” means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters, or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.

“Recycled water” means waste that has been treated at the highest level required by the California Department of Health Services for water not intended for human consumption. “Tertiary treated recycled water” means water that has been through three levels of treatment including filtration and disinfection.

“Reference evapotranspiration” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the ETo of a large field of four-inch to seven-inch tall, cool season turf that is well watered. Reference ETo is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. For purposes of this chapter, reference ETo shall be 42.9 inches per year.

“Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single- or multi-family homes.

“Runoff” means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscaped area.

“Special landscaped area” means an area of the landscape dedicated to edible plants, recreational areas, an area irrigated with recycled water or water features using recycled water.

“Submeter” means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility meter.

“Subsurface irrigation” means an irrigation device with a delivery line and water emitters installed below the soil surface that slowly and frequently emit small amounts of water into the soil to irrigate plant roots.

“Transitional area” means a portion of a landscaped area that is adjacent to a natural or undisturbed area and is designated to ensure that the natural area remains unaffected by plantings and irrigation installed on the property.

“Turf” means a groundcover surface of mowed grass.

“Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. A water feature includes a pond, lake, waterfall, fountain, artificial streams, spa and swimming pool. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices are not water features.

“WUCOLS” means Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources, 2014, or the most recent version thereof. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.040 Applicability.
A.     This chapter shall apply to the following projects that require a building permit or a discretionary permit:

1.     New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet.

2.     Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.

3.     A model home that includes a landscaped area.

4.     A cemetery under limited requirements in Section 23.26.150.

B.     Any project with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this ordinance or conform to the prescriptive compliance option specified in Section 23.26.240.

C.    For project using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured onsite, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet or less of aggregate landscape area and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured onsite is subject only to Section 23.26.240(B)(5).

D.    This chapter shall not apply to the following:

1.     A registered local, state or federal historical site.

2.     An ecological restoration project that does not require a permanent irrigation system.

3.     A mined land reclamation project that does not require a permanent irrigation system.

4.     Existing plant collections as part of a botanical garden or arboretum open to the public.

E.     There are specific regulations regarding the coastal bluff outlined in the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone, Section 30.34.020 of the Municipal Code. If there is a conflict between the standards of this chapter and Section 30.34.020, the standards of Section 30.34.020 shall supersede. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01; Ord. 2017-07)

 

23.26.050 Landscape Approval.
A.     No person shall install landscaping for a project subject to this chapter without the review and approval required by this chapter.

B.     A person constructing a project subject to the requirements of this chapter shall obtain approval for the landscaped area as follows:

1.     A person applying for a building permit for a single-family residence that does not require a discretionary permit shall obtain an approval of the landscaping from the City as part of the permitting process.

2.     A person applying for a discretionary permit described in Section 23.26.040:

a.     Shall submit a landscape documentation package as required by the discretionary permit application. The landscape documentation package shall include all of the information as specified in Section 23.26.070 except that a soil management report is not required and that the details of the irrigation system do not need to be shown. The landscape documentation package shall show the location of any separate water meters for landscaped areas and shall provide a discussion of the proposed method and type of irrigation and how the goal of water conservation will be attained.

b.     Shall obtain approval in accordance with this chapter for landscaping as part of the permitting process for each building permit for each project segment that requires installation of a water meter or connection to an existing water meter.

c.     May use “typical” plans for developer-installed landscaping for single-family homes.

C.    Upon approval of a project and landscaped area associated with a discretionary or building permit, the City shall provide a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor.

D.    Upon approval of a project and landscape area associated with a building permit, the project applicant shall:

1.     Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings and any other information to the property owner or designee.

2.     Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor.

E.     A person issued an approval of a project with a landscaped area shall install the approved landscaping and irrigation system before final inspection of the project. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.060 Administration and Landscape Manual.
A.     The Director shall administer and enforce this chapter.

 

B.     The Director shall prepare a landscape design manual or may designate the current County of San Diego Landscape Design Manual as the City landscape design manual to provide guidance to applicants on how to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.070 Landscape Documentation Package.
A.     Except as otherwise provided, applications for projects subject to Section 23.26.040 shall include a landscape documentation package that complies with the provisions of this chapter and with the landscape design manual.

B.     An applicant for a project described in Section 23.26.040B or Section 23.26.040C is eligible to conform to the prescriptive compliance option specified in Section 23.26.240 of this chapter in lieu of submitting a landscape documentation package.

C.    An applicant for a permit for a cemetery is not required to submit a landscape documentation package, but shall comply with Section 23.26.150.

D.    The landscape documentation package required by subsection A of this section shall contain the following:

1.     A soil management report and plan that complies with Section 23.26.080 that analyzes the soil within each landscaped area of the project and makes recommendations regarding soil additives. A soil management report is not required for discretionary applications.

2.     A landscape design plan describing the landscaping for the project that complies with Section 23.26.090 and an irrigation design plan describing the irrigation for the project that complies with Section 23.26.100. For discretionary applications, the details of the irrigation system do not need to be shown but the concept plan shall show the location of any separate water meters for landscaped areas and shall provide a discussion of the proposed method and type of irrigation and how the goal of water conservation will be attained.

3.     A water efficient landscape worksheet that complies with Section 23.26.110 that calculates the MAWA and the ETWU for the project.

4.     A grading design plan that complies with Section 23.26.120 that describes the grading of the project. If the project applicant has submitted a grading plan with the application for the project, the Director may accept that grading plan in lieu of the grading design plan required by this subsection if the grading plan complies with Section 23.26.120. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.080 Soil Management Report.
A.     The soil management report required by Section 23.26.070 shall be prepared by a California licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect or other landscape professional licensed by the state to do this work and shall contain the following information:

1.     An analysis of the soil for the proposed landscaped areas of the project that includes information about the soil texture, soil infiltration rate, pH, total soluble salts, sodium, and percent organic matter. The analysis shall be completed by a properly certified or accredited laboratory using accepted industry protocol.

2.     Recommendations and information about soil amendments and mulch that may be necessary to foster plant growth and plant survival in the landscaped area using efficient irrigation techniques. The report shall identify the type and amount of mulch for each area where mulch is applied.

B.     When a project involves mass grading of a site the applicant shall submit the soil management report that complies with subsection A of this section with the certificate of completion required by Section 23.26.230.

C.    In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments), a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15% will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots.

D.    The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

E.     The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations with the certificate of completion required by Section 23.26.230. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.090 Landscape Design Plan.
A.     For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

1.     Plant Material.

a.     Any plant may be selected for the landscape provided the estimated total water use (ETWU) in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

i.      Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation.

ii.     Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants.

iii.     Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance.

iv.    Selection of trees based on size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area.

v.     Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists.

vi.    Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines.

b.     Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

i.      Use of the Sunset Western Climate Zone System, which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate.

ii.     Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines) and to allow adequate soil volume for healthy root growth.

iii.     Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

c.     Use of Turf. The following regulations shall apply to the use of turf on a project subject to this chapter:

i.      Only low volume or subsurface irrigation shall be used for turf in a landscaped area:

(A)   On a slope greater than 25% grade where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape.

(B)   Where any dimension of the landscaped area is less than six feet wide.

ii.     On a commercial, industrial, institutional multifamily or public agency project, no turf shall be allowed on a center island median strip or on a parking lot island.

iii.     A ball field, park, golf course, cemetery and other similar use shall be designed to limit turf in any portion of a landscaped area not essential for the operation of the facility.

iv.    No turf shall be allowed in a landscaped area that cannot be efficiently irrigated, such as avoiding runoff or overspray.

d.     High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.

e.     No invasive plant species shall be added to a landscaped area.

f.      The architectural guidelines of a common interest development shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

2.     Water Features.

a.     Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

b.     Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

c.     Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

3.     Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments.

a.     Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

b.     Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to the recommendations of the soils management report required as per Section 23.26.080 and what is appropriate for the plants selected.

c.     For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

d.     A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces in each landscaped area except in turf areas, creeping or rooting ground covers or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscaped area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

e.     Stabilizing mulching products shall be applied on slopes that meet current engineering standards.

f.      The mulching portion of seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall comply with subparagraph a of this subsection (F)(1).

g.     Organic mulch materials from recycled or post-consumer shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available.

h.     Highly flammable mulch material shall not be used.

B.     The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

1.     Be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect or other landscape professional licensed by the state to do this work.

2.     Include a statement signed under penalty of perjury by the person who prepared the plan that provides, “I am familiar with the requirements for landscape and irrigation plans contained in the City of Encinitas Water Efficient Landscape Regulations. I have prepared this plan in compliance with those regulations and the Landscape Design Manual. I certify that the plan implements those regulations to provide efficient use of water.”

3.     Address fire safety issues and demonstrate compliance with applicable requirements for defensible space around buildings and structures and shall avoid the use of fire prone vegetation.

4.     Show features and characteristics of the property and project including but not limited to property lines, streets, street names, pervious and impervious hardscapes such as driveways, walkways, and other paved areas, the footprint of existing and proposed buildings and structures, water features, fences, and retaining walls. Elevations may be required for new structures in the landscaped areas such as trellises, fences, gazebos, etc.

5.     Include a list of all vegetation by common and botanical plant name, which exists in the proposed landscaped area. The plan shall state what vegetation will be retained and what will be removed.

6.     Include a list of all vegetation by common and botanical plant name that will be added to each landscaped area. Provide the plant factor for each species on the list. The plan shall include the total quantities by container size and species. If the applicant intends to plant seeds, the plan shall describe the seed mixes and applicable purity and germination specifications.

7.     The plan shall be accompanied by a drawing showing on a page or pages the specific location of all vegetation, retained or planted, the plant spacing and plant size, natural features, water features, and hardscape areas. The drawing shall include a legend listing the common and botanical plant name and plant factor of each plant shown on the drawing.

8.     All plants shall be grouped in hydrozones and the irrigation shall be designed to deliver water to hydrozones based on the moisture requirements of the plant grouping. A hydrozone may mix plants of moderate and low water use or mix plants of high water use with plants of moderate water use. No high water use plants shall be allowed in a low water use hydrozone. The plan shall also demonstrate how the plant groupings accomplish the most efficient use of water.

9.     The plan shall be accompanied by a drawing showing on a page or pages each hydrozone and specifying each as low, moderate, high water or mixed water use. Hydrozones shall be delineated and labeled by number, letter or other method.

10.   Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants.

11.   Demonstrate that landscaping when installed and at maturity will be positioned to avoid obstructing motorists’ views of pedestrian crossings, driveways, roadways and other vehicular travel ways. If the landscaping will require maintenance to avoid obstructing motorists’ views, the plan shall describe the maintenance, the frequency of the proposed maintenance and the party responsible for maintenance.

12.   Avoid the use of landscaping with known surface root problems adjacent to a paved area, unless the plan provides for installation of root control barriers or other appropriate devices to control surface roots.

13.   Plants in a transitional area shall consist of a combination of site adaptive and compatible native and/or non-native species. No invasive species shall be introduced or tolerated in a transitional area. The irrigation in a transitional area shall be designed so that no overspray or runoff shall enter an adjacent area that is not irrigated.

14.   Include a detailed description of each water feature that will be included in the landscaped area, including at a minimum feature type and surface area.

15.   Identify type of mulch and application depth.

16.   Identify type and quantity of soil amendments.

17.   Identify location, installation details and 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage onsite retention and infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan. (See Section 23.26.190.)

18.   Identify areas irrigated with recycled water.

19.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 23.26.190 and their 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity.

20.   Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and areas of distribution.

21.   On a project other than a single-family residence, the plan shall identify passive and active recreational areas. (Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.100 Irrigation Design Plan.
A.     For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management and maintenance.

B.     An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package:

1.     System.

a.     Landscape water meters, defined as either dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated landscapes of 1,000 square feet but not more than 5,000 square feet (the level at which Water Code Section 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of 5,000 square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:

i.      A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or

ii.     A privately owned meter or submeter.

b.     Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

c.     If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

i.      If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

ii.     Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

d.     Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

e.     Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. Additional manual shutoff valves shall be installed between each zone of the irrigation system and the water supply.

f.      Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.

g.     Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on nonresidential landscapes and residential landscapes of 5,000 square feet or larger.

h.     Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.

i.      The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

j.      Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

k.     The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

l.      The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 23.26.110 regarding the maximum applied water allowance.

m.    All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/lnternational Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

n.     It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

o.     In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

p.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

q.     Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

r.      Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass.

s.     Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.

t.      Areas less than 10 feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

u.     Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

i.      the landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

ii.     the adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

iii.     the irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 23.26.100(B)(1)(i).

v.     Slopes greater than 25% (one foot of vertical elevation change for each four feet of horizontal length) shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur.

w.    All wiring and piping under a paved area that a vehicle may use, such as a parking area, driveway or roadway, will be installed inside a PVC conduit.

x.     Irrigation piping and irrigation devices that deliver water, such as sprinkler heads, shall be installed below grade using swing joints or other riser-protection components if they are within 24 inches of a vehicle or pedestrian use area. The Director may allow on-grade piping where landform constraints make below grade piping infeasible.

2.     Hydrozone.

a.     Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

b.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

 

c.     Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.

d.     Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

i.      The plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

ii.     The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

e.     Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

f.      On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

C.    The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall:

1.     Be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect or other landscape professional licensed by the state to do this work.

2.     Include the MAWA for the plans, including the calculations used to determine the MAWA. The calculations shall be based on the formula in Section 23.26.130 and the water efficient landscape worksheet.

3.     Include the ETWU for the plans, including the calculations used to determine the ETWU. The calculations shall be based on the formula in Section 23.26.140 and the water efficient landscape worksheet.

4.     Show the location of separate water meters for landscape.

5.     Show the location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system that will provide water to the landscape area, including the controller, water lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices.

6.     Describe each automatic irrigation controller the system uses to regulate irrigation schedule and whether it is a weather based system or moisture detection system. The plan shall depict the location of electrical service for the automatic irrigation controller or describe the use of batteries or solar power that will power valves or a smart controller.

7.     Show the static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply.

8.     Show the flow rate in gallons, the application rate in inches per hour and the design operating pressure per square inch for each station.

9.     Show recycled water irrigation systems and the areas irrigated with recycled water.

10.   Identify areas irrigated with graywater or rainwater captured on-site.

11.   Demonstrate how grading and drainage techniques promote healthy plant growth and prevent erosion and runoff. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.110 Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.
The water efficient landscape worksheet required by Section 23.26.070 shall be prepared by a California licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional licensed by the state to do this work and shall contain the following:

A.     Information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas.

1.     The ETAF for a landscaped project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected.

2.     The MAWA is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required.

3.     The Estimated Total Water Use is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. The ETWU must be below the MAWA.

B.     Water budget calculations, which shall meet the following requirements:

1.     The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS, or may be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources. The plant factor shall be 0.1 for very low water use plants, from 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. A plan that mixes plants in a hydrozone that require a different amount of water shall use the plant factor for the highest water using plant in the hydrozone.

2.     Temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. Temporarily irrigated as used in this chapter means the period of time when plantings only receive water until they become established.

3.     The surface area of a water feature, including swimming pools, shall be included in a high water use hydrozone.

4.     The calculations shall use the formula for the MAWA in Section 23.26.130 and for the ETWU in Section 23.26.140.

5.     All special landscaped areas shall be identified by their water use calculated as shown on the water efficient landscape worksheet. The ETAF for new and existing special landscaped areas shall not exceed 1.0.

6.     Rock and stone or pervious design features, such as decomposed granite ground cover that are adjacent to a vegetated area may be included in the calculation of the MAWA and ETWU provided the features are integrated into the design of the landscape area and the primary purpose of the feature is decorative. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.120 Grading Design Plan.
The grading design plan required by Section 23.26.070 shall be prepared by a California licensed civil engineer, licensed landscape architect, licensed architect, or other landscape professional licensed by the state to do this work and shall comply with following requirements:

A.     The grading on the project site shall be designed for the efficient use of water by minimizing soil erosion, runoff and water waste resulting from precipitation and irrigation.

B.     The plan shall show the finished configurations and elevations of each landscaped area including the height of graded slopes, the drainage pattern, pad elevations, finish grade and any stormwater retention improvements. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.130 Maximum Applied Water Use.
A.     A landscape project subject to this chapter shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). The MAWA for a landscape project shall be determined by the following calculation:

 

MAWA (Annual Gallons Allowed) = (ETo)(0.62)[(ETAF x LA) + ((1 - ETAF) x SLA)]

 

B.     The abbreviations used in the equation have the following meanings:

1.     MAWA = Maximum applied water allowance in gallons per year.

2.     ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year.

3.     0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot.

4.     ETAF = adjustment factor for plant factors and irrigation efficiency (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas).

5.     LA = Landscaped area includes special landscaped area in square feet.

6.     1- ETAF = The additional ET adjustment factor for a special landscaped area.

7.     SLA = Portion of the landscaped area identified as a special landscaped area in square feet. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.140 Estimated Total Water Use.
A.     An applicant for a project subject to this chapter shall calculate the ETWU for each landscaped area and the entire project using the following equation:

 

ETWU = (ETo)(0.62)(PF x HA / IE + SLA)

 

B.     The abbreviations used in the equation have the following meanings:

1.     ETWU = Estimated total water use in gallons per year.

2.     ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year.

3.     0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot.

4.     PF = Plant factor from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources.

5.     HA = Hydrozone area in square feet. Each HA shall be classified based upon the data included in the landscape and irrigation plan as high, medium or low water use.

6.     IE = Irrigation efficiency of the irrigation method used in the hydrozone.

7.     SLA = Special landscaped area in square feet.

C.    The ETWU for a proposed project shall not exceed the MAWA. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.150 Cemeteries.
A person submitting an application for a cemetery shall include the following:

A.     A landscape concept plan including all of the information specified for a landscape design plan in Section 23.26.090 and the proposed method and type of irrigation.

B.     A water efficient landscape worksheet that calculates the MAWA for the project that complies with Section 23.26.110.

C.    A landscape irrigation and maintenance schedule that complies with Section 23.26.200. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.160 Projects With Model Homes.
A.     All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter.

B.     A person who obtains a permit to construct a single-family residential development that contains a model home or homes shall provide a summary of this chapter to each adult visitor that visits a model home. If an adult visitor is accompanied by one or more adults during the visit only one set of written materials is required to be provided.

C.    Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes.

D.    Each model home shall provide an educational sign in the front yard of the model home visible and readable from the roadway that the home faces that states in capital black lettering at least two inches high on a white sign, “THIS MODEL HOME USES WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION.”

E.     Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.170 Recycled Water.
A.     A person who obtains a permit for a project that is subject to this chapter shall use recycled water for irrigation when tertiary treated recycled water is available from the water purveyor who supplies water to the property for which the City issues a permit.

B.     A person using recycled water shall install a dual distribution system for water received from a public water purveyor. Pipes carrying recycled water shall be purple.

C.    A person who uses recycled water under this section shall be entitled to an ETAF of 1.0 for portions of the landscaped area utilizing recycled water.

D.    This section does not excuse a person using recycled water from complying with all state and local laws and regulations related to recycled water use. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.180 Graywater Systems.
A.     Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in onsite landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code. Refer to Section 23.26.040C for the applicability of this ordinance to landscaped areas less than 2,500 square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater.

B.     Graywater systems may include tanks, filters, pumps and piping for subsurface landscape irrigation through mulch basins, disposal trenches or subsurface drip irrigation fields.

C.    Graywater shall only be used for subsurface irrigation. An exception is allowed for ground surface discharge in a mulch basin as long as the discharge point(s) remain covered with at least two inches of mulch, rock or soil.

D.    Graywater may be used to irrigate fruit trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, groundcovers and lawns. Graywater shall not be used in vegetable gardens where the food is a root crop or touches the ground surface.

E.     Graywater is distinct from and does not include captured rainwater or recycled water. (Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.190 Stormwater Management and Rainwater Retention.
A.     Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged.

B.     The landscape design plan shall demonstrate compliance with best management practices required by Municipal Code Chapter 20.08, Stormwater Management (City of Encinitas Watercourse Protection, Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Ordinance).

C.    All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. (See Section 23.26.090(A)(3)(a).)

D.    It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: (1) the one-inch, 24-hour rain event; or (2) the 85th percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation.

E.     It is recommended that storm water projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve onsite storm water and dry weather runoff capture and use:

1.     Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.

2.     Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways.

3.     Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.

4.     Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.

5.     Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.

6.     Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture storm water and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.

7.     Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. (Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.200 Landscaping and Irrigation Maintenance.
A.     A property owner using water on property subject to a landscape approval shall prepare a maintenance schedule for the landscaping and irrigation system on the project. The schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion and shall provide for:

1.     Routine inspection to guard against runoff and erosion and to detect plant or irrigation system failure;

2.     Landscape irrigation auditing.

3.     Replacement of dead, dying and diseased vegetation;

4.     Eradication of invasive species;

5.     Adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components;

6.     Topdressing with compost;

7.     Replenishing mulch;

8.     Soil amendment when necessary to support and maintain healthy plant growth;

9.     Fertilizing, pruning and weeding and maintaining all landscaped areas;

10.   Aerating and dethatching turf areas;

11.   Removing obstructions to emissions devices;

12.   Maintenance to avoid obstruction of motorists’ views; and

13.   Identify who will be responsible for maintenance.

B.     After approval of a landscape plan, the owner is required to:

1.     Maintain and operate the landscaping and irrigation system on the property consistent with the MAWA.

2.     Maintain the irrigation system to meet or exceed an irrigation efficiency necessary to meet MAWA.

3.     Replace broken and malfunctioning irrigation system components with components of the same materials and specifications, their equivalent or better as soon as possible upon discovery of the break or malfunction. The system, or the portion of the system with the break or malfunction when that portion can be isolated behind a closed valve, shall not be used until the break or malfunction is repaired.

4.     Ensure that when vegetation is replaced, replacement plantings are representative of the hydrozone in which the plants were removed and are typical of the water use requirements of the plants removed, provided that the replaced vegetation does not result in mixing high water use with low water use plants in the same hydrozone.

5.     A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable Best Practices for all landscape maintenance activities. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.210 Irrigation Schedule.
A.     For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health.

B.     A property owner using water on property subject to a landscaping approval shall submit an irrigation schedule for the project.

C.    For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate and current reference evapotranspiration so that applied water meets the estimated total water use (ETWU). Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

D.    The irrigation schedule shall be prepared by a California licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional appropriately licensed by the state and shall provide the following information:

1.     A description of the automatic irrigation system that will be used for the project.

2.     The ETo date relied on to develop the irrigation schedule, including the source of the data.

3.     The time period when overhead irrigation will be scheduled and confirm that no overhead irrigation shall be used between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or within any more restrictive water use time frame established by the local water purveyor. Operation of the system outside the normal watering times is allowed for auditing and maintenance purposes.

4.     The parameters used for setting the irrigation system controller for watering times for:

a.     The plant establishment period.

b.     Established landscaping.

c.     Temporarily irrigated areas.

d.     Different seasons during the year.

5.     The consideration used for each station for the following factors:

a.     The days between irrigation.

b.     Station run time in minutes for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff.

c.     Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff.

d.     Amount of water to be applied on a monthly basis.

e.     Application rate setting.

f.      The root depth setting.

g.     The plant type setting.

h.     The soil type.

i.      The slope factor.

j.      The shade factor.

k.     Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.220 Irrigation Audit.
A.     All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a local agency landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.

B.     In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15% will satisfy this requirement.

C.    For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, the project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the local agency that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming.

D.    The City may randomly audit outdoor water use on any property for which it issued a landscape approval pursuant to this chapter to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A person who owns or occupies property subject to a landscape approval shall be deemed to consent to the audit of the outdoor water use if the person engages in outdoor water use on the property.

E.     The City may also analyze, survey and audit outdoor water use using methods described in 23 California Code of Regulations Section 490 et seq., on an existing landscape project where the landscaped area exceeds one acre and the City has reasonable grounds to believe that due to irrigation runoff, low head drainage, overspray or other similar condition, water is flowing onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, structures, walkways, roadways or other paved areas of the project. (Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.230 Certificate of Completion.
Prior to receiving final approval for completion of the project, each applicant shall submit a signed certificate of completion and final documentation for the project under penalty of perjury within 10 days after installation.

A.     The certificate of completion shall:

1.     Be submitted on a form provided by the City;

2.     Include a statement verifying that the landscaping and irrigation were installed as allowed in the approved landscape and irrigation plan, all approved soil amendments were implemented, the installed irrigation system is functioning as designed and approved, the irrigation control system was properly programmed in accordance with the irrigation schedule, and the person operating the system has received all required maintenance and irrigation plans; and

3.     Be signed by the professional of record for the landscape design.

B.     The final documentation submittal shall include:

1.     An irrigation schedule that complies with Section 23.26.210, that describes the irrigation times and water usage for the project.

2.     A landscaping and irrigation system maintenance schedule that complies with Section 23.26.200.

3.     A soil management report that complies with Section 23.26.080, if the applicant did not submit the report with the landscape documentation package.

4.     For all projects with 2,500 square feet or greater landscaped area, an irrigation audit report that complies with Section 23.26.220. Projects consisting of one single-family residence with a landscaped area of less than 5,000 square feet are not required to submit an irrigation audit.

5.     Where there have been significant changes to the landscape plan during the installation of landscaping or irrigation devices or irrigation system components, the professional of record for the landscape design shall submit final “as built” plans that show the changes. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.240 Prescriptive Compliance Option.
A.     This section contains prescriptive requirements which may be used as a compliance option to the City of Encinitas Water Efficient Landscape Regulations.

B.     Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option:

1.     Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following elements:

a.     Date;

b.     Project applicant;

c.     Project address;

d.     Assessor’s parcel number (APN);

e.     Total landscape area (square feet) including a breakdown of turf and plant material;

f.      Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed);

g.     Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;

h.     Contact information for the project applicant and property owner;

i.      Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option to the City of Encinitas Water Efficient Landscape Regulations.”

2.     Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet to a depth of six inches into landscape area (unless contraindicated by a soil test).

3.     Plant material shall comply with all of the following:

a.     For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for 75% of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water.

b.     For nonresidential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for 100% of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water.

c.     A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

4.     Turf shall comply with all of the following:

a.     Turf shall not exceed 25% of the landscape area in residential areas, and there shall be no turf in nonresidential areas.

b.     Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one foot vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length.

c.     Turf is prohibited in parkways less than 10 feet wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by subsurface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.

5.     Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:

a.     Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data and utilize a rain sensor.

b.     Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.

c.     Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturers recommended pressure range.

d.     Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply.

e.     All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard,” and all sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

f.      Areas less than 10 feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

6.     For nonresidential projects with landscape areas of 1,000 square feet or more, a private submeter(s) to measure landscape water use shall be installed.

C.    At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation, irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation maintenance. (Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.250 Waste Water Prevention.
A.     No person shall use water for irrigation such that due to runoff, low head drainage, overspray or other similar condition, water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, structures, walkways, roadways or other paved areas. Irrigation water use shall comply with any water waste prevention regulations, policies or guidelines established by the local water purveyor.

B.     No person whose landscape is subject to a landscape approval pursuant to this chapter shall apply water to the landscape in excess of the MAWA. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.260 Enforcement.
A.     The City Manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any city authorized personnel or enforcement officer may exercise any enforcement powers as set forth in the code.

B.     The City may delegate to or enter into a contract with a local agency or other person to implement and administer any of the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the City. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

 

23.26.270 Fees.
An applicant for a project subject to this chapter shall include with the application, all fees established by the City to cover the City’s cost to review an application, any required landscape documentation package and any other documents the City reviews pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-05; Ord. 2016-01)

Chapter 23.28 PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
23.28.010 Purpose.
A.     No person shall place an improvement upon or otherwise perform construction work on public property or public easements without first obtaining an encroachment permit issued by the City Manager.

B.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:

1.     City employees in their official capacity;

2.     Public utilities operating under franchise;

3.     Construction performed by the United States Government, the State of California, or the County of San Diego. (Ord. 87-12)

 

23.28.020 Emergency Excavations.
In the event that an encroachment is required for the immediate protection of life or property and there is insufficient time to obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the person making the encroachment shall thereafter promptly apply for a permit. (Ord. 87-12)

 

23.28.030 Application.
A.     The applicant shall file with the City Manager an application for encroachment permit on a form that calls for such information and drawings as required by the City Manager to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

B.     The applicant shall pay a filing fee in accordance with the resolution adopted by the City Council in an amount sufficient to recover the costs of processing the application.

C.    Any unused portion of the application fee shall be returned to the applicant if the application is denied or otherwise applied to the issuance fee. (Ord. 87-12)

 

23.28.040 Permits.
Unless the issuance of the encroachment permit will endanger the public health or safety or surrounding property, the encroachment permit shall be issued subject to such conditions as the City Manager deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and peace. (Ord. 87-12)

 

23.28.050 Regulations.
A.     The applicant shall deposit with the City Manager a permit issuance fee in an estimated amount sufficient to reimburse the City for the costs of inspecting, examining and otherwise regulating the proposed activity. Charges against the deposit will be in accordance with a fee schedule approved by resolution of the City Council. At the completion of the activity, any portion of the deposit remaining shall be returned to the permittee 30 days after completion of the activity.

B.     The City Manager shall require the permittee to place warning devices and barriers to protect the safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, in accordance with the provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

C.    The permittee shall agree to indemnify and hold the City and each officer and employee thereof harmless from any liability or responsibility arising out of the permitted activity.

D.    The applicant shall provide security guaranteeing proper completion of the work described and delineated on the permit and approved plans in an amount of 100% of the approved cost estimate. The security shall be in the form of one or more of the following at the option of the City Engineer:

1.     A deposit of money or negotiable securities of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.

2.     An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the permitted works are on deposit and guaranteed for payment or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.

3.     A lien on the permittee’s property.

4.     A performance bond from an approved bonding company. Bonding may be for up to a maximum of 80% of the total security required by the permit.

E.     All work authorized by an encroachment permit shall be performed by a licensed contractor. (Ord. 87-12; Ord. 93-24)

Chapter 23.36 RIGHT-OF-WAY STANDARDS, STREET IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS, AND BUILDING LINE REQUIREMENTS
23.36.010 Intent.
A.     In all zones, it is the intent of this chapter that the standard of adequacy for the right-of-way and grading of all streets be complied with by all projects and that building line requirements as set forth herein shall be complied with by all projects on parcels of land which adjoin general plan highways. All projects shall provide right-of-way dedication, street improvements, and undergrounding of overhead utilities unless they are otherwise exempt as per Sections 23.36.050 and 23.36.121 of this chapter.

B.     Further, on parcels of land in all zones, it is the intent of this chapter that no building permit be issued for the construction or alteration of buildings unless the persons securing such permit are required to assure compliance with the standard of adequacy for the right-of-way of streets abutting such parcels and the standard of adequacy for the improvement of such streets. (Ord. 87-47; Ord. 2007-04; Ord. 2009-08)

 

23.36.020 Definitions.
“Agricultural building” is a building located on agricultural property and used to shelter farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other farm produce, in which there is no human habitation, and which is not used by the public.

“Centerline of street.” The centerline of a street shall be as shown on a final subdivision map filed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act or pursuant to any of the earlier or following versions of the Subdivision Map Act, a record of survey filed pursuant to Chapter 15 of the Business and Professions Code, a subdivision or parcel map filed pursuant to Division 2 of the Government Code, an official map filed pursuant to Division 3 of the Government Code, an “AS BUILT” / “Record Drawings” Road Survey plan prepared by and on file in the Office of the Director, an “AS BUILT” / “Record Drawings” state highway plan prepared by and on file in the office of the District Director of the California State Department of Transportation, or in the event that no such map is filed, or in the event that the centerline shown on such map or maps does not meet with the approval of the Director, the centerline of a street as shown on an alignment study which has been adopted by City Council resolution following a public hearing.

If a centerline appears on more than one qualifying map or plan, the centerline shown on the most recent document will be taken as the centerline for purposes of this chapter if the Director determines that the most recent document accurately depicts the correct centerline.

If the Director finds that the centerline established pursuant to the Code is not a practical or reasonable centerline or is otherwise unacceptable, the Director will prepare and process an alignment study, or direct that the applicant is to prepare and process an alignment study pursuant to this chapter. In that event, the applicant shall grant right-of-way along the proposed alignment, and the Director shall accept the right-of-way subject to its being improved to standards specified in this chapter. A secured agreement pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be accepted in lieu of construction of the required improvements prior to the issuance of a building permit.

“Director” is the Director of Public Works.

“General Plan highway” is any street identified on the Circulation Element of the General Plan as amended or hereafter amended and the centerline of which is established as provided in this chapter.

“New floor area” is floor area as defined in Municipal Code Chapter 30.04 that is created by a new building or building addition. (Ord. 95-12; Ord. 2007-04; Ord. 2009-08; Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.36.030 Requirement.
A.     Unless the owner complies with the provisions of this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for any building or structure to be located on a parcel of land.

B.     Without exception, no development shall violate the setback requirements established by this chapter.

C.    The Director, utilizing standard engineering practices, may, in instances where construction of public improvements is determined to be infeasible, consider whether to authorize the payment of in-lieu fees for the future construction of the required public improvements. The in-lieu fee shall be equivalent to that fee established by the City Council of the City of Encinitas in effect at the time of the City review of permits for the development of the property.

 

23.36.050 Exceptions.
When in compliance with all other City ordinances and regulations, the following projects are exempted from the other provisions of this chapter:

A.     Commercial Projects. Right-of-way dedication and public improvements shall not be required for building permits for commercial projects when the total new square footage of the commercial structure does not exceed 500 square feet unless it is shown upon review of a traffic study that the traffic impact of the commercial development is for a use that would generate traffic in excess of a general commercial/retail structure of 500 square feet.

Right-of-way dedication and public improvements in compliance with this chapter shall be required for building permits for commercial development when the total square footage of the commercial structure is 500 square feet or greater, or when review of a traffic study shows that the traffic impact of the commercial development is for a use that would generate traffic in excess of a general commercial/retail structure of 500 square feet.

When a property is developed on an incremental basis, the cumulative development over a period of five years following the approval of the first building permit for the property shall be considered in total and the exceptions in this section shall not apply when the total new square footage of the commercial structure over the five year period is 500 square feet or greater, or when review of a traffic study shows that the traffic impact of the commercial development is for a use that would generate traffic in excess of general commercial/retail structure of 500 square feet.

B.     Residential Projects.

1.     Residential Single-Family Additions.

a.     Building permits for additions to an existing residential single-family dwelling when the total habitable square footage of the residential structure addition does not exceed 500 square feet, and the total square footage of habitable and nonhabitable residential structure additions do not exceed 750 square feet will not be required to comply with the rights-of-way dedication or public improvement requirements of this chapter.

b.     Building permits for residential single-family dwelling additions when the total habitable square footage of the addition to a residential structure does not exceed 2,000 square feet, and the total square footage of habitable and nonhabitable residential structures, including any additions, does not exceed 2,500 square feet will be required to comply with the rights-of-way dedication requirements, but will not be required to comply with the public improvement requirements of this chapter.

c.     Building permits for residential single-family dwelling additions when the total habitable square footage of the addition to a residential structure is greater than 2,000 square feet, or the total square footage of habitable and nonhabitable residential structures, including any additions, is greater than 2,500 square feet will be required to comply with the rights-of-way dedication requirements and public improvement requirements, other than the requirements contained in Section 23.36.120 of this chapter.

d.     When a property is developed on an incremental basis, the cumulative development over a period of five years following the approval of the first building permit for the property shall be considered for the 500 square foot threshold for rights-of-way dedication and 2,000 or 2,500 square foot thresholds for public improvements.

2.     Residential New Construction. Rights-of-way dedication and public improvements in compliance with this chapter shall be required for building permits for a new residential structure, except that the requirements contained in Section 23.36.120 to place underground the existing overhead public utilities shall not apply to a single-family home unless the single-family home is part of another application creating more than one single-family home. A new residential structure that is part of another application creating more than one single-family home may be required to comply with the requirement to place underground the existing overhead public utilities contained in Section 23.36.120.

C.    Agricultural Buildings. The exceptions in this section shall not apply to building line requirements. (Ord. 2007-04)

 

23.36.060 Building Line Requirement.
A.     A building line is hereby established on each side of and parallel to the centerline of every street which is either a General Plan highway or adjoins or provides direct access to property in a commercial, industrial or residential zone. The distance in feet from the centerline of the following classes of highways to the building line in the following zones shall be as follows:

 

 

R-R, with a lot size designator of 1 acre or more

Commercial

Industrial

Other

Residential Collector Street

60

36

36

36

Light Collector Industrial/Commercial

60

36

36

50

Cul-de-sac

66

36

36

56

Industrial/Commercial Street

66

36

36

56

Collector Highway Industrial/Commercial

72

42

42

62

Collector Street

74

44

44

64

Recreational Parkway

80

50

50

70

Major Highway

81

51

51

71

Prime Arterial Highway

93

63

63

83

 

B.     Add five feet to the setback requirements of these classifications if additional dedication is required for bicycle facilities.

C.    No building or structure may be constructed, altered, or changed in use on any lot abutting a public street or any zone if any portion of such building or structure protrudes into the area between the building line and the centerline of the street.

D.    When the class of zone is such that the Zoning Ordinance requires a greater front yard setback than the building line requirement in this section, then the front yard setback in the Zoning Ordinance shall supersede the building line requirement in this section. If the building line

requirement in this section is greater than the front yard setback established in the Zoning Ordinance, then the building line requirement shall apply.

 

23.36.070 Corner Cut-Offs.
No building or structure shall be constructed or altered and no change may be made in the use or occupancy of a building located adjacent to a circulation element road/street when a portion of the building is constructed within the following described triangular corner cut-off area. The triangular corner cut-off area is determined by extending the ultimate curb lines, or, if no curbs are constructed, the ultimate edges of the paved travel lanes or the tangents to the ultimate curb returns, to their point of intersection; then connecting two points measured back 40 feet along the lines from their point of intersection. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

23.36.080 Standards of Adequacy in All Zones.
A.     No building or structure may be constructed on a lot in any zone, and no building or structure shall be altered on a lot in any zone if such alteration results in a change of occupancy as defined in the California Building Code, unless the streets or highways which abut that lot are adequate with respect to right-of-way and improvements and connect to a dedicated and improved street. The standard of adequacy for the right-of-way is that set forth in this chapter. The standard of adequacy for improvements is that set forth in this chapter.

B.     The owner of real property being developed within the City of Encinitas upon one existing legal lot when the legal lot is not connected with a subdivision approved by the City of Encinitas in accordance with Encinitas Municipal Code Title 24 may, when authorized by the Director of Public Works, voluntarily elect to pay an established in-lieu fee instead of providing for the construction of public improvements along the frontage of the property being developed. The in-lieu fee shall be equivalent to that fee established by the City Council of the City of Encinitas in effect at the time of the issuance of the building permit for the construction of the structure. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.36.090 Standard for Right-of-Way.
A.     The portion of a street abutting a lot or parcel of land shall be considered to have adequate right-of-way if the portion of the roadway which has been dedicated to the public for highway purposes or which is subject to an irrevocable offer to so dedicate measures no less than 40 feet in width and measures not less than the following between the centerline of the street and the boundary line of the lot or parcel of land:

 

 

1.

Residential or Light Collector

30 feet*

 

2.

Industrial or Commercial Cul-de-Sac Street

36 feet

 

3.

Industrial Street

36 feet

 

4.

Collector Highway

42 feet

 

5.

Industrial or Commercial Collector Street

44 feet

 

6.

Recreational Parkway or Rural Mountain Road

50 feet

 

7.

Major Highway

51 feet

 

8.

Prime Arterial Highway

63 feet

*      Except in commercial or manufacturing/industrial zones the width shall be 36 feet.

B.     If the road is on the bikeway master plan, consistent with the Circulation Element of the General Plan, an additional five feet shall be dedicated for the construction of a bicycle lane.

C.    Where the volume of traffic anticipated is determined by the Director to warrant separate turn lanes and associated transition improvements, additional dedication will be required in those classifications listed in paragraphs A1 through 8 of this section.

D.    If right-of-way dedication is required, the owner shall furnish a title report less than three months old which shows all deeds of trust and easements, and a copy of the grant deed for the property being developed, together with all deposits or fees pursuant to this chapter, a legal description and plat prepared by a licensed land surveyor and a signed and notarized right-of-way deed to the Director for execution and recordation. If the owner is a corporation, a corporate certificate shall be submitted indicating those corporation officers authorized to sign for the corporation. If the owner is a partnership, a partnership agreement shall be submitted indicating who is authorized to sign for the partnership. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

23.36.100 Standards for Improvements.
A street shall be considered to meet the standard of adequacy for improvements if it conforms to the then current City standards. All required improvements shall be completed prior to the issuance of any building permit; provided, however, that the Building Official may, when a grading permit requires construction of building foundations and walls as part of the grading permit, authorize a building permit for construction of a building or buildings or other work concurrently with the installation of the improvements required by this chapter. When such a building permit is issued in conjunction with a grading permit, the building construction cannot proceed beyond the foundation stage until the acceptance of the rough grading by the Director of Public Works. A note indicating the requirements of this section shall appear on all issued plans and permits for the subject property when this condition exists. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.36.110 Street Lights Required.
A.     The owner shall install a street lighting system that provides the level of illumination specified in the current City standards. Installation shall be in accordance with plans and specifications that meet the approval of the Director.

B.     Unless the property is in an existing lighting and landscaping district, the territory under development shall be annexed, in accordance with rules and procedures in effect at the time, to an existing lighting district or lighting maintenance district. The owner shall deposit with the City through the Director fees sufficient to:

1.     Pay the State Board of Equalization processing fee for annexation to the district.

2.     Operate and maintain the street lights until tax revenue resulting from the annexation begins to accrue.

3.     Augment the reserve fund of the existing district by an amount equal to the anticipated cost of operating and maintaining the street lights for three months.

4.     Any other fees pertaining to street lights that may be required by the City Council.

 

23.36.120 Undergrounding of Existing Utility Facilities.
A.     The owner, unless otherwise exempt from this requirement in accordance with Section 23.36.121, shall underground all existing utility distribution facilities, including cable television lines, along the frontage of the owner’s property. The owner shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities, including licensed cable television operators for the installation of such facilities.

B.     All new development within the City of Encinitas shall, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, place underground all new utilities, whether public or private.

C.    For the purposes of this section, the term “frontage” shall mean the length of overhead utilities anywhere within the rights-of-way or an easement contiguous to or through the property. If utility lines are adjacent to an access easement that is not within or contiguous to the property, but benefit the property, then that portion of utility line is considered to be frontage. When Municipal Code Section 24.16.010G refers to “any half-street abutting a new subdivision,” the Director may require overhead utilities anywhere within the rights-of-way to be placed underground in accordance with this chapter.

Projects not exempted from undergrounding requirements may, in order to provide for a net elimination of utility poles, be required to underground utilities that extend beyond the frontage of the developed property.

 

23.36.121 Undergrounding Exceptions.
The exceptions to undergrounding requirements contained within Section 23.36.120A are listed in subsections A through G of this section:

A.     Electric transmission lines in excess of 34,500 volts, exempt from undergrounding electrical only.

B.     Residential development for a single-family residence, a twin home, a duplex, a triplex or a fourplex when not part of an application yielding five or more residential units.

C.    Commercial or industrial projects proposing less than 20,000 square feet of new floor area.

D.    Subdivisions comprising four or fewer parcels, provided that a covenant is recorded against any resulting parcels and any remainder parcel prohibiting further subdivision.

E.     Condominium conversion if proposed new floor area is less than 20,000 square feet.

F.     Mixed use projects with or without a condominium map if the total commercial plus residential new floor area is less than 20,000 square feet.

G.    A residential project that is constructed and occupied as a 100% affordable housing development and is occupied by lower income households as defined periodically by the City based on the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), adjusted for household size.

Projects not exempted from undergrounding requirements may, in order to provide for a net elimination of utility poles, be required to underground utilities that extend beyond the frontage of the developed property. (Ord. 2009-08)

 

23.36.122 Undergrounding In Lieu Fee.
Alternatively, if undergrounding is required pursuant to this chapter, an in-lieu fee payment in an amount established by City Council resolution may be accepted by the City instead of physical undergrounding. The in-lieu fee shall be at the option of the owner with the City Engineer’s approval. If the owner chooses to pay the in-lieu fee, the owner must acknowledge and agree that it may be used for a citywide undergrounding fund for authorized undergrounding projects or as approved by City Council. (Ord. 2009-08)

 

23.36.125 Requirement for Service Connections.
All utilities (electric, telephone, cable, and similar utilities that transmit service via wire, fiber optics, or other materials) shall be installed underground from the utility distribution facility to the service connection at structures on the property. This criteria shall be applicable to all new construction when more than 500 square feet of habitable area is created and in those instances when a utility panel is upgraded to 200 AMP service or greater due to additional construction or use of the property. (Ord. 2007-04)

 

23.36.130 Requirement for Construction Permit.
If street improvements are required, the Director shall accept any right-of-way dedication required subject to the dedicated right-of-way being improved to standards specified in this chapter, and the owner shall obtain a construction permit from the Director to construct the necessary improvements. The owner shall furnish the following to the Director, prior to applying for such permit.

A.     A street improvement plan prepared in ink on linen or polyester base standard size city improvement plan sheet by a civil engineer registered in the State of California.

B.     Deposits or fees required by this chapter.

C.    A petition to annex the lot which is the subject of the building permit application to a lighting maintenance district or a lighting district if the Director finds that the street lights are required pursuant to this chapter.

D.    The applicant shall provide security guaranteeing proper completion of the work described and delineated on the permit and approved plans in an amount of 100% of the approved cost estimate. The security shall be in the form of one or more of the following at the option of the City Engineer.

1.     A deposit of money or negotiable securities of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.

2.     An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the permitted works are on deposit and guaranteed for payment or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.

3.     A performance bond from an approved bonding company. Bonding may be for up to a maximum of 80% of the total security required by the permit. The remaining 20% of required security shall be in the form of cash or a certificate of deposit drawn for the benefit of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2007-04)

 

23.36.140 Costs of Processing Improvement Plans, Documents, Inspection and Laboratory Testing.
The owner shall pay the actual costs incurred by the City in reviewing the site in the field, preparing and processing documents, checking improvement plans, determining street light requirements, and performing inspection and laboratory testing.

The actual cost for site inspections, preparing and processing documents, checking improvement plans, determining street light requirements, and performing inspection and laboratory testing shall be equal to the fees established by the City Council and that are in effect at the time the application is submitted, or, if the Director determines that the work involved is anticipated to cost more than the fee, the Director may require a deposit of funds sufficient to cover the anticipated work. If the actual cost is less than the amount deposited, the Director will refund to the owner any remaining funds in the deposit. If any deposit is insufficient to pay the actual costs incurred by the City, the owner shall, upon demand of the Director pay an amount equal to the deficiency or equal to the amount estimated to be needed to complete the document preparation, plan checking, testing, and/or inspection. The final inspection prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be performed until all such deficiencies have been paid. (Ord. 2017-07)

 

23.36.150 Secured Agreement Authorized.
If the Director finds that the requirement to construct the road improvements prior to the issuance of a building permit would cause undue hardship on the owner, the Director may, with the concurrence of the Director of Planning and Building, require the owner to enter into a secured agreement to construct the required improvements prior to the occupancy of the building or within 24 months, whichever is earlier, in lieu of completing the improvements prior to issuance of the building permit; and, the Director of Planning and Building may, upon receipt of notification of acceptance of the required improvements, consider the requirements of this chapter satisfied. (Ord. 2007-04)

 

23.36.160 Grading, Requirement and Deferral.
A.     If the construction of right-of-way improvements is deferred, the Director may still require the owner to grade the right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Grading may be deferred if the Director concludes that the proposed project will be located so as not to interfere with or be potentially incompatible with the proposed right-of-way improvements and grading.

C.    By encroachment permit, the Director may allow the property owner to utilize the right-of-way area until such time as the right-of-way area is developed.

 

23.36.170 Connection to a Dedicated and Improved Street.
The right-of-way and improvement of any street or general plan highway required by this chapter shall not be considered adequate unless the right-of-way and improvement connects to a street in the City maintained road system or an improved and dedicated state highway or an improved and dedicated City street or dedicated right-of-way (off site) with a minimum width of 40 feet, A.C. pavement with a minimum width of 28 feet on approved base, and A.C. dikes. Such off site connection which is necessary to provide access to such street or General Plan highway, shall be acquired and the required improvements shall be constructed by the owner. (Ord. 2017-07)

Chapter 23.40 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
23.40.011 Statutory Authorization.
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Encinitas City Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 2012-03)

 

23.40.012 Findings of Fact.
A.     The flood hazard areas of the City of Encinitas are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. (Ord. 2012-03)

 

23.40.013 Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide [i.e. mudflow] or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:

A.     Protect human life and health;

B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2012-03)

 

23.40.014 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:

A.     Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.    Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;

E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 2012-03)

 

Article II. Definitions
23.40.020 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“A zone.” See “Special flood hazard area.”

“Accessory structure” means a structure that is either:

1.     Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or

2.     A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square feet and $1,500.00 in value.

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

“Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

“Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

“Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special flood hazard area.”

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100 year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

“Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade—i.e., below ground level—on all sides.

“Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

1.     Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2.     The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

“Building.” See “Structure.”

“Coastal high hazard area” means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V.

“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before September 14, 1987.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood, flooding, or floodwater” means:

1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

2.     The condition resulting from flood related erosion.

“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain or flood prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

“Floodplain administrator” is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

“Fraud and victimization” as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Hardship” as related to Article VI of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

“Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “Basement” definition).

1.     An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

a.     The flood openings standard in Section 23.40.051C3;

b.     The anchoring standards in Section 23.40.051A;

c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 23.40.051B; and

d.     The standards for utilities in Section 23.40.052.

2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Market value” is defined in the City of Encinitas substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 23.40.042B1.

“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after September 14, 1987, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed on or after September 14, 1987.

“Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

“One hundred year flood” or “100 year flood.” See “Base flood.”

“Primary frontal dune” means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively mild slope.

“Program deficiency” means a defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations.

“Public safety and nuisance” as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1.     Built on a single chassis;

2.     400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.     Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

“Sand dunes” mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

“Sheet flow area.” See “Area of shallow flooding.”

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement.

This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“V zone.” See “Coastal high hazard area.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 2019-29)

 

Article III. General Provisions
23.40.031 Lands to Which This Chapter Applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Encinitas.

 

23.40.032 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Encinitas dated May 16, 2012, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated May 16, 2012, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the Public Works Department, 505 S. Vulcan Avenue, Encinitas California. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.033 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

 

23.40.034 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

 

23.40.035 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A.     Considered as minimum requirements;

B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

 

23.40.036 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Encinitas, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

 

23.40.037 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

 

Article IV. Administration
23.40.041 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Director of Public Works Department is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.042 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

A.     Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine:

1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;

2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Encinitas; and

5.     All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

B.     Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures.

1.     Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings,” develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining “market value.”

2.     Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff.

C.    Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 23.40.032, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article V of this chapter.

Note: A base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995.

D.    Notification of Other Agencies.

1.     Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse.

a.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

b.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

c.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.

2.     Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations.

a.     Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).

b.     All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

3.     Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

E.     Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1.     Certification required by Section 23.40.051C1 and Section 23.40.054 (lowest floor elevations);

2.     Certification required by Section 23.40.051C2 (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3.     Certification required by Section 23.40.051C3 (wet floodproofing standard);

4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 23.40.053A3 (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);

5.     Certification required by Section 23.40.056B (floodway encroachments);

6.     Information required by Section 23.40.057F (coastal construction standards); and

7.     Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

F.     Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 23.40.044.

G.    Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 23.40.033.

H.    Biennial Report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA.

I.      Planning. Assure community’s general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. (Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2017-07)

 

23.40.043 Development Permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 23.40.032. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Encinitas. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:

A.     Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:

1.     Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;

2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;

3.     Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;

4.     Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;

5.     Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 23.40.032 or Section 23.40.042C;

6.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

7.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 23.40.051C2 of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.

B.     Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 23.40.051C2.

C.    For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 23.40.051C3 of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.

D.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

E.     All appropriate certifications listed in Section 23.40.042E of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.044 Appeals.
The City Council of the City of Encinitas shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
23.40.051 Standards of Construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A.     Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed:

1.     With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;

2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

4.     Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

C.    Elevation and Floodproofing.

1.     Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a.     In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated two feet above the base flood elevation.

b.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height two feet above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

c.     In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated two feet above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 23.40.042C.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

2.     Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 23.40.051C1 or:

a.     Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section 23.40.051C1, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c.     Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Section 23.40.051C2a and b are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

3.     Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria:

a.     For non-engineered openings:

i.      Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

ii.     The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

iii.     Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and

iv.    Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or

b.     Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.

4.     Manufactured Homes. See Section 23.40.054.

5.     Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures.

a.     Attached Garages.

i.      A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See Section 23.40.051C3. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See Section 23.40.051B.

ii.     A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.

b.     Detached Garages and Accessory Structures.

i.      “Accessory structures” used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Article II or this chapter, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

(A)   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;

(B)   The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;

(C)   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;

(D)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;

(E)   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 23.40.056; and

(F)   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section 23.40.051C3.

ii.     Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 23.40.051. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.052 Standards for Utilities.
A.     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

2.     Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.053 Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed Development.
A.     All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:

1.     Identify the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) and Base Flood Elevations (BFE).

2.     Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.

3.     If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator:

a.     Lowest floor elevation.

b.     Pad elevation.

c.     Lowest adjacent grade.

B.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

C.    All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

D.    All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.054 Standards for Manufactured Homes.
A.     All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall:

1.     Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

2.     Within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s flood insurance rate map, meet the requirements of Section 23.40.057.

B.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 23.40.054.A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two feet above the base flood elevation; or

2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.055 Standards for Recreational Vehicles.
A.     All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30 and VE will either:

1.     Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

2.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 23.40.043 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 23.40.054.

B.     Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Section 23.40.055A and Section 23.40.057. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.056 Floodways.
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A.     Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Encinitas.

B.     Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the City of Encinitas shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

C.    If subsections A and B of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.057 Coastal High Hazard Areas.
Within coastal high hazard areas, Zones V, V1-30, and VE, as established under Section 23.40.032, the following standards shall apply:

A.     All new residential and nonresidential construction, including substantial improvement/damage, shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards.

B.     All new construction and other development shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide.

C.    All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls as defined in Article II of this chapter. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and will be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.

D.    Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.

E.     Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.

F.     The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records:

1.     Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with Section 23.40.057A; and

2.     The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement.

 

Article VI. Variance Procedure
23.40.061 Nature of Variances.
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.

The variance criteria set forth in this article are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.062 Conditions for Variances.
A.     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles IV and V of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Article II of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

C.    Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

E.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

1.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage, and

2.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the Office of the County of San Diego Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

F.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 2014-12)

 

23.40.063 Appeal Board.
A.     In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

4.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

B.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

1.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

2.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” to the applicant; and

3.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see “Public safety and nuisance”), cause “fraud and victimization” of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

C.    Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

D.    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 23.40.062A and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-12)

Chapter 23.80 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
23.80.010 Purpose.
A.     This title shall be known as the “Development Agreement Ordinance” of the Municipal Code and is adopted to supplement and implement Article 2.5, Development Agreements, of the state Planning and Zoning Law.

B.     It is the purpose of this title to:

1.     Minimize the waste of resources and the escalation in the costs of housing and other development arising from uncertainties inherent in the approval of such projects; and

2.     Provide a means of assuring that, upon approval of a project, the project may proceed with development in accord with the rules, regulations and policies made part of the development agreement. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.020 Scope of Chapter.
A.     Except as otherwise provided in this title, all of the provisions of Government Code Section 65864, et seq., and this title shall apply to the establishment of development agreements.

B.     In applying this title, the City shall consider the effect of its ordinances and actions on the housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.030 Prohibition.
No development agreement shall be applied for, processed, or approved except in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 65864, et seq., and this title. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.040 Eligible Projects.
A.     An applicant may apply for a development agreement for the following projects:

1.     Any residential, commercial, office professional, visitor-serving commercial or industrial project;

2.     A project which provides a public service, public facilities, or both, whether initiated by a public agency or by a private party pursuant to a requirement imposed by a public agency.

B.     Coastal Zone Exemption. A development agreement shall not be applicable to any development project located in an area for which a local coastal program is required to be prepared and certified pursuant to Division 20 (commencing with Section 30000) of the Public Resources Code unless:

1.     The required local coastal program has been certified prior to the date on which the development agreement has been entered into; or

2.     In the event that the local coastal program has not been certified, the California Coastal Commission approves such development agreement by formal commission action. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.050 Application for Development Agreement.
A.     Form of Application. An application for consideration for a development agreement shall be made on a form approved by the Planning and Building Director (Director) as accomplishing the purposes of this Code.

B.     Additional Information. The Director may require an applicant for a development agreement to submit such additional information and supporting data as the Director considers necessary to process the application in a manner that will accomplish the purposes of this Code.

C.    Initiation. A development agreement may be initiated by an application presented by a person having legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the application, or a duly authorized agent of such person(s). (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.060 Fees.
The Director shall determine the amount of the deposit or fee for the filing of a development agreement application by reference to a cost schedule approved by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.070 Environmental Review.
An application for a development agreement for a development which qualifies as a project under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) shall be subject to environmental review in accordance with CEQA and the adopted City guidelines for the implementation of CEQA. (Ord. 94-04; Ord. 2017-07)

 

23.80.080 Filing of Application.
A.     Upon receipt of the application, the Director shall endorse on the application the date it is received. The Director shall review the application and determine any additional requirements or information needed to complete the development agreement application. An application may be rejected by the Director if it is not completed in the manner required by this chapter.

B.     After receiving a complete application, the Director shall prepare a staff report which shall analyze the proposed development agreement and shall recommend as to whether or not the development agreement, as proposed or in an amended form, would be consistent with the general plan and/or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.090 Notice of Intention to Consider a Development Agreement.
A.     Upon completion of the staff report, in addition to any other notice required by law, the Director shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of a development agreement. The notice shall contain:

1.     The time and place of the public hearing;

2.     A general explanation of the development agreement, including a general description of the property which is subject to the proposed agreement;

3.     Other information considered by the Director to be necessary or desirable to properly notice the public hearing.

B.     The notice required by this chapter shall be given in the manner provided in Section 30.01.070 of the Municipal Code.

C.    In accordance with state law, the failure of any person to receive lawfully required notice of any hearing prescribed herein, shall not affect the authority of the City Council to enter into a development agreement. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.100 Public Hearing by Planning Commission Required.
A.     The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed development agreement at the time and place specified in the notice of intention. Where applicable, development agreement applications shall be considered concurrently with other discretionary permits or approvals for a project.

B.     Upon completing the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall render its decision in the form of a draft resolution of the City Council recommending to the City Council approval, modification or disapproval of the development agreement. The draft resolution shall include the commission’s determination on the findings listed in this chapter. (Ord. 94-04)

 

23.80.110 Public Hearing by City Council Required.
A.     Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation and draft resolution, the City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the City Council.

B.     The City Council may refer back to the Planning Commission for its report and recommendation any matters raised during the City Council hearing that were not previously considered during Planning Commission deliberations. The Planning Commission need not hold a public hearing on such referrals.

C.    Upon completing the public hearing, the City Council may approve, modify or disapprove the application for a development agreement.

D.    The City Council shall not approve a development agreement unless it finds in writing that the agreement is consistent with the following:

1.     The goals, policies, objectives and general land uses and/or programs of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

2.     The agreement will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the community and that it will not adversely affect the orderly development of property;

3.     The agreement complies with Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5.

E.     Development agreements shall be adopted by ordinance and are subject to referendum. Such ordinance shall authorize the City Manager to sign the agreement on behalf of the City.

F.     In addition to the mandatory provisions of a development agreement required by Government Code Section 65864 et seq., a development agreement may include, without limitation, the following provisions:

1.     Conditions relative to financing of necessary public improvements/facilities and subsequent reimbursement over time, if applicable;

2.     A schedule for commencement and completion of the project and any phases thereof, including both private and public improvements;

3.     Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for any subsequent discretionary action(s) by the City, provided that such conditions etc. shall not prevent or preclude development of the land for the uses, and to the density/intensity of use, set forth in the agreement;

4.     The specific date upon which the development agreement will expire shall be included. In establishing the duration of the development agreement, the following will be considered:

a.     The degree to which the proposed time frame may preempt or impair effective long range planning for the area,

b.     Permitted use of surrounding properties and the potential for their development over the life of the agreement,

c.     The nature, size and complexity of the project covered by the agreement, and

d.     Short term verses long term market demand for the project;

5.     An alternative procedure for processing insubstantial amendments which includes a precise definition of the term “insubstantial amendment”;

6.     Any other terms or conditions agreed to by the parties. (Ord. 94-09)

 

23.80.120 Irregularity in Proceedings.
No action, inaction or recommendation regarding a proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error or irregularity, as more specifically set forth in Government Code Section 65801. (Ord. 94-09)

 

23.80.130 Recordation.
Within 10 working days of the date on which the City enters into, amends or terminates a development agreement, the City Clerk shall have the agreement, amendment or notice of termination recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. 94-09)

 

23.80.140 Modification and Termination.
A.     A development agreement may be modified, or terminated in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the developer (or the successor in interest) and the City.

B.     Should the City Council determine on the basis of substantial evidence, that one or more terms of the development agreement have not been complied with, it may initiate proceedings to modify or terminate the agreement. City Council action to modify or terminate the agreement shall be taken at a public hearing, after written notice of the Council’s intent has been given to the other party and pursuant to Section 25.02.030. In addition to the requirements of Section 25.02.020, such notice shall contain:

1.     The time and place of the public hearing;

2.     A statement as to whether or not the City Council intends to modify or terminate the agreement; and

3.     A list of the terms and/or conditions of the agreement which have not been complied with in a good faith manner and a summary of the factual basis upon which the determination of noncompliance was made.

C.    In modifying a development agreement, the City Council may, as part of its final determination, impose such conditions as it considers necessary and appropriate to protect the City’s interests.

D.    The decision of the City Council to modify or terminate an agreement shall be final. Any court action or proceedings by the applicant or a successor in interest to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision or determination of the City Council shall be commenced within 30 calendar days of the City Council’s action. (Ord. 94-09)

 

23.80.150 Periodic Review.
Each development agreement shall be reviewed administratively by the Director at least every 12 months. In the course of the review, the developer or successor in interest thereto shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. Upon a finding by the Director that substantial compliance has not been achieved, the matter shall be referred for review by the City Council. (Ord. 94-09; Ord. 2017-07)

Chapter 23.90 EXACTIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
23.90.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth general provisions relating to exactions imposed upon development. These provisions do not apply to utility fees. (Ord. 87-20)

 

23.90.020 Amount of Exaction.
The amount of an exaction established in accordance with the authority of this title shall not exceed the estimated cost of providing the proposed development with the service or facility for which the exaction is imposed. (Ord. 87-20)

 

23.90.030 Payable During Building Permit Process.
When exactions are imposed in accordance with the provisions of this title and made payable during the building permit process, the exaction shall be satisfied as a condition to the issuance of the building permit for development, except:

A.     If the exaction is for the construction of public improvements or facilities, and the building permit is for a residential development of only one dwelling, the exaction is due and payable as a condition to obtaining a final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs last.

B.     If the exaction is for the construction of public improvements or facilities, and the building permit is sought for a residential development of more than one dwelling, the exaction shall be satisfied on a pro rata basis for each dwelling when it receives its final inspection or certificate of compliance, whichever occurs last.

C.    In accordance with the Government Code, the City may require the developer of a residential development to pay, at an earlier time, exactions for the construction of public improvements or facilities if the public project has been funded and scheduled, or if exacted fees are to reimburse the City for expenditures previously made on the project. (Ord. 87-20)

Chapter 23.92 FIRE MITIGATION FEE
23.92.010 Purpose.
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the Public Safety Element of the City of Encinitas’ General Plan, and to mitigate the impacts caused by new development in the City, certain fire protection facilities must be constructed. The City Council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements, and to pay for new development’s fair share of the construction of these improvements. It is the purpose of this chapter to assess and collect fees during the subdivision or building permit processing to finance the cost of additional fire protection facilities and equipment necessitated by new development. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the City Council has found the fee to be consistent with the City’s General Plan, and pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, the City has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the City’s housing needs as established in the Housing Element of the General Plan. (Ord. 91-22)

 

23.92.020 Requirement.
A.     The fire mitigation fee shall be determined by the Fire Chief or his/her designated agent, and satisfied by the applicant as a condition of approval of the development project. If the new development is in a new subdivision as defined by Government Code Section 66424, the fee shall be paid by the applicant during the subdivision processing as a condition of the approval of the proposed final or parcel map; or at the subdivider’s option, a covenant may be executed burdening each lot for a pro rata share of the fee, due as a condition of the issuance of a building permit. If the development is not in a new subdivision, the fee shall be paid by the applicant as a condition of the granting of a building permit for the proposed development.

B.     In accordance with Government Code Section 66007, in the case of a residential development, the City shall require the applicant to satisfy the fee requirement prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, as a condition of approval of the development, only if the City has established a separate account for the public improvements or facilities for which the fees will be collected and has adopted a proposed construction plan prior to the final inspection, or if the fees are reimbursement to the City for expenditures previously made.

C.    The requirement to pay the fire mitigation fee may be satisfied by the applicant by dedicating land or donating facilities or equipment to the fire agency serving the City. The Fire Chief or his/her designated agent shall determine whether to require a dedication of land and/or donation of facilities and equipment, impose a requirement to pay fees, or require a combination of both for the purpose of fire protection facilities acquisition and construction. The value of any land, facilities, or equipment shall be credited to the applicant’s fire mitigation fee requirement. (Ord. 91-22)

 

23.92.030 Exemptions.
The following development is exempt from the regulations of this chapter:

A.     Swimming pools;

B.     Fences;

C.    Residential accessory structures to an existing unit;

D.    Construction for public or governmental purposes;

E.     Remodels of existing residential structures which do not add new units; or

F.     Development involving the replacement on the same parcel by the owner of a dwelling unit or dwellings destroyed by fire or other calamity, provided that the application for a building permit to replace such dwelling or dwellings is filed within six months after destruction and that the number of dwelling units is not increased. (Ord. 91-22)

 

23.92.040 Distribution and Use of Funds.
A.     The fees collected in accordance with this chapter shall be used to provide capital facilities and equipment for fire prevention and control, to include station construction, station expansion and fire apparatus acquisition.

B.     Fees shall be distributed to the fire agency serving the City as received.

C.    Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited by the fire agency in a segregated fund identified as the “fire mitigation fee fund.”

D.    Prior to the receipt of fees, the fire agency shall adopt a resolution establishing a fire mitigation fee program within the fire agency jurisdiction. The form and content of the resolution must be first approved by the City Manager. (Ord. 91-22)

 

23.92.050 Residential Development.
Fire mitigation fees shall be set in an amount as determined by a City Council resolution and kept in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 91-22; Ord. 2011-06)

 

23.92.060 Other Development.
Fire mitigation fees shall be set in an amount as determined by a City Council resolution and kept in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 91-22; Ord. 2011-06)

 

23.92.070 Fee Adjustment.
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the Fire Chief for a reduction or adjustment of the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the fire protection impacts of that development and the amount of the fee charged. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver or reduction. The application shall be made in writing to the Fire Chief at the time of the filing of the request for a final or parcel map, or for a building permit. The Fire Chief shall consider the fee adjustment application within 30 days of the filing of the application. If a reduction or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project which results shall subject the development to payment of the full fee. (Ord. 91-22; Ord. 2017-07)

Chapter 23.94 TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE
23.94.010 Purpose.
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the Circulation Element of the City of Encinitas’ General Plan and the San Diego Association of Government’s (SANDAG) Regional Transportation Plan, and to mitigate the impacts caused by new development in the City, certain traffic facilities must be constructed. The City Council has determined that a development impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements, and to pay for the development’s fair share of the construction of these improvements. It is the purpose of this chapter to impose on persons developing real property a requirement to pay a fee to provide for the traffic facilities needed to serve the development. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the City Council has found the fee to be consistent with the City’s General Plan, and pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, the City has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the City’s housing needs as established in the Housing Element of the General Plan. (Ord. 2008-08; Ord. 2014-04)

 

23.94.020 Requirement.
A.     The traffic mitigation fee shall be determined by the City Engineer, and satisfied by the applicant as a condition of approval of the development project. If the new development is in a new subdivision as defined by Government Code Section 66424, the fee shall be paid by the applicant during the subdivision processing as a condition of the approval of the proposed final or parcel map; or at the subdivider’s option, a covenant may be executed burdening each lot for a prorata share of the fee, due as a condition of the issuance of a building permit. If the development is not in a new subdivision, the fee shall be paid by the applicant as a condition of the granting of a building permit for the proposed development.

B.     In accordance with Government Code Section 66007, in the case of residential development the City shall only require the applicant to satisfy the fee requirement as a condition of approval of the development prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Unless the fees are reimbursement to the City for expenditures previously made, the fees will be payable to the City and placed in a separate account to fund the construction for the needed public improvements or facilities resulting from the development.

C.    The City may allow a credit in the amount based upon the value of on and off-site road improvements constructed by the developer and dedicated to the City which provide facilities as specified in the City’s Transportation Element, and for which the fee could be used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

D.    The fees imposed by this chapter shall not be considered to be in lieu of the dedications of land adjacent to the development and adjacent road improvements which are required to be constructed by the developer by the City’s requirements as specified in the Encinitas Municipal Code. (Ord. 2008-08; Ord. 2014-04)

 

23.94.030 Exemptions.
The following development is exempt from the regulations of this chapter:

A.     Construction for public or governmental purposes;

B.     Replacement or remodels of existing residential structures which do not add new units; or

C.    Residential accessory units as defined in Municipal Code Section 30.48.040V. (Ord. 2008-08; Ord. 2014-04)

 

23.94.040 Use of Funds.
A.     Fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in an account identified as the “Traffic Mitigation Fee Fund,” except for exactions and administrative fees collected pursuant to SANDAG Commission Ordinance 04-01, Transnet Extension Ordinance and Expenditures Plan, which shall be deposited into an account identified as the “Regional Transportation Congestion Improvement Program Fund.”

B.     The fees deposited in the traffic mitigation fee fund shall be used solely for the construction and reconstruction of Circulation Element streets and traffic facilities.

C.    The fees deposited in the regional transportation congestion improvement program fund shall be used in accordance with SANDAG Commission Ordinance 04-01. (Ord. 2014-04)

 

23.94.050 Traffic Mitigation Fees.
Traffic mitigation fees shall be set in an amount as determined by a City Council resolution and kept in the office of the City Clerk.

The fees shall be adjusted on July 1st of each year beginning in 2015. The fees shall be increased in an amount approved by the SANDAG Board of Directors that does not exceed the percentage increase set forth in the Engineering Construction Cost Index published by the Engineering News Record or similar cost of construction index with a minimum increase of two percent. (2011-06; Ord. 2014-04)

 

23.94.055 Single-Family and Other Residential Fee Calculation.
The traffic mitigation fee for single-family and other residential developments will be charged per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2014-04)

 

23.94.060 Other Development Fee Calculation.
A.     The calculation of the traffic mitigation fee for other developments including rural residential and nonresidential projects will be based on the traffic mitigation fee for single family multiplied by the peak hour trip generated by the development project. Where relevant to the fee, the square footage of the proposed development project will be based on the gross square footage within the structure. If applicable to the specific development, the peak-hour-trips will be reduced by a factor that is based upon the number of pass-by-trips. The fee shall be determined as follows:

 

Single-Family Peak-Hour-Trips

X

Traffic Mitigation Fee

X

Reduction Factor for Pass-by-Trips if Applicable

=

Total Fee

B.     If the proposed project will not fully develop the proposed lot, then a prorated fee shall be paid, and a covenant shall be executed agreeing to pay an additional fee for all future development which expands the coverage development of the lot. If a general plan amendment changes the density for designation of use for the subject lot, the calculation of the fee for subsequent development will be determined in accordance with the then existing General Plan designation.

C.    To determine peak-hour-trips generated by nonresidential development, the City Engineer, or designee, will refer first to the City’s most current schedule of peak-hour-trips and reduction factors, which is established by resolution of the City Council and revised periodically. If the specific proposed use is not identified on this schedule, the City Engineer, or designee, will refer to the San Diego Association of Government’s (SANDAG) most recent “Traffic Generators’ Manual’s (Not So) Brief Guide of Vehicular Traffic Generation Rates for San Diego Region.” If the peak hour and applicable reduction factor data is absent from both of these schedules, the applicant will be required to submit a traffic study or other relevant factual data which demonstrates the traffic impacts of the development to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. (Ord. 2000-08; Ord. 2014-04)

 

23.94.070 Fee Adjustment.
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the City Engineer for a reduction or adjustment of the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the traffic impacts of that development and the amount of the fee charged. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver or reduction, and shall be accompanied by a traffic study demonstrating that the cost of mitigating the traffic impacts of the development is less than the amount of the fee charged for the development. The application shall be made in writing to the City Engineer at the time of the filing of the request for a final or parcel map, or a building permit, and shall bear the seal of a traffic engineer licensed by the State of California. The City Engineer shall consider the fee adjustment application within 30 days of the filing of the application. If a reduction or waiver is granted, any subsequent change in use which results in an increase in peak-hour-trips or pass-by-trip reduction factors within the project shall subject the development to payment of the full fee. (Ord. 2000-08; Ord. 2014-04; Ord. 2017-07)

Chapter 23.96 FLOOD CONTROL FEES
23.96.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to impose on persons developing real property the requirement to pay a fee to provide for flood control facilities needed to serve the development.

B.     “Impervious surface” means a surface which covers the ground, is not covered by another surface and is constructed of a material or in a manner in which water may pass over the surface. (Ord. 87-19)

 

23.96.020 Requirement.
A.     A flood control fee shall be determined by the City and paid by the applicant during the subdivision processing of a proposed development if the provisions of this chapter can be applied lawfully to the proposed development during the subdivision processing. Otherwise, the flood control fee shall be determined by the City and paid by the applicant during the building permit processing of the proposed development, or portion thereof, if the provisions of this chapter can be applied lawfully to the proposed development, or portions thereof, during the building permit processing.

B.     The requirement to pay a flood control fee for property within a project may be satisfied by the applicant as a condition of approval of a discretionary land use permit. (Ord. 87-19)

 

23.96.030 Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the regulations of this chapter:

A.     Swimming pools;

B.     Fences;

C.    Additions or alterations to existing structures which add no more than 500 square feet of impervious surface. Additions and alterations constructed during the five years prior to the application shall be included in determining the square footage of the impervious surface involved;

D.    Construction for public or governmental purposes;

E.     Development involving the replacement on the same parcel by the owner of a structure destroyed by fire or other calamity, provided that the application for a building permit to replace such structure is filed within six months after destruction; and

F.     Commercial greenhouses. (Ord. 87-19)

 

23.96.040 Use of Funds.
A.     The fees and dedications received in accordance with this chapter shall be used for the construction of planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and stormwaters from the City of Encinitas, as shown on the San Diego County Flood Control Plan adopted in 1977.

B.     Fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into an account identified as the “flood control fund.” (Ord. 87-19)

 

23.96.050 Determination of Fee.
Each person seeking to develop a project which is within the City of Encinitas shall pay a flood control fee of 21 cents per square foot of impervious surface resulting from the completion of the project. (Ord. 87-19)

 

23.96.060 Calculation of Fee.
A.     Based on a determination by the City Engineer, the calculated fee may be proportionately reduced to the degree that the property owner constructs on-site collection and retention systems that will retain run off water on the property. The granting of this credit shall require the recording of a covenant by the property owner agreeing to maintain the collection and retention system in lieu of paying the entire calculated fee.

B.     Any flood control dedications of land or improvements by the developer and accepted by the City shall be a credit against the amount of the fee owing.

C.    The construction and dedication of drainage facilities may be required as a condition to the approval of a discretionary land use permit. (Ord. 87-19)

 

23.96.070 Annual Review.
A.     In January of each year, the City Council shall consider the current fee. If the fee is no longer related to the actual or estimated cost of additional flood control facilities needed to serve the new development within the City, the City Council shall amend the ordinance to reflect the change in cost.

B.     An increase in the fee adopted in accordance with the provision of this section shall be effective July 1st of the year in which the new fee is adopted. (Ord. 87-19)

Chapter 23.98 PARKLAND ACQUISITION AND IMPROVEMENTS
23.98.010 Purpose.
In order to meet the specifications of the City’s recreational space and facilities standards and to implement the goals and objectives of the Recreation Element of the City of Encinitas’ General Plan, additional land must be purchased and certain facilities must be constructed. The City Council has determined that a land dedication requirement or in-lieu fee and a park improvement fee are needed in order to meet the cost of acquiring and improving parkland to serve new development, and to pay for the development’s fair share of these acquisitions and improvements. It is the purpose of this chapter to impose on persons developing real property an obligation to provide land or in-lieu fees and park improvement fees for park and recreation purposes. The combined dedication/in-lieu fee and park improvement fee shall be referred to as the parkland acquisition and improvement fee. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the City Council has found the fee to be consistent with the City’s General Plan, and consistent with the requirements of Government Code Sections 66000 et seq. (Ord. 2000-09)

 

23.98.020 Requirement.
A.     The parkland acquisition and improvement fee shall be determined by the Director of Parks and Recreation or his/her designated agent, and satisfied by the applicant as a condition of approval of the development project. If the new development is in a new subdivision as defined by Government Code Section 66424, the fee shall be paid by the applicant during the subdivision processing as a condition of the approval of the proposed final or parcel map; or at the subdivider’s option, a covenant may be executed burdening each lot for a prorata share of the fee, due as a condition of the issuance of a building permit. If the development is not in a new subdivision, the fee shall be paid by the applicant as a condition of the granting of a building permit for the proposed development.

B.     In accordance with Government Code Section 66007, in the case of residential development, the City shall only require the applicant to satisfy the fee requirement as a condition of approval of the development, and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Unless the fees are reimbursement to the City for expenditures previously made, the fees will be payable to the City and placed in a separate account to fund the construction for the needed public improvements or facilities resulting from the development. (Ord. 2000-09; Ord. 2003-04)

 

23.98.030 Exemptions.
The following development is exempt from the regulations of this chapter:

A.     Replacement or remodels of existing residential structures which do not add new units; or

B.     Residential accessory units as defined in Municipal Code Section 30.48.040V. (Ord. 2000-09)

 

23.98.040 Use of Funds.
A.     The fees received in accordance with this chapter shall be used for the acquisition of parkland and the construction of park facilities serving the proposed development in a manner consistent with the City’s recreational space and facilities standards.

B.     The fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in a segregated fund identified as the “park fee fund.”

C.    Land and fees extracted in accordance with Section 23.98.040 of this chapter shall be administered in accordance with and used only for purposes authorized by Government Code Section 66477. (Ord. 2000-09)

 

23.98.050 Residential Subdivision Land Dedication Obligation and In-Lieu Fee.
A.     The Director of Parks and Recreation or his/her designated agent shall determine whether to require a dedication of land, impose a requirement to pay fees, or require a combination of both for park acquisition and construction purposes.

B.     In accordance with Government Code Section 66477, a person seeking to construct a residential development project in a new subdivision shall be obligated to dedicate three acres of undeveloped parkland per new 1,000 population. The amount of land to be dedicated shall be determined as follows:

 

3.0 acres

x

Population per dwelling unit

=

Land dedication per dwelling unit

1,000 population

 

C.    In accordance with Government Code 66477(a)(7), only the payment of fees may be required in subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less, except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project, exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than 50.

Parkland Acquisition and Improvement fees shall be set in an amount as determined by a City Council resolution and kept in the office of the City Clerk.

D.    As required by Government Code 66477(d), the City shall allow planned developments, real estate developments, stock cooperatives, community apartment projects and condominiums credit in an amount based on open space within the development which is usable for active recreational uses.

E.     In accordance with Government Code 66477(d), this section does not apply to commercial or industrial subdivisions, and has limited application to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building.

F.     In accordance with Government Code 66477(a)(8), this section has a limited application to nonresidential subdivisions of less than five parcels and to reversion acreage.

G.    In accordance with Government Code 66477(a)(6), the City shall develop a schedule specifying how, when and where the land dedicated and the fees collected pursuant to this section will be used to serve the residents of the subdivision. (Ord. 2000-09; Ord. 2011-06)

 

23.98.090 Fee Adjustment.
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the Director of Parks and Recreation for a reduction or adjustment of the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the open space and developed parkland needed to serve the new development and the amount of the fee charged. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver or reduction. The application shall be made in writing to the Director of Parks and Recreation at the time of the filing of the request for a final or parcel map, or for a building permit. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall consider the fee adjustment application within 30 days of the filing of the application. If a reduction or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project resulting in an increase in density shall subject the development to payment of the full fee. (Ord. 2003-04; Ord. 2017-07)

Title 24 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 24.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 24.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 24.12 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 24.16 IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 24.20 DEDICATIONS—GENERAL
Chapter 24.22 DEDICATION—BIKE PATH
Chapter 24.23 DEDICATION—ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
Chapter 24.24 DEDICATION—LOCAL TRANSIT FACILITY
Chapter 24.26 DEDICATION—PUBLIC ACCESS
Chapter 24.27 DEDICATION—SOLAR ACCESS
Chapter 24.28 DEDICATION—DRAINAGE/FLOOD FACILITY
Chapter 24.29 DEDICATION—STREETS
Chapter 24.30 DEVELOPMENT FEE—BRIDGE/MAJOR THOROUGHFARES
Chapter 24.31 DEVELOPMENT FEE—DRAINAGE AND SANITARY SEWER FACILITY
Chapter 24.32 DEVELOPMENT FEE—GROUND WATER RECHARGE FACILITY
Chapter 24.40 CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Chapter 24.44 CONVERSION OF MOBILEHOME PARK
Chapter 24.48 VESTING MAP
Chapter 24.50 MAJOR SUBDIVISION—TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURE
Chapter 24.54 MAJOR SUBDIVISION—FINAL MAP PROCEDURE
Chapter 24.60 MINOR SUBDIVISION—TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP
Chapter 24.64 MINOR SUBDIVISION—PARCEL MAP
Chapter 24.70 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 24.74 REVERSION TO ACREAGE
Chapter 24.76 LOT MERGERS: PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 24.80 ENFORCEMENT

Chapter 24.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
24.01.010 Citation.
This title shall be known as the “Subdivision Ordinance” and may be cited as such and is adopted to supplement and implement the California state Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 94-06)

 

24.01.015 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to, and to implement provisions of, the Encinitas General Plan and certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan (LUP). (Ord. 94-06)

 

24.01.020 Application.
A.     Except as otherwise provided in this title, all of the provisions of the Act and this title shall apply to the creation of subdivisions.

B.     In applying this title, the City shall consider the effect of its ordinances and actions on the housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources. (Ord. 94-06)

 

24.01.025 Amendment.
An amendment to any portion of this title constitutes a proposed amendment to the implementing regulations of the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program (LCP).

A proposed LCP amendment shall comply in form, content and procedure with the provisions of Chapter 30.82 of the Municipal Code. An amendment to this title shall not become effective until certified by the Coastal Commission pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30514. (Ord. 94-06)

 

24.01.030 Prohibition.
No person shall create a subdivision except in accordance with the provisions of the Act and this title. (Ord. 94-06)

 

24.01.040 Advisory Agency and Authorized Agency.
A.     The Planning and Building Director is authorized to render a final determination on an application for the creation or revision of a minor subdivision:

1.     That has not been referred to the Planning Commission or other agency for a final determination; and

2.     That is not part of a project, a component of which requires final approval by either the Planning Commission or City Council.

B.     The Planning Commission shall be the authorized agency to render a final determination on a major subdivision (creation or reversion) that is not part of a project, an element of which requires approval by the City Council.

C.    The Planning Commission is the advisory agency, and the City Council is the authorized agency to render a final determination on an application for a subdivision that is part of a project, an element of which requires approval of the City Council.

D.    The Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee shall be the authorized agency to render a final determination on an application for a lot line adjustment.

E.     Recommending agencies, advisory agencies and authorized agencies may prescribe, subject to review by the City Council, such additional rules and procedures as are necessary to accomplish their duties. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 96-07)

 

24.01.050 Environmental Impact Review.
A.     All tentative maps and tentative parcel maps shall be subject to environmental review in accordance with this Code and the rules and procedures adopted by the City Council pursuant to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970 as may be amended by the state Legislature. Consequently, decisions to approve, conditionally approve or deny any tentative map or tentative parcel map shall be subject to the following:

1.     Determination of Exemption. Certain minor subdivisions may be determined to be exempt from the requirement of environmental review pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. Upon such determination, the advisory and authorized agencies may proceed to consider these maps without an environmental initial study or an environmental impact report.

2.     Negative Declaration. Upon filing and certification of a negative declaration with respect to any proposed tentative map or tentative parcel map, the advisory agency and the authorized agency may proceed to consider the map without an environmental impact report. The advisory and authorized agencies shall consider the environmental initial study as evidence in determining action on the map.

3.     Environmental Impact Report. With respect to any tentative map or tentative parcel map for which an environmental impact report is required, the authorized agency shall consider such report as independent evidence in determining whether to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the map.

B.     An application for approval of a subdivision shall not be complete, pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code, until after the environmental review for such proposed subdivision has been accomplished. (Ord. 88-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.01.060 Grading and Erosion Control.
All subdivisions shall, as a condition of approval, comply with the City Standards for erosion and grading control, including prevention of sedimentation or damage to off site property.

 

24.01.070 Soils Report.
A.     For every subdivision, a preliminary soils report, prepared by a registered civil engineer and based upon adequate test borings shall be submitted to the building official with respect to the subdivision lots and to the City Engineer with respect to public improvements.

B.     A preliminary soils report may be waived by the City Engineer if the City Engineer determines that sufficient information to warrant the waiver is available during the subdivision process.

C.    If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other problems which, if not corrected would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the City. Such soils investigation shall be done by a registered civil engineer, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problem exists.

D.    The authorized agency may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problem exists if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.01.080 Disapproval of Maps.
The authorized agency shall not approve or conditionally approve any map if:

A.     The authorized agency makes any of the findings contained in Section 66474 of the Act.

B.     The final or parcel map is not in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map.

C.    The City Council and the authorized agency have not taken action in accordance with Section 66474.5 of the Act relating to land projects.

D.    In accordance with Sections 66473 and 66474.2 of the Act, the map does not comply with the requirements or conditions imposed by this title and the Act.

E.     The resulting parcels are too small to sustain agricultural use in accordance with Section 66474.4 of the Act.

F.     The proposed subdivision is not entirely within the corporate boundaries of the City and no application for annexation to the City has been submitted.

G.    The property is served by an on-site sewage disposal system and the Health Department has not certified that the system is satisfactory to support the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.01.090 Discharge of Waste.
In accordance with Section 66474.6 of the Act, the authorized agency may disapprove a map based upon the discharge of waste.

 

24.01.100 Condominium, Community Apartment or Stock Cooperative Project.
A map of a condominium project, a community apartments project, or of the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative project shall be processed in accordance with Section 66427 of the Act.

 

24.01.110 Waiver of Nonmaterial Error.
When the failure of a map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map, the failure shall be waived and the map approved.

 

24.01.120 Current Equalized County Assessment Roll.
Nothing in this title shall prevent a purchaser of a unit of land created under the provisions of the Act or this title from subdividing such land one time, pursuant to the provisions of the Act prior to the time that an equalized county assessment roll has been completed reflecting the creation of the unit proposed to be subdivided.

 

24.01.130 Notice of Hearing.
A.     At a minimum, notice of a hearing held pursuant to this title shall be given in accordance with Section 66451.3 of the Act.

B.     In addition, notice shall be made in accordance with the general notice requirement contained in Section 30.01.070 of this Code. For coastal development permits, public notice procedures shall conform to the requirements in Chapter 30.80, “Coastal Development Permit,” in addition to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 94-06)

 

24.01.140 Appeals.
A.     A final determination made by an authorized agency shall be posted at City Hall and become effective 10 days thereafter unless a timely appeal is filed. (See Chapter 1.12.)

B.     A final determination by an authorized agency may be appealed to the next higher authorized agency by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal within 10 days after the action. The notice of appeal must specify the decision or part thereof appealed from and the specific errors alleged as the basis of the appeal.

C.    Upon receipt of a sufficient notice of appeal together with the established fee, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a noticed, public hearing by the next higher authorized authority.

D.    The authorized agency which hears the appeal may sustain, overrule or modify the final determination.

 

24.01.150 Monuments.
A.     The subdivider shall place monuments in accordance with City Standards and the Act.

B.     For all maps, the subdivider shall set monuments at all property corners, excluding property corners where existing monuments of record have been found in good condition.

C.    All monuments shall be placed prior to the recordation of the map.

D.    Upon approval of the City Engineer, the setting of interior monuments may be delayed. The subdivider shall furnish to the City security for the payment of the cost of setting monuments. The security shall not be released by the City until notices have been filed in accordance with the Act.

 

24.01.160 Times to Report and Act.
A.     The time limits specified in this title for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the body required to report or act. However, no body may require a routine waiver of time limits as a condition of accepting the application for, or processing of a map, unless the routine waiver is obtained for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of a related approval or an environmental review on the same development project.

B.     At the time that the subdivider makes an application pursuant to this division, the Planning and Building Director shall determine whether or not the City is able to meet the time limits specified in this chapter for reporting and acting on maps. If it will be unable to meet such time limits, the Planning and Building Director shall, upon request of a subdivider and for the purpose of meeting such time limits, contract or employ a private entity or persons on a temporary basis to perform such services as necessary to permit the City to meet such time limits. However, the City need not enter into such a contract or employ such persons if it determines either that: (1) no such entities or persons are available or qualified to perform such services; or (2) the City would be able to perform service in a more rapid fashion than would any available and qualified persons or entities.

C.    Such entities or persons employed by the City may, pursuant to an agreement with the City, perform all functions necessary to process maps and to comply with other requirements imposed pursuant to this chapter except those functions reserved by this chapter to the authorized agency. The authorized agency shall charge the subdivider fees in an amount necessary to defray costs directly attributable to employing or contracting with entities or persons performing services pursuant to this section. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.01.170 Fees.
At the time of filing, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City for the examination, review, processing and inspection related to such application in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

 

24.01.180 City Standards.
The authorized agency may modify City Standards as the standards are defined in Section 24.04.020 of the Municipal Code in particular cases. The application of a request for such modification must show special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question; and that such modification is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and that the modification will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.01.190 Severability.
If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this title which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application thereof, and to this end the provisions of this title are severable.

Chapter 24.04 DEFINITIONS
24.04.010 General.
Terms used in this title that are not specifically defined in this chapter, or the Subdivision Map Act, shall bear the meaning assigned to them by general usage. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.04.020 City Standards.
“City Standards” refers to those standards and specifications, including standard drawings, as may be adopted by resolution by the City Council from time to time. Three copies of these standards are to be on file in the office of the City Clerk and one copy in the office of the City Engineer. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.04.030 Subdivision.
A.     “Subdivision” is defined by Section 66424 of the Act.

B.     “Subdivision” does not include:

1.     Those things described in Government Code Sections 66412 and 66412.1;

2.     Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing;

3.     Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates a map; or

4.     Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.04.040 Subdivision Map Act.
“Subdivision Map Act” or “Act” means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California commencing with Section 66410 et seq. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.12 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
24.12.010 Application.
Unless expressly exempted, every subdivision shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.12.020 Suspension of Requirements.
Suspension of any requirement of this chapter may be granted by the authorized agency in a particular case. Application for such suspension must show that there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question, also, that such suspension, if granted, will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.12.030 Subdivision Design Standards.
A.     Purpose and Intent. The design of the subdivision (tentative maps and tentative parcel maps) is to reflect the existing pattern of development and be consistent with the character of the surrounding community, to the extent practical, while being consistent with density provisions of the underlying zone of the subdivision.

B.     Subdivision Design Standards. The following design standards shall apply to all subdivisions (tentative maps and tentative parcel maps).

1.     No lot shall include land in more than a single tax code area unless provisions are made with the County assessor to modify the tax code area for the lot.

2.     Every lot shall contain the minimum lot area and conform to the minimum lot dimensions and design standards specified in Title 30 of the Municipal Code (the Zoning Ordinance) for the zone in which the lot is located at the time the final map is submitted to the authorized agency for its approval.

3.     Every lot shall front on a dedicated street, a street offered for dedication, or a private road easement, as required by this title or the conditions of approval of the tentative map.

4.     Whenever practicable, side and rear lot lines shall be located along the top of man-made slopes instead of at the toe or at intermediate locations on the slopes.

5.     Panhandle-shaped lots and easement access lots shall be permitted to promote better subdivisions design or in subdivision when consistent with the existing pattern of development within the area, as determined by the authorized agency.

6.     Panhandle-shaped and easement access lots, if permitted, shall have the minimum panhandle/easement widths specified by the Municipal Code.

7.     Through lots shall not be allowed unless vehicular access rights are relinquished to one of the abutting streets.

8.     Whenever practicable, subdivision of residential property abutting streets shown on the Circulation Element of the City of Encinitas General Plan, railroads, transmission lines and open flood control channels shall be designed so that the lots do not face on such rights-of-way.

9.     Lot design shall allow for residences to be oriented with the rear of the residence toward collector and larger streets where possible, consistent with the pattern of development in the neighborhood.

10.   Walkways connecting with City sidewalk/trail systems shall, where practical, be provided in new residential developments.

11.   If reflected in the existing pattern of the surrounding community, a variety of lot sizes are encouraged within the density provisions of the underlying zone.

12.   The lot and street design shall follow the existing natural contour of the property, to the extent practicable. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 89-10; Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2017-03)

 

24.12.040 Connection to Sewer System.
A.     Each lot shall be designed to connect to the public sewer system; or

B.     Apply for and receive approval of an on-site, private sewage disposal in accordance with this title. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.12.050 Street Plans.
All streets shown on a tentative or tentative parcel map shall be in substantial conformance to the Circulation Element of the General Plan and they shall relate to the existing streets in the areas adjoining the subdivision. Such streets shall conform to any applicable master plans, specific plans or other officially adopted street plans. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.12.060 Bicycle Route Plans.
Bicycle route and pedestrian trails shall conform to applicable master plans, specific plans or other officially adopted plans. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.12.070 Natural Heating and Cooling Plans.
The design of a subdivision shall provide for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in accordance with Section 66473.1 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.12.080 Utility Service.
The design of the subdivision shall provide, to the extent feasible, for the availability to each residential unit in the subdivision individual household telephone service, cable television, natural gas, electricity and other utilities. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.12.090 Connectivity of Adjacent Land Uses.
Interconnecting pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be provided between adjacent residential and non-residential land uses to the extent feasible. The interconnection of pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall include, but not limited to, the dedication of easements for future connectivity and circulation between adjacent land uses. (Ord. 2019-24)

Chapter 24.16 IMPROVEMENTS
24.16.010 Required Improvements Generally.
Before a final or parcel map is approved by the authorized agency or by operation of law, it shall be required:

A.     That the subdivider grade and improve or agree to grade and improve all land dedicated or to be dedicated for streets or easements, bicycle routes, and all private streets and private easements laid out on a final map or parcel map in such manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, and in accordance with the City standards.

B.     That the subdivider install or agree to install all drainage and flood control structures and facilities required by the City Engineer, which drainage and flood control structures and facilities shall conform to the City standards and the general plan.

C.    That the subdivider install or agree to install fire hydrants and connections of a type and location approved by the Fire Chief and City Engineer.

D.    That the subdivider provide all necessary easements and rights-of-way to accommodate all streets, drainage and flood control structures and facilities, sewer systems, water systems, cable television and all other required utilities extending beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.

E.     That the subdivider shall provide that the subdivision be connected to a domestic water system approved by the City and all water system facilities shall be subject to the requirements of the water company or agency serving the subdivision. That the subdivider shall install or agree to install all required water systems necessary to serve the subdivision including fire hydrants and connections as may be required, and that all water lines, appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving or provisions have been made to insure the construction.

F.     That, where a sewer facility is constructed or laid within a street or road, the subdivider has installed or agreed to install sewer facilities of a type, size and location approved by the City Engineer to the property line of each lot within the subdivision and that all sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving or provisions have been made to insure the construction; and that all sewer system facilities and construction standards shall be subject to the requirements of the agency providing service to the subdivision.

G.    All new and existing utility facilities, including, but not limited to, power, telephone and cable television conduit and lines within the boundaries of any new subdivision and within any half street abutting a new subdivision, shall be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection, and shall make the necessary arrangement with each of the serving utilities, including franchised cable television operators, for the installation of such facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities and street lighting systems may be placed above ground subject to the subdivider’s obtaining a design review permit unless such installation is otherwise exempt from a design review permit pursuant to the Public Utility Commission’s regulations. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the installation and maintenance or overhead electric transmission lines in excess of 34,500 volts and long distance and trunk communication facilities. This installation of cable television lines may be waived when, in the opinion of the City Council, no franchised cable operator is found to be willing and able to install cable television lines in the subdivision. Notwithstanding any such waiver, the installation of cable television conduit is required.

H.    That the subdivider shall construct or shall cause to be constructed at the cost to the subdivider a street lighting system conforming to the City standards.

I.      Where the City has adopted a flood control element or drainage element of the general plan, all improvements shall conform to such element.

J.     That the subdivider comply or agree to comply with all the conditions of approval contained in the resolution approving the tentative or tentative parcel map and not otherwise provided for by this chapter.

K.     That all required improvements conform to City standards. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2017-03)

 

24.16.020 Improvements Benefiting Property Outside Subdivision.
A.     The City Council may require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public.

B.     If improvements are required under Section 24.16.020A, the City Council shall enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider in accordance with Section 66484 of the Act.

C.    In order to pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement, the City Council may proceed in accordance with Section 66487 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.16.030 Required Improvements for Specified Minor Subdivision.
Whenever a proposed subdivision is for four or fewer lots or units, required improvements shall be limited in accordance with Section 66411.1 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.16.040 Improvement Plan Review.
A.     Prior to filing the final map or parcel map, all improvement plans shall be subject to plan review by the City Engineer and other appropriate departments and agencies.

B.     Construction and installation of all improvements shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer and other appropriate agencies.

C.    A minimum of three copies of the improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer, or as many copies as is deemed necessary by the City Engineer for plan review and inspection by other appropriate departments. The costs to the City in examining improvement plans, inspecting improvements and monuments shall be paid by the subdivider. Upon approval of the improvement plans by the City Engineer, the originals of the improvement plans shall remain on file in the City Engineer’s office. Additional copies can be obtained through the engineering division or by a bonded carrier approved by the City Engineer.

D.    Where other agencies are involved or will be impacted by the proposed improvements, the City Engineer shall not approve the improvement plans until written approvals have been obtained from the other agencies.

E.     Approval of improvement plans are valid for a period of three years after date of approval by the City Engineer as shown on the approved plans. Expired plans must be resubmitted for checking. Plans must conform to City Standards in effect at the date of submittal, or if expired plans, at date of resubmittal. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.16.050 Improvement of Remainder Parcel.
When a subdivision is a portion of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, the subdivider may designate as a remainder that portion which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing. The fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements on the remainder parcel shall be in accordance with Section 66424.6 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.16.060 Agreement to Improve.
A.     The City may require a subdivider to enter into one of the types of agreements set forth in Section 24.16.060B as specified by the City:

1.     As a condition precedent to the approval of the final or parcel map announced at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative or tentative parcel map; or

2.     If at the time of approval of a final or parcel map, any improvement required by the authorized agency has not been completed and accepted in accordance with standards established by the City Council at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative or tentative parcel map.

B.     The City may require the subdivider to enter into one of the following types of agreements as specified by the authorized agency:

1.     An agreement with the City upon mutually agreeable terms to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider’s expense.

2.     An agreement with the City to thereafter:

a.     Initiate and consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act for the financing and completion of all such improvements, or

b.     If not completed under such special assessment act, to complete such improvements at the subdivider’s expense.

C.    The City entering into any agreement pursuant to this chapter shall require that performance of such agreement be guaranteed by the security specified in this chapter and that the agreement be recorded. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.16.070 Off-site Improvements Acquisition of Property Interests.
Whenever a subdivider is required as a condition of a tentative map to construct or install off-site improvements on property which neither the subdivider nor the City possesses a sufficient interest to permit the improvements to be made, the subdivider shall provide to the City, no later than 60 days prior to filing the final map, sufficient information, report and data, including but not limited to an appraisal and title report, to enable the City to commence proceedings to acquire an interest in the land. The subdivider shall agree to complete the improvements at such time as the City has sufficient interest in the property to permit the construction of the improvements. The subdivider shall bear all costs associated with the acquisition of the property interests and the estimated costs thereof shall be secured as provided in this title. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.16.080 Improvement Security Required.
The improvement agreement referred to in this chapter shall be secured, at the election of the City, in accordance with Section 66499 of the Act. The form of security shall be in substantial compliance with Section 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.16.090 Security.
The applicant shall provide security guaranteeing proper completion of the work described and delineated on the permit and approved plans in an amount of 100% of the approved cost estimate. The security shall be in the form of one or more of the following at the option of the City Engineer:

A.     A deposit of money or negotiable securities of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.

B.     An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the permitted works are on deposit and guaranteed for payment or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.

C.    A lien on the permittee’s property.

D.    A performance bond from an approved bonding company. Bonding may be for up to a maximum of 80% of the total security required by the permit. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 93-24)

 

24.16.100 Release of Security.
The required security for public improvements shall be released in the following manner:

A.     In accordance with Section 66499.7 of the Act, subject to Section 24.16.100B herein.

B.     The City Engineer may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon application therefor by the subdivider, provided, however, that no such release shall be for an amount more than 25% of the total improvement security given for faithful performance of the act or work and that the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than 50% of the total improvement security given for faithful performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this chapter, the Act or the improvement agreement; nor shall the City Engineer be obligated to make a partial release of security. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.16.110 Forfeiture of Security.
Upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any improvement, acts or obligations within the time specified, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than 10 days served upon the person responsible for the performance thereof, or upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of such person, determine that the subdivider is in default and may cause the improvement security, or such portion thereof as is necessary to complete the work or act and any other obligations of the subdivider secured thereby, to be forfeited to the City. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.16.120 Lien Contract for Improvements.
The authorized agency may require the subdivider, as a condition of approving the map, to enter into an agreement with the City to construct the improvements in the future, and require the subdivider to grant the City a lien on the property to be divided securing such future improvements. The lien granted under authority herein may be used to secure future improvements in easements, right-of-way or irrevocable offers of dedication or any other improvements or conditions of the map. The City Manager or designee is authorized to sign such agreements on behalf of the City. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.16.130 Covenant Not to Oppose an Improvement District.
In connection with a lien contract under this title, the authorized agency may require that the subdivider execute a covenant not to oppose the formation of an improvement district. The City Manager or designee is authorized to sign such covenants on behalf of the City. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.20 DEDICATIONS—GENERAL
24.20.010 Dedications Generally.
Subject to the other provisions of this title, the City may require, as a condition precedent to the approval of a final or parcel map, that the subdivider dedicate or irrevocably offer to dedicate real property within the subdivision for streets, alleys, access rights, abutter’s rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.20.020 Dedication Procedure.
A.     All dedications or offers of dedication required by the provisions of this title shall be by certificate on the final or parcel map.

B.     An offer of dedication shall be in such terms as to be binding on the owner, owner’s heirs, assigns, or successors in interest, and except as provided in Section 66477.2 of the Act, shall continue until such dedication is accepted or the offer is abandoned or otherwise terminated. Any such dedication or offer of dedication shall be free of any burden or encumbrance which would interfere with the purposes of which the dedication or offer of dedication is required.

C.    The subdivider shall provide a current preliminary title report or equivalent proof of title satisfactory to the City Engineer.

D.    At the time the authorized agency approves the final or parcel map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The City Clerk or secretary of the authorized agency shall certify on the map the action taken. The City Engineer is authorized to act on behalf of the City in rejecting or accepting dedications. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.20.030 Reservation of Area for Public Use.
The City Council or authorized agency may require that areas of real property within the subdivision be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries, and recreational trails where indicated on the General Plan, or other public uses in accordance with Sections 66479 through 66482 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.20.040 Protest of Dedication.
In accordance with Section 66475.4 of the Act, at the time of the imposition of a dedication requirement, the subdivider may file a protest. An administrative review will be conducted by the next higher authority. If the dedication requirement is determined to be excessive, the City may require amendment of the tentative subdivision map, redesign of the subdivision, pay just compensation, or delete or modify the dedication found to be excessive. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.22 DEDICATION—BIKE PATH
24.22.010 Requirement.
Whenever a subdivider is required to dedicate roadways, the City Council or authorized agency may require a subdivider to dedicate such real property as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision; provided that the subdivision, as shown on the final map, contains 200 or more lots. (Ord. 92-39)

Chapter 24.23 DEDICATION—ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
24.23.010 Requirement.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, the City Council or authorized agency may require the subdivider to dedicate such land as deemed necessary for the construction of elementary schools. (Ord. 92-39)

Chapter 24.24 DEDICATION—LOCAL TRANSIT FACILITY
24.24.010 Reserved.
Reference 66475.2 of the Act.

Chapter 24.26 DEDICATION—PUBLIC ACCESS
24.26.010 Requirement.
Whenever any land to be subdivided is bound by an inlet, bay, estuary, lagoon, river, stream, lake, reservoir or by the Pacific Ocean, there shall be a street to and along such inlet, bay, estuary, lagoon, river, stream, lake, reservoir or ocean front; or adequate public access to and along such boundary shall be provided or be made otherwise available in lieu of such street or any combination as the City may require to insure compliance with Chapter 4, Article 3.5 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.27 DEDICATION—SOLAR ACCESS
24.27.010 Reserved.
Reference 66475.3 of the Act.

Chapter 24.28 DEDICATION—DRAINAGE/FLOOD FACILITY
24.28.010 Requirement.
A.     Where a drainage facility or flood control facility is necessary for the use of lot owners or for the protection of lots, or where proposed drainage facilities are identified on an adopted General Plan, Specific Plan or other plan, adequate rights-of-way for such drainage facilities or flood control facilities shall be offered for dedication to the City or to such other public entities as the City designates and shall be shown on the map.

B.     Where it is necessary to extend a drainage facility or flood control facility beyond the boundaries of the subdivision for adequate drainage or flood control needs, the required rights-of-way shall be offered for dedication.

C.    Drainage facilities and flood control facilities within and without the subdivision shall be provided so as to carry storm runoff, both tributary to and originating within the subdivision.

D.    Facilities required under this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with City Standards to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.29 DEDICATION—STREETS
24.29.010 Requirement.
Streets required to be dedicated by the subdivider shall be in accord with the following:

A.     The subdivider shall offer to dedicate rights-of-way for streets within the subdivision in accordance with the City Standards as adopted by Resolution 91-39 of the City Council on August 21, 1991.

B.     No final or parcel map shall be approved unless the street or streets providing primary access to the subdivision are offered as dedication to the City, County of San Diego or the state and the street or the streets meet City standards.

C.    Where it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of a subdivision to provide adequate circulation for residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall cause the required easements or dedications in accordance with City standards.

D.    The City Engineer may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on the final or parcel map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.020 Street Dedications.
All lands to be subdivided shall provide access in the following manner:

A.     Major Subdivisions. Streets dedicated and improved in accordance with City street standards with right-of-way widths as adopted by Resolution 91-39, for on-site streets, and with not less than 40 feet right-of-way for off-site streets.

B.     Planned Residential Developments. Internal access with private streets may be provided if no reasonable possibility for access through the proposed development exists.

C.    Parcel Maps. Streets adjacent to the project shall be dedicated and improved in accordance with City Street Standards as adopted in Resolution 91-39. Off site access may be by legally existing private road access provided health and safety standards for access can be met to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and Fire Marshal.

D.    Private Streets, Limitation. Private streets may only be established where the development creates a cul-de-sac street serving 10 or less lots. In any location where any possibility exists for access needs beyond the proposed development, the dedication of right-of-way shall be required through the development. Unless otherwise noted in this chapter, private road access shall not otherwise be allowed. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.040 Private Road Maintenance.
A.     Private streets will be maintained either through private road maintenance agreements or through a special district, as approved by the City Engineer.

B.     In the case where standards of an existing special district to which a subdivision is to be annexed are different from those specified, the standards of the existing special district shall prevail.

C.    Improvement standards for private roads shall be consistent with private road standards adopted by the City Council of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.050 Specific Plan Area Requirements.
Where land to be subdivided is located in the specific planning area designation as defined by the Land Use Element of the City of Encinitas General Plan, streets providing on site and off site access shall be designed and improved to those standards necessary to implement the development density design and objectives of an adopted specific plan as determined by the authorized agency following recommendation by the City Engineer. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.060 Commercial Industrial Requirements.
Where land to be subdivided is located in any commercial or industrial designation defined by the Land Use Element of the City General Plan, streets providing on-site and off-site access shall be dedicated and improved in accordance with City standards. Creation of new streets of access for commercial and industrial uses shall avoid access through residential areas unless the Circulation Element of the General Plan has otherwise provided for the access. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.070 Streets on Boundaries of Subdivision.
All dedicated streets which are proposed on the boundaries of a subdivision shall be not less than one half the standard width, plus 10 feet in width together with a strip of land one foot wide on its outer edge which shall be offered to the City for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.080 Streets Terminated at Subdivision Boundary and in a Cul-de-Sac.
All dedicated streets proposed to be terminated at the subdivision boundary shall include a strip of land one foot wide extending across the street at its point of termination at the boundary which shall be portions of the adjacent lots, offered for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished. (Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2017-03)

 

24.29.090 Extension of Streets on Boundaries of Subdivision.
Where it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of a subdivision to provide adequate circulation and fire protection for residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall obtain the necessary easements therefor, which easements shall be dedicated or offered for dedication to the City when required by other provisions of this section and shall improve the easements in accordance with City standards of City-maintained roads. (Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2017-03)

 

24.29.100 Off-Site Access—Publicly Maintained Streets.
Where off site access will not serve as access to on site streets to be maintained by the City or a Special District, no dedication or offer of dedication shall be required for residential streets providing off-site access to the land to be subdivided when the authorized agency has determined that a practical difficulty in obtaining public rights over intervening land makes dedication or an offer of dedication impossible or circumstances such as location make such dedication or offer of dedication unwarranted.

A.     When such determination has been made, a private road easement not less than 40 feet in width shall be approved in lieu of such dedication or offer of dedication.

B.     Where such private road easement is approved, the subdivider shall obtain documentation from a title company that the owner and his/her successors have the right to use such private road easement for the lots to be created prior to the approval of the final map. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.110 Non-Urban Development Areas.
In non-urban development areas, offers of dedication may be required when the City Engineer determines that a high probability exists that a proposed private street may need to be brought into the City maintained system at some future date. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.29.120 Utility Easements.
All utility easements which are acquired after the issuance of the resolution of approval (notice of approval) shall be subordinated to any public dedications which are required as a condition of the approval with the exceptions of major transmission facilities, mains and lines as determined by the City Engineer. (Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2017-03)

Chapter 24.30 DEVELOPMENT FEE—BRIDGE/MAJOR THOROUGHFARES
24.30.010 Reserved.
Reference Sections 66484 and 66484.3 of the Act.

Chapter 24.31 DEVELOPMENT FEE—DRAINAGE AND SANITARY SEWER FACILITY
24.31.010 Fee Imposed.
The substantive and fee provisions contained in Sections 810.201 et seq. of the County Code, County of San Diego, are hereby incorporated into this title by reference, as though fully set forth, and made applicable to subdivisions within the City. (Ord. 87-10)

24.31.020 Effective Date.
The effective date of this chapter is September 25, 1993. (Ord. 93-16)

Chapter 24.32 DEVELOPMENT FEE—GROUND WATER RECHARGE FACILITY
24.32.010 Reserved.
Reference Section 66484.5 of the Act.

Chapter 24.40 CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
24.40.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:

A.     To establish criteria for the conversion of existing housing to condominiums or stock cooperative.

B.     To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation.

C.    To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase.

D.    To insure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety and is consistent with the goals of the City. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.020 Physical Elements Report.
A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A.     A report by a licensed engineer detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceiling, windows, recreational equipment, parking facilities and appliances. Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of each element; when said element was replaced; the approximate condition of each element; the approximate date upon which said application for conversion was filed and accepted by the City. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.

B.     A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the City, on each structure and each unit within the structure.

C.    A report by a licensed geotechnical engineer on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater, and landslides or other geological hazards in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with said report.

D.    A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.030 Acceptance of Reports.
The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be subject to approval by the City. The reports in their accepted form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the authorized agency. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.040 Copy to Buyers.
The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports (in their final, accepted form), prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project and said developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said reports. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the City, at the project site. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.050 Physical Standards for Condominium Conversions.
A.     To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the City shall require that all condominium conversions conform to the Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

B.     All provisions of the Municipal Code must be met and violations corrected prior to the approval of the final map. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.060 Specific Physical Standards.
The City shall require conformance with the standards of this section in approving the map.

A.     Building Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the City building code in effect at the time the application for conversion was accepted by the City except as herein provided.

B.     Zoning Regulations. The project shall conform to all applicable standards of the Zoning Ordinance, in effect at the time the application for conversion was accepted by the City except as herein provided. Except, if the applicant demonstrates that some aspect of the property or improvements is legally nonconforming, the structure may be converted so long as the nonconforming aspect is not expanded. In cases where modification of the nonconformity can be reasonably achieved in terms of financial or structural feasibility, the City shall require such modification as a condition of approval for conversion.

C.    Fire Prevention.

1.     Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.

2.     Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times.

D.    Sound Transmission.

1.     Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors which is determined by the Planning and Building Department to be a source of structural vibration or structure borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Planning and Building Department.

2.     Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the Uniform Building Code. In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the authorized agency may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units.

E.     Utility Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. A plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering shall be developed prior to final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the authorized agency.

F.     Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least 200 cubic feet of enclosed weather proofed and lockable private storage space in addition to closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the Planning and Building Department, but shall not be divided into two or more locations. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the authorized agency.

G.    Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the authorized agency.

H.    Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored as necessary and maintained to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality.

I.      Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, and air conditioners that are provided are in operable working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowners’ association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.070 Notice to Tenants.
A.     The authorized agency shall not approve a final map or parcel map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project unless it makes all of the findings set forth in Section 66427.1 of the Act relating to notices and offers to tenants.

B.     The subdivider shall give notice to prospective tenants in accordance with Section 66452.8 of the Act.

C.    In accordance with Section 66452.9 of the Act, subdivider shall give notice of the filing of the tentative map or tentative parcel map.

D.    Subdivider shall provide evidence of receipt of each tenant of the notices required herein. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.080 Stock Cooperatives Owners’ Vote.
In accordance with Section 66452.10 of the Act, a stock cooperative will not be converted to a condominium unless a majority of the owners have voted in favor of the conversion. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.090 Conversion to Stock Cooperative.
The City shall approve or disapprove the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative within 120 days following receipt of a completed application for approval of such conversion. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.40.100 Findings.
The authorized agency shall not approve an application for conversion unless the authorized agency finds that:

A.     All provisions of this chapter are met;

B.     The proposed conversion is not inconsistent with any objectives or policies in the City General Plan specifically directed to the conversion;

C.    The proposed conversion will conform to the Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter;

D.    The overall design and physical condition of the conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety; and

E.     The conversion would not displace predominantly low and moderate income families or tenants without adequate provision for suitable relocation of such families or tenants. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.44 CONVERSION OF MOBILEHOME PARK
24.44.010 Report Required.
At the time of filing a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the subdivider shall file a report in accordance with Section 66427.4 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.44.020 Procedure.
In approving a conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the authorized agency shall comply with the requirements of Section 66427.4 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

Chapter 24.48 VESTING MAP
24.48.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 66498.8 of the Act which requires the City to adopt procedures for processing vesting tentative maps and vesting tentative parcel maps (referred to in this chapter as “vesting maps”) under the Vesting Tentative Map Statute set forth in Section 66498.1 et seq. of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.48.020 Filing and Processing.
A.     Whenever this title requires the filing of a tentative map or a tentative parcel map for a residential development, a subdivider may file a proposed, vesting map subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Except as provided in this chapter, the proposed vesting map shall be filed and processed in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a tentative map or tentative parcel map.

C.    The proposed vesting map shall have conspicuously printed on its face either “vesting tentative map” or “vesting tentative parcel map.”

D.    The subdivider shall pay an additional fee in an amount established by City Council resolution for processing the proposed vesting map. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.48.030 Additional Requirements.
In order for an application for a vesting map to be deemed complete, the application must be accompanied with the following information in a form satisfactory to the City:

A.     The height, size and location of structures proposed for the property to be subdivided with sufficient plans and specifications to constitute a complete application for a building permit.

B.     General architectural renderings.

C.    Detailed landscaping plans.

D.    Detailed final grading plans showing existing and proposed finished grades at one foot intervals.

E.     A complete application for any design review required to construct the project.

F.     The design and specifications for all public facilities and improvements, both on-site and off-site.

G.    Detailed geological, drainage, flood control, soils, traffic and other reports deemed necessary by the City to permit a complete review of the design of improvements proposed for the subdivision.

H.    A detailed description of the uses to which the real property and structures will be put.

I.      A complete application for any variances required to construct the project.

J.     A complete application for any rezoning required to complete the project.

K.     A report demonstrating that all public facilities necessary to serve the subdivision or mitigate any impact created by the subdivision will be available for the entire time that the approved vesting map is valid plus any time during which the rights conferred by this chapter exist. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-14)

 

24.48.040 Disapproval of Proposed Vesting Map.
A proposed vesting map shall be disapproved if:

A.     Either the proposed subdivision or the proposed development are inconsistent with the general plan, a specific plan or a Zoning Ordinance of the City.

B.     The development of the proposed project has not already received or is not concurrently receiving all required permits and discretionary approvals.

C.    The City Council finds that all public facilities necessary to serve the subdivision or mitigate any impact created by the subdivision will not be available for the entire time that the approved vesting map is valid plus any time during which the rights conferred by this chapter exist. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.48.050 Rights Conferred.
A.     Approval or conditional approval of a vesting map shall confer a right to proceed with development in accordance with Section 66498.1 of the Act.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A above, the City may condition or deny a subsequent permit, approval, extension or entitlement in accordance with Section 66498.1(c) of the Act.

C.    The rights conferred by the approval or conditional approval of the vesting map shall expire:

1.     If a final map or parcel map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting map.

2.     The subdivider has requested and the City has approved a change in the type, density, bulk or design of the development, unless an amendment to the vesting map has been approved.

3.     One year after the recording of the final map or parcel map in accordance with Section 66452.6(g) and (h) of the Act.

D.    Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the amount of any fees which are required to be paid either as a condition of the map’s approval or by operation of any law shall be determined by application of the law or policy in effect at the time the fee is paid. The amounts of the fees are not vested upon approval of the vesting map.

E.     The subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map in accordance with the Act. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-14)

 

24.48.060 Extension of Vesting Map.
A.     Upon application received prior to the expiration of the vesting map, the Director of Planning and Building may extend the time of expiration for a period not to exceed one year from the date of expiration of the vesting map. No more than three such time extensions may be granted to any vesting map. The Director shall consider the current circumstances of the subdivision, the site and the surrounding area. The vesting map for which an extension is granted and conditions of approval shall remain substantially unchanged from the vesting map as originally approved. A need to alter or add conditions, attach additional development fees, or alter map design or number of units shall be grounds for denial of the time extension; the applicant may file for a new vesting map review and approval.

B.     Upon an application by the subdivider to extend a vesting map, the map shall automatically be extended for 60 days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. If the Director denies a subdivider’s application for an extension, the subdivider may appeal to the legislative body within 15 days after the advisory agency has denied the extension. During the time a determination or an extension request is pending, a final map for that subdivision shall not be approved for recordation. (See Chapter 1.12.) (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-14)

Chapter 24.50 MAJOR SUBDIVISION—TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURE
24.50.010 Requirements.
A.     Every subdivider proposing to create a major subdivision shall comply with the procedures and requirements contained in this chapter. Prior to the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider or his/her authorized agent shall pay the required pre-application fee and confer with the Director of Planning and Building (hereinafter “Director”) and the City Engineer regarding the preparation of the map.

B.     A vesting tentative map shall be filed in accordance with the procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 92-14)

 

24.50.020 Filing of Tentative Map.
A.     The subdivider shall submit to the Director, in as many copies as required by the City, the proposed tentative map.

B.     A proposed tentative map shall not be deemed filed until:

1.     All necessary zoning approvals have been secured;

2.     An environmental impact report, negative declaration, or exemption determination, as required, has been proposed for the project covered by the application;

3.     The map complies with the form and content requirements of this title;

4.     The filing fee or initial deposit has been paid in full; and

5.     A traffic study has been completed and submitted to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. The traffic study shall be completed by a City-approved traffic engineer. (Ord. 89-17; Ord. 92-14)

 

24.50.030 Notice to School Board.
Within 10 days of the filing of a tentative map, the Director shall send a notice in accordance with Section 66455.7 of the Act. (Ord. 92-14)

 

24.50.040 Preparation of Tentative Map.
The tentative map shall be based upon a reasonably accurate or detailed survey and shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions relating to final maps contained in Section 24.54.040A, B, and E. (Ord. 89-17)

 

24.50.050 Contents of Tentative Map.
Each tentative map shall depict all contiguous property owned by the subdivider and shall contain the following information:

A.     Name and address of the owner whose property is proposed to be subdivided and the name and address of the subdivider;

B.     Name and address of registered civil engineer, or licensed surveyor, who prepared the map;

C.    North arrow, scale, vicinity map, California Lambert coordinates, date of preparation;

D.    Tax rate area and assessor’s parcel numbers for all existing parcels;

E.     Statement of ownership of existing streets and easements; location, dimensions and purposes of all plotable easements, and statement of the purposes of non-plotable easements;

F.     The location, width and proposed names of all streets and alleys within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, and typical sections and approximate grades thereof and point of access from each lot;

G.    Statement as to whether proposed streets are to be public or private;

H.    Names, location and width of adjacent streets and alleys;

I.      Lot lines and approximate dimensions, gross and net lot areas and numbers of each lot, including lot numbers of private streets and open space/common area lots;

J.     Location and width of watercourses with a rate of flow of 10 cfs or greater in the 100-year flood event, areas subject to inundation from stormwater flows, lines of inundation of all 100-year floodplains, and location of drainage structures, irrigation ditches and other permanent drainage features;

K.     Existing site topographic contours at five-foot intervals extending 50 feet beyond the proposed subdivision;

L.     Proposed grading (may be shown on separate proposed grading plan);

M.    Location of existing buildings and permanent structures;

N.    Location of all major vegetation showing size and type;

O.    Width and location of all existing and proposed public or private easement, for example, utilities and bicycle paths;

P.     Name and map number of adjacent subdivisions;

Q.    Location of railroads and rights-of-way;

R.    Approximate radii of curves;

S.     Any proposed phasing by units;

T.     Number of units to be constructed when a condominium or community apartment project is involved;

U.    At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map”;

V.     Locations of existing structures within the subdivision and structures outside the subdivision but within 25 feet of the subdivision boundaries;

W.    A certificate signed by the subdivider whereby: “The subdivider agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Encinitas and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the City of Encinitas or its agents, officers or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul an approval from the City of Encinitas concerning this subdivision when such action is brought within the time period specified in Gov. Code Section 66499.37. This certificate is conditioned upon the City of Encinitas providing prompt notice to the subdivider as provided by the Act.”

X.     A statement of whether the subdivider will seek the creation of a special district;

Y.     Land use and zoning designations for proposed and existing lots and lots adjacent to the proposed subdivision;

Z.     Where private sewage disposal systems and/or private domestic wells are proposed, a Department of Health certification and certification number, together with a statement that each parcel of the subdivision is suitable for on-site sewage disposal;

AA.  All open space area and reason for open space area (environmentally constrained land, common recreation area, etc.). (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.50.060 Additional Information Required with Tentative Map.
The following information, to the satisfaction of the Planning and Building Director, shall be shown either on the proposed tentative map or on accompanying documents:

A.     Source of water supply, and a service letter from the appropriate water agency, stating that water service is available to the proposed subdivision;

B.     Type of street improvement and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install, including street lights, traffic signals and fire hydrants;

C.    Proposed method of sewage disposal including location of facilities, if applicable, a service letter shall be provided from the appropriate sewer agency, stating that sewer service is available to the proposed subdivision;

D.    Proposed storm drainage facilities or other means of drainage, including the location of such facilities;

E.     Protective covenants to be recorded;

F.     Fire protection service letters must be completed and signed by the district or public agency which would provide fire protection service for the project;

G.    Landscaping and irrigation conceptual plan;

H.    Proposed conversions of existing overhead electrical utilities;

I.      Project service availability letter from each affected school district certifying to the adequacy or inadequacy of school facilities to serve the project. Property zoned other than residential or agricultural does not need school letters;

J.     Any other pertinent information which the City Engineer or Director may request to accomplish the provisions of the title; and

K.     Subdivider shall file a certificate that, “subdivider hereby acknowledges that there is imposed as a condition on this subdivision, the obligation to pay fees, offer dedications, and/or construct improvements in accordance with the provisions of Title 23 of the Encinitas Municipal Code, and that those obligations shall be satisfied during the building permit process.” (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.50.070 Grading Plan and Soils Report.
A.     There shall be filed with the tentative map a grading plan showing any grading proposed for the creation of building sites within the subdivision or for construction of improvements to serve the subdivision. The grading plan together with the original topographical contours may be shown on the tentative map. This plan shall indicate approximate earthwork volumes of proposed excavation and filling operations. In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be filed with the tentative map.

B.     Where grading is proposed as a part of a subdivision, a preliminary soils report must be prepared and submitted with the tentative map, unless specifically waived by the City Engineer. In any case, a soils report must be prepared prior to final map approval in accordance with Section 24.01.070.

 

24.50.080 Preliminary Title Report.
There shall be filed with the tentative map a current preliminary title report for the property being subdivided.

 

24.50.090 Processing of Tentative Map by Director.
A.     The Director shall obtain recommendations from the City staff, concerned governmental agencies and other persons affected by or integrated in the proposed subdivision and shall present those recommendations to the subdivider for discussion at a pre-hearing conference.

B.     The Director shall prepare a staff report to the authorized agency containing recommendations regarding the proposed tentative map. (Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.50.100 Report in Writing Fee.
Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the Director shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the subdivider and on each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the advisory agency. A fee in an amount set by resolution, from time to time, by the City Council shall be collected from the subdivider for expenses incurred under this section. (Gov. Code Section 66452.3)

 

24.50.110 Advisory Agency’s Processing of Proposed Tentative Map.
A.     The advisory agency shall conduct a noticed public hearing on the proposed tentative map in accordance with Chapter 30.01.

B.     The advisory agency shall investigate each proposed tentative map filed pursuant to this chapter. The advisory agency shall consider the proposed design of the subdivision and the kind, nature, and extent of proposed improvements.

C.    Within 50 days of the filing of the tentative map with the secretary of the advisory agency, the advisory agency shall file with the authorized agency its findings and its recommendation based on those findings. The advisory agency will recommend to the authorized agency the approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map. As appropriate, the advisory agency shall recommend the kind, nature, and extent of improvements that should be constructed or installed. (Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.50.120 Placing Proposed Tentative Map on Authorized Agency Agenda.
A.     When a report on a tentative map is filed with the City Clerk, the Clerk is directed to act prior to the next regular meeting of the authorized agency by setting the matter on the authorized agency agenda for public hearing, which date shall be within 30 days of that next regular meeting. The authorized agency shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within that same 30-day period.

B.     The authorized agency shall comply with the time periods set forth in Section 66452.2(c) of the Act.

 

24.50.130 Expiration and Extension of Tentative Map.
A.     A tentative map shall expire 36 months after its approval or conditional approval unless extended by law or City action.

B.     Upon application received prior to the expiration of the tentative map, the Director may extend the time of expiration for a period not to exceed one year from the date of expiration of the tentative map. A tentative map shall be valid for a total of six years if extensions of time are applied for and granted. The authorized agency shall consider the current circumstances of the subdivision, the site and the surrounding area. The tentative map for which an extension is granted and conditions of approval shall remain substantially unchanged from the tentative map as originally approved. A need to alter or add conditions (unless requested by the applicant to comply with Municipal Code standards), attach additional development fees, or alter map design or number of units shall be grounds for denial of the time extension; the applicant may file for a new tentative map review and approval.

C.    Upon an application by the subdivider to extend a tentative map, the map shall automatically be extended for 60 days after the original date of expiration or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. If the Director denies a subdivider’s application for an extension, the subdivider may appeal* to the legislative body within 15 days after the Director has denied the extension. (*See Chapter 1.12.)

D.    Upon proper filing of an application for extension, public notice shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 30.01 as modified by this chapter. A public hearing is not required. (Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.50.140 Revised Tentative Map.
A.     Where a subdivider desires to revise or alter a proposed subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved by the authorized agency, the subdivider may file with the Director a revised tentative map on payment of the established fees.

B.     A revised tentative map shall conform to the following requirements:

1.     The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall generally conform to the street and lot pattern shown on the approved tentative map;

2.     The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall include only one contiguous area consisting of all or a portion of the subdivision shown on the approved tentative map together with such additional land, if any, as the subdivider desires to include;

3.     The revised tentative map shall contain all of the information required on tentative maps and shall be accompanied by such data as is required to be filed with proposed tentative maps.

C.    A revised tentative map shall be filed within the period of approval of the tentative map by the authorized agency or, if an extension of time is granted, within the period specified in such extension.

D.    Upon the filing of a revised tentative map and payment of the prescribed fee, such revised tentative map shall be treated in all respects as an original tentative map and shall be reported on, approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as a tentative map. (Ord. 92-39)

 

24.50.150 Replacement of Tentative Map.
At any time following the filing of a proposed tentative map with the Director and prior to its adoption, and prior to approval of the tentative map, the City may direct the subdivider to, or the subdivider may elect to, submit a replacement tentative map. Such direction shall be based upon the City’s finding that the number or nature of the changes necessary for approval are such that they cannot be shown clearly or simply on the original tentative map. Subdivider shall pay the required fee for replacement map as established by resolution. (Ord. 92-39)

Chapter 24.54 MAJOR SUBDIVISION—FINAL MAP PROCEDURE
24.54.010 Requirements.
After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map and prior to the expiration of such map, a subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be subdivided by complying with the procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.020 Multiple Final Maps.
The subdivider may file multiple final maps prior to the expiration of the tentative map in accordance with Section 66456.1 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.030 Preparation of Final Map.
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a field survey and shall conform to all of the requirements of Section 66434 of the Act. In addition, the final map shall be prepared in the form, and contain information as required by this chapter, or as may be required by the City Engineer. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.040 Supplemental Information on Final Map.
Every final map shall:

A.     Contain a definite description of the land subdivided by references to recorded deeds, recorded maps and official United States surveys. Reference to tracts, recorded deeds and recorded maps shall be spelled out, worded identically with original records and show the book and page or records or map numbers.

B.     The California Coordinate System shall be used as the basis of bearings and all measured and calculated bearing values shall be expressed in terms of such system. The angle of grid divergence from a true meridian (Theta or mapping angle), and the north point of said map shall appear on each sheet thereof. Establishment of said basis of bearings may be by use of existing horizontal control stations or astronomic observations.

“Basis of Bearings” means the source of uniform observation of all measured bearings shown on the map. Unless otherwise approved, this source will be the California Coordinate System, Zone 6, “North American Datum of 1983” (NAD 83).

“California Coordinate System” means the coordinate system as defined in Sections 8801 through 8819 of the California Public Resources Code. The specified zone for San Diego County is “Zone 6” and the official datum is the “North American Datum of 1983.”

C.    Show the acreage of all parcels to the nearest hundredth, and corresponding square footage.

D.    Clearly indicate, by description or a distinctive boundary line, any area subject to flooding at times of high tide or heavy rainfall, and state that such area is subject to flooding at time of high tide or heavy rainfall.

E.     Show a solid line separating all private ways, easements and other rights-of-way not to be accepted as public streets and shown on said map from public streets and clearly designate their nature and the manner in which the right is reserved or granted. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.54.050 Record of Easements.
Every final map shall:

A.     Indicate the centerline data, width and side lines of all existing and proposed easements to which the real property is subject or will be subjected by the approval of the final map;

B.     Easements for storm drains, sewer and other purposes shall be denoted by broken lines;

C.    The easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if already of record, proper reference to the records given;

D.    Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication;

E.     Easements for public utility companies shall be designated on the final map as easements for public utilities. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.060 Survey Data.
A.     The final map shall show the centerlines of all streets, length, tangents, radii and central angles or radial bearings of all curves, the total width of each street, the width of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing dedication and the width of each side of the centerline; also the width or rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels and any other easements existing or being dedicated by the map.

B.     Surveys in connection with maps prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be made in accordance with standard practices and principles for land surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivisions and all lots and blocks shall close. Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. Dimensions of lots shall be net dimensions, and no ditto marks shall be used.

Show two measured ties from the boundary of the subject property to existing Horizontal Control stations having California Coordinate values of third order accuracy or better, as published in the County of San Diego’s Horizontal Control Book. These tie lines to the existing control shall be shown in relation to the California Coordinate System (i.e., grid bearings and grid distances). All other distances shown on the map are to be shown as ground distances. A combined factor for conversion of grid-to-ground distances shall be shown on the map.

If there are no acceptable horizontal control stations within one-half mile of the subject property, then the engineer or land surveyor may make a written request to the City Engineer for additional control stations within the subject area.

The City may provide a coordinated monument (using the North American datum of 1983) by tying either a section, quarter-section, rancho or other appropriate land net corner or road centerline which is intervisible with an existing monument in the local control network.

In the event the City is unable to provide an acceptable horizontal control station within one-half mile of the subject property within 30 days of written request, this requirement may be waived.

None of the above will preclude a person, authorized to practice land surveying, from performing the necessary work to meet the requirements of this section.

C.    Traverse sheets and work sheets showing the closure of the exterior boundaries and of each irregular block and lot shall be provided.

D.    The final map shall also have indicated thereon the following:

1.     Suitable primary survey control points:

a.     Section corners,

b.     Monuments (existing outside of subdivision);

2.     Location of all permanent monuments within the subdivision;

3.     Ties to any City or County boundary lines involved;

4.     Ties to and identification of adjacent subdivisions;

5.     Required certificates. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.54.070 Lot Numbers.
A.     The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number “1” with no omissions or duplications. In the case of successive subdivisions of the same basic tract number, the numbering may be successively extended from the previous subdivision bearing the same general tract number.

B.     Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.080 Established Lines.
A.     Whenever the City Engineer has established the centerline of a street or alley, such data shall be considered in making the surveys and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field books or maps of public record, relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated.

B.     The final map shall show City boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision clearly designated and tied in. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.090 Additional Certificates on Final Map.
In addition to certificates and other material required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, every final map shall bear the following certificates or endorsements:

A.     A certificate by the City Treasurer and the County Director of Public Works, where applicable, to the effect that there are no unpaid special assessments or bonds which may be paid in full shown by the records in their offices against the subdivision or any part thereof.

B.     A certificate by the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors that the provisions of Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code have been complied with regarding deposits for taxes on the property within the subdivision.

C.    Certificate of the County Recorder as to the filing of the map.

D.    A certificate signed and sealed by the responsible engineer or surveyor in accordance with Section 66441 of the Act.

E.     A certificate signed by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 66442 of the Act.

F.     A certificate for execution by the City Clerk or Secretary of the authorized agency, stating that the authorized agency approved the final map; and accepted, accepted subject to improvement or rejected, on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication.

G.    A certificate, signed and acknowledged before a notary, by all parties, and if a corporation, a certified copy of the appropriate resolution of such corporation, having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map as required, except as set forth in Section 66436 of the Act.

H.    Where dedications are required, a certificate offering to dedicate interests in real property for specified public purposes in accordance with the Act. The certificate shall be properly signed and acknowledged before a notary public and shall be signed by all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided subject to the provisions of Section 66436 of the Act. In case any dedication or consent shown on a subdivision map is signed by a corporation, a certified copy of the resolution passed by the Board of Directors must accompany the final map.

I.      The certificate of a qualified title company that the parties who executed the owner’s certificate required by Section 66436 of the Act are all the parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. The certificates shall also set forth the names of the parties owning the interests set forth in Section 66436 of the Act together with a description of the interests and the reasons the parties did not execute the owner’s certificate. The title company shall, on the date the final map will be transmitted to the County Recorder, present to the County Recorder a letter stating that the date the names of the parties and the other facts set forth in the title company’s certificate were the same as shown by the certificate.

J.     In the event that a grant of an open space easement is to be made over any portion of the subdivision, the final map shall contain a certificate signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the subdivided land granting such open space easement and stating the conditions of the grant.

K.     A notice in accordance with Section 66434.1 of the Act relating to the development lien created under the Education Code.

L.     In accordance with Section 66434.2, the Director or City Engineer may require such additional information and certificates as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Code.

M.    A certificate signed by the subdivider whereby: “The subdivider agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Encinitas and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the City of Encinitas or its agents, officers or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul an approval from the City of Encinitas concerning this subdivision when such action is brought within the time period specified in Gov. Code Section 66499.37. This certificate is conditioned upon the City of Encinitas providing prompt notice to the subdivider as provided by the Act.”

N.    In the event an owner’s development lien has been created, a notice shall be placed on the face of the map. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 2017-03)

 

24.54.100 Certificates by Separate Instrument.
A.     The City may require that the certificates and acknowledgments required by this title be made by separate instrument to be recorded concurrently with the final map being filed for record.

B.     Whenever a certificate or acknowledgment is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately recorded documents. This reference shall be completed by the San Diego County Recorder pursuant to Section 66468.1 of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.110 Title Company Subdivision Guarantee.
In lieu of the title company certificate required by this chapter there may be filed with the City Engineer a subdivision guarantee from a qualified title insurance company which guarantees that the parties’ names therein are the only parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. The title company shall, on the date the final map will be transmitted to the County Recorder, present to the County Recorder pursuant to the requirements of Section 66465 of the Act, a letter stating that at the time of filing of the final or parcel map in the office of the County Recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being subdivided whose signatures are required by Division 2 of Title 7 of the Act, as shown by the records in the Office of the Recorder. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.120 Soils Report Certificate.
A.     When a soils report, a geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of such report or reports, the name of the engineer making the soils report and geologist making the geologic report and the location where the reports are on file.

B.     The soils report, geologic report, or soils and geologic reports specified in subsection A of this section shall be kept for public inspection by the City. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.54.130 Processing of Final Map by City Engineer.
A.     The final map shall be submitted to the City Engineer prior to its expiration, together with the established fee.

B.     The City Engineer will obtain recommendations from all appropriate City staff and governmental agencies regarding the form and content of the proposed final map.

C.    The City Engineer shall prepare a report to the authorized agency and provide a copy to the subdivider. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.54.140 Processing of Final Map by Authorized Agency.
A.     Upon receipt of the department report, the City Clerk or secretary of the authorized agency shall place the matter on the agenda of the authorized agency at the next regular meeting.

B.     The authorized agency shall approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of this title applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder; or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. If the authorized agency does not act within the prescribed time, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the City Clerk shall certify its approval thereon.

C.    If approval or denial of the final map is appealed, the appeal* shall be set for hearing on the next available agenda of the City Council, the governing body. (*See Chapter 1.12.) (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2017-03)

 

24.54.150 Transmittal of Final Map to County.
After the approval by the City of a final map or parcel map, the City Clerk or designee shall transmit the map to the appropriate County agency. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-39)

 

24.54.160 Correction and Amendment of Final Map.
Correction of and amendments to the final map shall be made pursuant to Section 66469 et seq. of the Act. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.60 MINOR SUBDIVISION—TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP
24.60.010 Requirement.
Every subdivider proposing to create a minor subdivision shall comply with the procedure and requirements contained in this chapter. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.60.020 Tentative Map Contents and Procedure.
Unless otherwise provided in this title, tentative parcel maps shall be subject to the requirements and procedures applicable to tentative maps contained in Chapter 24.50. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-14; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.60.030 Eligibility to File.
Any person shall be eligible to file a minor subdivision application to create four or fewer parcels on a parcel of land when:

A.     Such parcel has been created legally or has been approved for development;

B.     The applicant or owners by their current application will not have created, caused to be created, or participated in the creation of more than four parcels on contiguous property unless such parcels were created by the major subdivision process. For purposes of interpreting this section, the term “participated” shall mean having cooperated with or acted in a planning, coordinating or decision making capacity in any formal or informal association or partnership for the purpose of dividing real property;

C.    Such minor subdivision is consistent with all applicable adopted general, community and sub-area plans; and

D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 66426 of the state Subdivision Map Act, any proposed subdivision to create five or more parcels, regardless of parcel size before or after the subdivision, and is subject to the provisions of Chapters 24.50 and 24.54 of this title. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 92-14; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.60.040 Determination of Eligibility.
The applicant or owner shall certify or declare under penalty of perjury that he or she is eligible to divide property by the minor subdivision process. Prior to issuing any notice of approval, the Development Services Director (hereinafter “Director”) shall review the certification or declaration and any other pertinent information and determine the eligibility of the applicant or owner to divide property by the minor subdivision process. If the Director determines that there is evidence that the eligibility requirements have not been met, or that there is evidence that the transactions relating to the subdivision may have been collusive or for the purpose of evasion of the Act or this title, the Director shall require documentary evidence to establish that the applicant or owner meets the requirements and that the transactions are or were bona fide transactions and not intended to evade the Act or this title. As determined by the Director, such evidence shall include, but is not limited to, true copies of escrow instructions, grant deeds and offers to purchase and such statements under oath satisfactory to the Director to establish that the applicant or owner has acquired the property by a legitimate arm’s length transaction. Such statements shall cover such matters as the adequacy of consideration for the transactions, whether the transfer was to a close relative or business associate, the retention of control or financial interest in the transaction, or any other matter necessary to establish that the transaction is not part of a conspiracy or plan to evade the Act or this title. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.60.050 Parcel Map Waiver.
Under the circumstances and subject to the provisions specified in this section, in lieu of the requirements to file and receive approval of a tentative and final parcel map and to record a final parcel map, a subdivider may file for approval of a parcel map waiver.

A.     A parcel map waiver may be applied to the following type of subdivision:

1.     A condominium conversion when no new units or lots are being created.

B.     Prior to approval of a parcel map waiver, the following finding shall be made: The proposed condominium conversion complies with requirements as to area, on-site improvements, design, access, floodwater drainage control, adequate boundary monumentation, dedications of right-of-way, payment of development fees, appropriate improved public streets and other off-site improvements, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, fire protection facilities, environmental review and protection, grading, and any and all other requirements of this title and the state Subdivision Map Act which would be applicable to review and approval of a tentative final parcel map.

C.    For purposes of consideration of a parcel map waiver application, the Director shall be the authorized agency. Any determination of the Director may be appealed* to the next higher approval authority as provided under this title. (*See Chapter 1.12.)

D.    An application for a parcel map waiver shall be submitted on such form and with such material as shall be determined by the Director. Such material shall include a parcel map waiver plat which shall provide all information required by this title to be provided on a tentative parcel map. Such fee as may be adopted by the City for a parcel map waiver application shall be paid. The application shall be distributed for review and comment as determined by the Director. Such distribution shall include review by the City Engineer to determine compliance with technical requirements applicable under the state Subdivision Map Act.

E.     After receipt of all comments and review of the proposed subdivision, the Director shall determine if the required findings can be made and the application for parcel map waiver is approved or denied. Prior to any determination of approval, acceptance by the City Engineer by signature on the Final Parcel Map waiver plat shall be obtained. A letter of determination shall be provided to the applicant. An approval shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of approval, within which time the remaining procedures under subsection F of this section shall be completed, otherwise the approval shall expire.

F.     If no appeal is filed or if approval is granted after an appeal, upon notification of approval the applicant(s) for a parcel map waiver shall have a site survey done and have a record of survey prepared and recorded at the County Recorder’s office. The applicant(s) shall also have prepared and recorded new deeds of property ownership. The applicant(s) shall deliver to the Director copies of the recorded record of survey plat and the recorded deeds of ownership. Upon confirmation that these instruments are in substantial compliance with the parcel map waiver application as approved, the Director shall have prepared and recorded a certificate of compliance. Recordation of the certificate(s) of compliance shall complete the parcel map waiver process for an approved application. (Ord. 88-10; Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-10)

Chapter 24.64 MINOR SUBDIVISION—PARCEL MAP
24.64.010 Requirement.
After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map and prior to the expiration of such map, a subdivider may cause the real property included within the tentative parcel map, or any part thereof, to be subdivided by complying with the procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.64.020 Preparation of Parcel Map.
The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property and shall conform to all of the following provisions:

A.     The provisions of Section 66445 of the Act.

B.     Shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.64.030 Supplemental Information of Parcel Map.
A.     The parcel map shall contain the information required of a final map as set forth in Chapter 24.54, portions of which may be waived by the City Engineer when not required to achieve the purposes of this title.

B.     A certificate of an engineer or land surveyor in accordance with Section 66449 of the Act.

C.    A certificate in accordance with Section 66450 of the Act relating to unincorporated territory. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.64.040 Processing of Parcel Map.
A parcel map shall be processed in accordance with the procedure made applicable to final map by Chapter 24.54. (Ord. 87-10)

Chapter 24.70 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
24.70.010 Requirements.
A.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title to the contrary, every person desiring to adjust a legal lot line between two or more adjacent lots, where the land taken from one lot is added to an adjacent lot, or to merge contiguous parcels under common ownership initiated by a private property owner, without creating a greater number of lots shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. All lots prior to adjustment proposed to be included in a lot line adjustment or merger shall be lots lawfully created under the provisions of the state Subdivision Map Act and local ordinances adopted pursuant thereto.

B.     In the alternative, the applicant may elect to accomplish a lot line adjustment by preparing a parcel map in accordance with this title without filing a tentative parcel map. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 88- 10; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.020 Filing of Application.
A.     The applicant shall file with the Development Services Director (hereinafter “Director”) an adjustment plat prepared and signed by a licensed civil engineer or land surveyor and the subject property owner(s), which clearly shows all existing and proposed lot lines and all structures on the properties. The form and content of the application must comply with the requirements established by the Director.

B.     The applicant shall pay the established fee before the application is accepted for filing. (Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.030 On-Site Sewage Disposal.
A.     Prior to approval of a lot line adjustment, any parcel which is served by an on-site sewage disposal system must be reviewed by the Department of Health to ensure that the proposed lot line adjustment:

1.     Will not adversely impact upon existing sewage disposal facilities; and

2.     Will conform to all property line setback requirements for sewage disposal facilities.

B.     No lot line adjustment shall be approved for any property with a substandard, on-site sewage disposal system unless such system is improved to conform with existing standards.

C.    Upon review and approval by the Department of Health, a designated officer of the Department shall sign a certificate on the proposed record of survey. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.040 Director’s Action.
A.     The Director shall determine whether the existing parcels to be adjusted are legal lots of record. The Director may require a certificate of compliance be prepared for the existing parcels. The applicant shall pay the required fee for preparation of the certificate of compliance.

B.     The Director shall act within 45 days of filing a complete application.

C.    The Director is authorized to approve, disapprove or direct the revision of the proposed lot line adjustment in order to bring the proposal into conformance with the Municipal Code as to setbacks, lot width, lot depth and lot area.

D.    The decision of the Director shall become final 10 days after the decision unless a timely appeal is filed. (See Chapter 1.12.)

E.     The Director when authorized, shall render a final determination without conducting a noticed public hearing. The Director may hold a public hearing prior to making a final determination which shall be noticed according to the provisions of Chapter 30.01 as modified by this chapter. The Director may refer the application, with a recommendation to the Planning Commission.

F.     If the Director has referred the application to the Planning Commission, the Director shall cause the filed application to be presented at a noticed public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission.

G.    The Planning Commission shall make a final determination on the application when authorized. Otherwise, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council.

H.    If the Planning Commission made a recommendation, the Director shall cause the filed application to be presented at a noticed public hearing conducted by the City Council which shall render a final decision. (Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-39; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.060 Approval of Application.
The application to adjust a lot line shall be approved unless the parcels resulting from the adjustment will:

A.     Create a condition which does not comply with zoning and development regulations. All parcels resulting from a lot line adjustment shall comply with minimum City requirements for lot size, dimensions, access, parking and circulation, and all other applicable development standards established through the Zoning and Development Code. The lot line adjustment shall also be found to promote available design standards and guidelines as established through the Zoning and Development Code. The lots resulting from a lot line adjustment and existing and/or potential development on those lots shall be found to be within limitations for lot density and intensity of development and use as established through the Zoning and Development Code.

B.     Create a condition which does not comply with building regulations.

C.    Materially, adversely affect an agreement for the security for the construction of public improvements.

D.    Extends beyond the City limit boundary.

E.     Requires substantial alteration of any existing improvement or creates a need for any new improvement.

F.     Adjusts the boundary line between lots which are subject to an agreement for public improvements, unless the City Engineer finds that the proposed adjustment will not materially affect such agreement for the security therefor. (Ord. 87-10; Ord. 88-10; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.070 Appeal.
A.     Any person aggrieved by a final determination made under the authority of this chapter may file with the next higher authority an appeal pursuant to Chapter 1.12.

B.     A final determination by the Director or the Planning Commission shall be appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.080 Action on Appeal.
The appeal authority shall sustain, overrule or modify the decision. With the concurrence of the applicant, the matter may be returned to the authorized agency for further action. (Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.090 Expiration of Approval.
An action to approve a lot line adjustment shall be valid for two years from the date of action of the authorized agency or appeal authority. Within this time the remaining procedures specified under Section 24.70.110 of this chapter shall be completed; otherwise, the approval shall expire and be of no further effect. (Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.100 Extension of Approval.
A.     The Director may grant time extensions to approved lot line adjustment applications according to the following procedures and standards:

1.     Upon application received prior to the expiration of the approved lot line adjustment, the Director may extend the time of expiration for a period not to exceed one year from the date of expiration of the approved lot line adjustment application. No more than three such time extensions may be granted to any lot line adjustment application. The Director shall consider the current circumstances of the site and the surrounding area. The conditions of approval shall remain substantially unchanged from the originally approved application for lot line adjustment. A need to alter or add conditions, attach additional development fees, or alter map design shall be grounds for denial of the time extension; the applicant may file a new lot line adjustment application.

2.     Upon proper receipt of an application, according to the provisions of this section, to extend approval of a lot line adjustment, the approval shall automatically be extended for 60 days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. If the Director denies an application for an extension, the applicant may appeal to the legislative body within 10 days after the Director has denied the extension. Upon proper filing of an application for extension, public notice shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 30.01 as modified by this chapter. A public hearing is not required. (Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-39; Ord. 2019-10)

 

24.70.110 Completion of Approved Lot Line Adjustment.
Upon notification of approval if no appeal is filed, or approval after appeal, the applicant(s) shall comply with conditions imposed. The applicant(s) shall also have prepared and recorded new deeds of property ownership to conform to the adjusted lots as approved. The applicant(s) shall deliver to the Director two copies of the recorded deeds of ownership, together with evidence of compliance with conditions, and closure calculations for each of the lots as adjusted. No record of survey shall be required for completion of an approved lot line adjustment, unless otherwise required by Section 8762 of the California Business and Professions Code. Upon written confirmation by the City Engineer that these instruments are in substantial compliance with the lot line adjustment application as approved, the Director shall have prepared and recorded a certificate of compliance for each of the new lots. Recordation of the certificates of compliance shall complete the process for an approved application for lot line adjustment. (Ord. 2000-14; Ord. 2019-10)

Chapter 24.74 REVERSION TO ACREAGE
24.74.010 Requirement.
All of the owners of record of the real property, by petition, may revert subdivided real property to acreage pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 87-10)

 

24.74.020 Petition.
The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning and Building Director and shall contain, without limitation, the following:

A.     Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision.

B.     Sufficient data to enable all of the required determinations and findings to be made.

C.    A final map which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion or a parcel map in accordance with Section 66499.20 one-quarter of the Act for four or less contiguous parcels in the form prescribed by this title, there being no tentative map required.

D.    Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property.

E.     Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later.

F.     Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.74.030 Procedure.
A.     Upon payment of the established fee and the filing of a sufficient petition and proposed map, the Planning and Building Director shall prepare a report and submit the matter to the authorized agency.

B.     The petition shall be set on the agenda of the authorized agency for noticed, public hearing.

C.    The reversion to acreage will be approved only if the authorized agency makes the findings set forth in Section 66499.16 of the Act.

D.    The Planning Commission shall impose the required conditions set forth in Section 66499.17 of the Act. Upon approval of the reversion, the map shall be delivered to the County Recorder for filing. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.74.040 Appeal of Decision.
A.     Within 10 days after the adoption of a resolution approving, denying or conditionally approving the petition, which shall be posted at City Hall, any person affected thereby may appeal the decision by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal which specifies the decision or part thereof appealed from and the specific errors alleged as the basis of the appeal. (See Chapter 1.12.)

B.     Upon receipt of a sufficient notice of appeal together with the established fee, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a noticed, public hearing by the appeal authority. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.74.050 Action on Appeal.
A.     The appeal authority shall conduct a noticed, public hearing.

B.     The appeal authority shall sustain, overrule, or modify the Planning Commission decision. With the concurrence of the applicant, the matter may be returned to the authorized agency for further action.

Chapter 24.76 LOT MERGERS: PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES
24.76.010 Intent.
The City of Encinitas may cause the merger of contiguous parcels of land under the same ownership, pursuant to the provisions and procedures established by this chapter. (Ord. 88-28)

 

24.76.020 Requirements.
Pursuant to the procedures prescribed by this chapter the City of Encinitas may provide for the merger of a parcel or unit with a contiguous parcel or unit held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size applicable to the parcels or units of land under the Zoning and Development Code of the City; and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

A.     At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure, or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.

B.     With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:

1.     Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger.

2.     Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.

3.     Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply.

4.     Does not meet slope stability standards, so that no buildable site is possible.

5.     Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.

6.     Its development would create health or safety hazards.

7.     Is inconsistent with the City of Encinitas General Plan, and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

C.    For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded.

D.    This chapter shall not apply if one of the following conditions exist:

1.     On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is enforceably restricted open-space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open-space easement, as defined and set forth in Section 421 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

2.     On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is timberland as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 51104, or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 51201.

3.     On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the local agency.

4.     On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of a future commercial mineral extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by the local agency.

For purposes of paragraphs 3 and 4 of this subsection, mineral “resource extraction” means gas, oil, hydrocarbon, gravel, or sand extraction, geothermal wells, or other similar commercial mining activity. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

24.76.030 Effective Date of Merger.
A merger of parcels becomes effective when the City causes to be filed for record with the Recorder of San Diego County, a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property.

 

24.76.040 Notice of Hearing of Intention to Determine Status.
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the Director of Planning and Building shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then-current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards specified in the merger ordinance, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the Recorder of San Diego County on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.76.050 Owner’s Request for Hearing.
At any time within 30 days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the Director of Planning and Building a request for a hearing on determination of status. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.76.060 Hearing on Determination of Status.
Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status from the owner of the affected property, the Director of Planning and Building shall fix a time, date, and place for a hearing to be conducted by the City’s Planning Commission and shall notify the property owner of that time, date, and place for the hearing by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than 60 days following the receipt of the property owner’s request for the hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the Director and the property owner. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.76.070 Determination of Status.
At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. The Director of Planning and Building shall so notify the owner of this determination. A determination of nonmerger may be made when the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in this chapter, when it can be found that the parcels as separate, unmerged lots qualify for recordation of a certificate of compliance as established by this title, and each parcel as a separate development site will be consistent with the applicable adopted goals and policies of the City of Encinitas for land development and use. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.76.080 Time Limit for Requesting a Hearing.
If, within the 30-day period specified in Section 24.76.050, the owner does not file a request for a hearing, the Director of Planning and Building may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section 24.76.030 no later than 90 days following the mailing of notice required by Section 24.76.070. (Ord. 2003-08)

Chapter 24.80 ENFORCEMENT
24.80.010 Requirement.
The Director of Planning and Building shall investigate reported violations of this title and initiate enforcement proceedings as required. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.80.020 Lots Created Prior to March 4, 1972.
Any parcel created prior to March 4, 1972, shall be dealt with in accordance with Sections 66412.6 and 66412.8 of the Act. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.80.030 Withholding Development Permits and Approvals.
In accordance with Section 66499.34 of the Act, the City may deny or conditionally approve the issuance of permits or other approvals necessary to develop real property divided in violation of the provisions of this title or the Act. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.80.040 Certificate of Compliance.
The City shall issue certificates of compliance in accordance with Section 66499.35 of the Act. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.80.050 Notice of Violation.
The City shall record notices of violations in accordance with Section 66499.36 of the Act. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.80.060 Merger of Parcels.
The City shall process merger of parcels in accordance with Sections 66451.10 through 66451.21 of the Act, utilizing the procedures applicable to parcel maps without a tentative parcel map. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

24.80.070 Unmerger of Parcels.
The City shall proceed with the unmerger of parcels in accordance with Sections 66451.30 through 66451.33 of the Act. (Ord. 2003-08)

Title 30 ZONING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-09, 2020-10 and 2020-16. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 30.00 ENCINITAS RIGHT TO VOTE AMENDMENT
Chapter 30.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 30.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 30.08 ZONES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 30.09 ZONING USE MATRIX
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 30.16 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Chapter 30.20 COMMERCIAL ZONES
Chapter 30.24 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Chapter 30.26 ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 30.28 PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC ZONE
Chapter 30.32 ECOLOGICAL RESOURCE/OPEN SPACE/PARKS ZONE
Chapter 30.33 URBAN AGRICULTURE
Chapter 30.34 SPECIAL PURPOSE OVERLAY ZONES
Chapter 30.36 EMERGENCY SHELTERS
Chapter 30.40 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Chapter 30.41 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Chapter 30.46 TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 30.48 ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
Chapter 30.54 OFF-STREET PARKING
Chapter 30.55 ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 30.56 RECYCLING FACILITIES
Chapter 30.57 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
Chapter 30.60 SIGNS
Chapter 30.72 ZONING AMENDMENT
Chapter 30.74 USE PERMITS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 30.76 NONCONFORMITIES
Chapter 30.78 VARIANCES
Chapter 30.80 COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
Chapter 30.82 LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM AMENDMENT
Chapter 30.84 SPECIFIC PLANS
Chapter 30.86 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

Chapter 30.00 ENCINITAS RIGHT TO VOTE AMENDMENT
30.00.010 Section 1—Title.
1.1. This measure shall be known as the Community Character and Voters’ Rights Initiative. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.020 Section 2—Statement of Purposes and Intent.
Our Zoning Map, General Plan and Zoning Ordinances provide important protections to many aspects of our community. This measure gives the Voters of Encinitas final word on major increases in zoning density or intensity of land use. In doing so, it is the intent of this measure to:

2.1.1. Protect our natural resources such as lagoons, watershed, riparian, and wildlife habitat, natural vegetation, bluffs, and hillsides for our lives, our children’s lives and future generations.

2.1.2. Prevent the urbanization of our small town character and maintain the individual character of our five unique communities.

2.1.3. Ensure infrastructure and public benefits, such as schools, parks, roads, sewer, and water facilities, are adequately planned and funded prior to approving any increase in zoning.

2.1.4. Preserve our community’s zoning and property rights in perpetuity, if we so choose.

This measure does not limit development as currently permitted under existing vested property rights of land owners. It entrusts the protection of the community’s shared property rights, including the final approval on proposed increased zoning densities, to the majority vote of the Voters of Encinitas. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.030 Section 3—Planning Policy Documents Covered.
3.1. After this measure becomes effective, no repeal, amendment or adoption of all or part of the following land use planning policy documents of the City of Encinitas may become effective unless and until there is compliance with provisions of this initiative measure:

a. The text of the Encinitas General Plan’s Land Use Element,

b. The Land Use Policy Maps of the Encinitas General Plan (including the following policy maps: “Land Use Policy: Cardiff-by-the-Sea” LU-59, “Land Use Policy: Leucadia” LU-64, “Land Use Policy: New Encinitas” LU-67, “Land Use Policy: Old Encinitas” LU-73, and “Land Use Policy: Olivenhain” LU-77),

c. The text of the Encinitas Zoning Regulations (Title 30 of the Encinitas Municipal Code),

d. The Zoning Map of the City of Encinitas,

e. Any Specific Plan for a geographic area within the City, or

f. Any Development Agreement granting rights to develop private or public land.

3.2. In this initiative measure the above six items are referred to as the “Planning Policy Documents.” (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.040 Section 4—Types of Amendments Covered.
4.1. A “Major Amendment” of any of the Planning Policy Documents means any amendment which results in any of the following changes to the development standards for any parcel of land affected by the proposed amendment:

a. Increases the maximum allowable number of residential units which may be constructed on any parcel or group of parcels.

b. Increases the maximum allowable number of separate parcels which may be created from an existing parcel or group of parcels.

c. Changes zone type for a parcel or parcels from Agricultural, Public/Semi-Public, Ecological Resource/Open Space/Parks or Open Space to a different zone type.

d. Changes zone type for a parcel or parcels from a non-mixed-use zone to mixed-use type zone resulting in additional residential units where none were previously permitted, allowing commercial where commercial was not previously permitted or increasing the maximum allowable residential units.

e. Changes a parcel or parcels from any residential land use to allow any other nonresidential land use.

f. Increases the allowed maximum height of development or changes how height is measured such that additional height could be permitted than previously permitted.

g. Increases the maximum allowable commercial or retail square footage for a parcel or group of parcels.

h. Repeals any of the Planning Policy Documents.

4.2. A “Regular Amendment” of any of the Planning Policy Documents includes any amendment which is not a Major Amendment. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.050 Section 5—Amendments to Encinitas Planning Policy Documents.
5.1. No Major Amendment of any of the Planning Policy Documents shall be effective unless and until it is approved by a simple majority vote of the voting electorate of the City of Encinitas voting “YES” on a ballot measure proposing the Major Amendment at a regular or special election. The entire text of a Major Amendment and an easily readable map of the geographic area affected shall be included in the sample ballot material which is mailed to registered voters prior to the election.

5.2. No Major Amendment and no Regular Amendment of any of the Planning Policy Documents shall be effective unless and until it is approved by an ordinance adopted by the City Council, but no such amendment shall be considered until a public hearing is conducted on the proposed amendment at both the Planning Commission and at the City Council in the manner provided by state law and advance notice is given as required by Section 5.3 below.

5.3. No public hearing to consider an amendment of any of the Planning Policy Documents shall be conducted less than 20 days after the date a notice accurately describing the proposed amendment is sent by first class mail to the owners of each parcel of land, and a notice is sent by first class mail addressed to the occupant of each lawful unit on each parcel of land, located within a radius measured outward 500 feet from the boundaries of each parcel of land affected by the proposed amendment.

5.4. The notice described in Section 5.3 shall include at least all the following information in not less than 13 point type: a. The name of the applicant proposing the amendment. b. The total acreage of the area proposed for amendment. c. An easily readable map of all parcels affected by the amendment, including all street names. d. The land uses and building density currently allowed for each parcel affected. e. The land uses and building density proposed to be allowed for each parcel affected. f. The date, time, and place of the upcoming public hearing.

5.5. All Major Amendment and all Regular Amendment of any Planning Policy Documents shall be required to adhere to the Encinitas Community Participation Program as described in Chapter 23.06 of the Encinitas Municipal Code. (Ord. 2013-04; Ord. 2019-04)

 

30.00.060 Section 6—City Wide Height Limits.
6.1. Maximum Height. On and after the date this initiative measure becomes effective no building or structure shall exceed a maximum height of two stories or 30 feet.

6.2. Height shall be measured from the lower of the natural or finished grade adjacent to the structure, to the highest portion of the roof immediately above; except for projects on sites with the R-30 Overlay land use designation, which shall be measured as provided by Chapter 30.16 of the Encinitas Zoning Code.

6.3. Exemptions to Height Limit. The following structures are exempted from this height limit:

a.     Medical Complex development projects as provided in Section 30.28.010(C);

b.     Specified buildings associated with a public high school on a minimum 10 acre site, as provided in Section 30.28.010(D); and

c.     Residential structures proposed on sites designated with the R-30 Overlay land use designation that meet the requirements of the R-30 OL Zone as provided in Chapter 30.16 of the Encinitas Zoning Code, as well as in the DVCM R-30 OL Zone of the Downtown Specific Plan, the N-R3 (R-30 OL), and N-L-VSC (R-30 OL) Zones of the North 101 Corridor Specific Plan; and the ER-R-30 Zone of the Encinitas Ranch Specific Plan. (Ord. 2013-04; Ord. 2019-04)

 

30.00.070 Section 7—This Measure Amends Existing Policy Documents.
7.1. Once adopted by the voters, this measure shall amend and become a new part of the Encinitas General Plan’s Land Use Element and the Encinitas Zoning Code (Title 30 of the Encinitas Municipal Code).

7.2. After the date this measure becomes effective the entire text of this measure shall be printed within all copies of the Encinitas General Plan Land Use Element and also within all copies of the Encinitas Zoning Code, and it shall appear immediately following the table of contents of each such document.

7.3 This measure repeals Policy 3.10, Exceptions 4 and 5 of Policy 3.12, and Policy 7.10 of the Encinitas General Plan’s Land Use Element and Section 30.16.010(B)(6)(d) of the Encinitas Zoning Code. This measure does not repeal the remaining policies found in Goal 3 (growth management) of the Encinitas General Plan’s Land Use Element, but intends to supplement (i.e., add to) the voter requirements found in those policies. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.080 Section 8—Effective Date.
8.1. The provisions of this initiative measure shall become effective at twelve o’clock noon the day after it is approved at an election of the voters of the City of Encinitas. It shall be considered as adopted upon the date that the result of the election is declared by the City of Encinitas City Council, and shall go into effect 10 days after that date as specified in Section 9217 of the California Elections Code. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.090 Section 9—Priority.
9.1. Once this initiative measure becomes effective, its provision shall prevail over and supersede all provisions of the municipal code, ordinances, resolutions, and administrative policies of the City of Encinitas which are in conflict with any provisions of this measure. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.100 Section 10—Severability.
10.1. In the event a final judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction determines that a provision of this initiative measure, or a particular application of a provision, is invalid or unenforceable pursuant to a state or federal law or constitution, the invalid or unenforceable portion or application shall be severed from the remainder of this measure, and the remaining portions of this measure shall remain in effect without the invalid or unenforceable provision or application. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.110 Section 11—Conflict With Other Ballot Measures.
11.1. In the event that any other ballot measure is proposed for voter approval on the same election ballot as this initiative measure, and that other measure contains provisions which deal with the same or similar subjects, it is the intent of the voters in adopting this measure that it shall prevail over any such other ballot measure in its entirety to the extent that this measure is approved and receives a greater number of votes for approval of the other measure. In such case, no provision of the other measure shall become effective. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.120 Section 12—Amendment or Repeal.
12.1. Once this initiative measure becomes effective no provision of this measure may be amended or repealed except by a majority of the voters of the City of Encinitas voting on a ballot measure for that purpose. (Ord. 2013-04)

 

30.00.130 Section 13—Request for Special Election.
13.1. In the event that the initiative petition is signed by not less than 15 percent of the voters of the city according to the last report of registration by the county elections official to the Secretary of State, a special election to approve this ordinance is hereby requested pursuant to Section 9214 of the California Elections Code. (Ord. 2013-04)

Chapter 30.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
30.01.010 Purpose.
A.     This title is adopted to regulate the use of real property and the buildings, structures and improvements located thereon so as to protect, promote and enhance the public safety, health and welfare.

B.     This chapter is adopted pursuant to, and to implement provisions of, the Encinitas General Plan and certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan (LUP). The regulatory provisions of this title shall implement the provisions of the General Plan to carry out the objectives contained therein.

C.    This title shall be known as the “Zoning Regulations.” (Ord. 86-19; Ord. 94-06)

 

30.01.020 Interpretation of Provisions.
A.     When, in the opinion of the Director, it is necessary for the City to render an administrative interpretation of one or more of the provisions of this title, the Director of Planning and Building may cause a noticed, public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission.

B.     After hearing, the Planning Commission may render an interpretation which shall thereafter control development within the City, unless an appeal is filed. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.01.030 Determination of Allowable Use.
A.     A determination of whether a particular use is within the scope of permitted uses and allowable accessory uses in a particular zone shall constitute a “determination of allowable use.”

B.     A person with an interest in real property located within a particular zone who intends to develop such real property with a use not expressly allowed in such zone shall be entitled to apply to the Planning Commission for a determination of allowable use.

C.    Upon the making of the application and the payment of a fee set by resolution of the City Council, the director shall cause a noticed, public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission.

 

D.    The determination of allowable use by the Planning Commission shall become final and thereafter control development within the particular zone, unless such determination of use is appealed.

 

30.01.040 Determination of Development Compliance.
A.     A determination of whether a particular project complies with the non-discretionary development regulations applicable to the particular project shall constitute a “determination of development compliance.”

B.     A determination of development compliance rendered by the Director or his/her authorized representative may be appealed to the Planning Commission for reconsideration. Any request for reconsideration shall be filed within 15 days of such determination. The determination of the Planning Commission shall be final, unless appealed.

C.    A determination of development compliance shall not substitute for an application for relief from the regulations of this title. (Ord. 89-41)

 

30.01.050 Zones.
A.     The City shall be divided into use zones and the boundaries of those zones shall be depicted on a map known as the “Zoning Map of the City” which shall be on file with the Director and available to the public for review.

B.     Specific Plan areas are also identified on the Zoning Map, denoted by a “SP” designator. For individual specific plan areas there may be different use zones which apply. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, for use zones and their boundaries within a particular specific plan area. (Ord. 94-02)

 

30.01.060 Applications.
A.     An approval for a discretionary or ministerial approval or permit authorized by this title shall be made on the form approved by the Director.

B.     To be received for filing, the application must be complete and the applicant must submit a fee and/or deposit in the amount identified in accordance with the current Planning Fee Schedule. The required fees and/or deposit amounts identified in the Planning Fee Schedule may be determined from time to time by resolution.

C.    For projects which a deposit is required, additions to the deposit may be required by the Director and shall be paid by the applicant or the processing of the application shall be terminated. (Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.01.070 Noticed, Public Hearings.
A.     When a noticed, public hearing must be conducted the following shall apply:

1.     Notice shall contain the date and time set for hearing which shall not be less than 10 nor more than 40 calendar days from the date of notice. Notice shall describe the purpose of the hearing and a description of the areas affected.

2.     Notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.

3.     Notice shall be mailed to all owners, as shown on the last available County Tax Assessor’s rolls of real property in accordance with the following:

a.     When notice is required to be mailed to adjacent property owners, adjacent property owners for the purposes of this section are defined as: All owners whose property abuts the property which is the subject of the hearing and those whose property is located directly across an abutting street, alley, or other public or private accessway, except a freeway, from the subject property.

b.     When not specifically designated “adjacent property owners” as defined in this section above, public notice shall be mailed to all occupants and property owners of property located within 500 feet (300 feet for projects requiring an agriculture permit) of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the hearing or the 20 nearest occupants and property owners, whichever creates the greater number of notices.

4.     The agenda for the public hearing shall be posted at City Hall.

5.     The applicant shall post a “notice of filing an application” on the site immediately following the filing of an application, identifying the project application type, address and brief description. The notice shall be posted in clear view from the front of the property. The notice shall remain up for the length of the application process.

B.     When a public hearing is not required and the notice is to allow for a public review and comment period, paragraphs 2, 3, and 5 in subsection A apply. The notice shall indicate the time prior to which comments or objections must be filed.

C.    As an alternative to mailing, where the number of property owners to whom notice would be sent is greater than 1,000, the Director may elect to publish notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.

D.    Notwithstanding the notice procedures described above, the Director shall mail notice by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request therefor and has paid the required fee. Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of such calendar year. It may then be renewed annually during January. In December, the Director shall mail a notice to persons receiving notice in accordance with this section which shall indicate the need to renew the request.

E.     For coastal development permits, public notice procedures shall conform to the requirements in Chapter 30.80, Coastal Development Permit, in addition to the requirements of this section.

F.     If the date of a subsequent hearing or a continued hearing is announced at the noticed time and place, no additional notice is required for the second or continued hearing, unless required by law. If no such announcement is made at the noticed time and place, the second or continued hearing shall be noticed in accordance with the above. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 92-14; Ord. 92-15; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.01.080 Conflict with State or Federal Rights.
A.     Upon timely application by a person with an interest in a real property use, building, structure or improvement, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the operation of the provisions of this title conflict with such person’s rights under the laws of the State of California or the United States.

B.     In the event of an affirmative determination, the Planning Commission may, by resolution, adjust the impact of this title on such person to alleviate the conflict. The determination of the Planning Commission shall be final and shall thereafter control the operation of this title on the subject property unless appealed* to the City Council. (*See Chapter 1.12.)

C.    This section shall not constitute a substitute for a variance.

 

30.01.090 Prohibition.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to use real property within the City in a manner that is contrary to the land use designations made applicable to such real property in accordance with the provisions of this title.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to develop or maintain improvements upon real property within the City in a manner that is contrary to the development standards made applicable to such real property in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 94-11)

Chapter 30.04 DEFINITIONS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-10 and 2020-16. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 30.04.010 Definitions.
ABUT shall mean two adjoining parcels of property with a common property line, including two or more lots adjoining only at a corner, except where such common property line is located in a public street right-of-way.

ACCESS OR ACCESS WAY shall mean the place, mean, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Ordinance.

ACCESS, LATERAL shall mean an area of land providing public access along the shoreline. Lateral accessways are to be used for public pass and repass, passive recreational use or as otherwise designated in the Encinitas Land Use Plan.

ACCESS, VERTICAL shall mean an area of land providing a connection between the first public road or use area nearest the sea and the publicly owned tidelands or established lateral accessway. A vertical accessway may be used for public pass and repass, passive recreation use or as otherwise designated in the Encinitas Coastal Land Use Plan.

ACCESSORY BUILDING shall mean a building, part of a building, or structure, which is incidental or subordinate to the main building or use on the same building site, i.e., garage, barn, storage buildings, gazebo and the like.

ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT shall mean an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit on the same lot as an existing dwelling unit zoned for single-family or multifamily use that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. An ADU can be an efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code, or a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, DETACHED shall mean not being structurally connected and maintains a minimum of a six-foot setback from the dwelling with eaves having a minimum of four feet of separation.

ACCESSORY USE shall mean a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building and accessory use does not alter the principal use of such lot or building.

ADULT ARCADE shall mean a business establishment as defined in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT BOOTH/INDIVIDUAL VIEWING AREA shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT BUSINESS shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT CABARET shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

 

ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT MODELING STUDIO shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT ORIENTED MATERIAL shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

ADULT RETAIL STORE shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

AGGRIEVED PERSON. In accordance with Sections 30625 and 30801 of the Public Resources Code as amended, an “aggrieved person” means any person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at a public hearing of the Coastal Commission or the City of Encinitas in connection with the decision or action appealed,* or who, by other appropriate means prior to a hearing with the Coastal Commission or City of the nature of his or her concerns or who for good cause was unable to do either. “Aggrieved person” includes the applicant for a permit and, in the case of an approval of a Local Coastal Program Amendment for the City of Encinitas, the City of Encinitas. (*See Sections 1.12.010 through 1.12.060.)

ALCOHOL AND DRUG TREATMENT CENTER shall mean a dwelling unit that provides an in-house treatment or rehabilitation program for its residents and is operated on a 24-hour basis to provide necessary treatment in a residential setting. Alcohol Drug and Treatment Centers are licensed and defined by the State of California under the Uniform Controlled Substances Act (California Health & Safety Code Section 11000 et. seq.)

ALLEY shall mean a public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property.

AMBIENT LEVEL shall mean that general noise level in the area at a given time.

ANATOMICAL AREAS. See Specified Anatomical Areas.

ANCILLARY USE shall mean a permitted land use which is secondary in importance and character to a primary principal land use on a given development site. An ancillary use is differentiated from an accessory use in that it is more than incidental to the primary use. An ancillary use shall be limited in size or scope of operation to be not more than 15% of the total gross floor area of the development located on a given development site. Additional square footage up to, but not to exceed 30% of total gross floor area of the development may be permitted upon application and approval of minor use permit. An ancillary use must be listed as such as a permitted use under zoning for its given site.

ANIMAL HOSPITAL shall mean a place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use.

ANIMAL, LARGE shall be bovine animals, sheep, goats, and swine.

ANIMAL RAISING PROJECT shall mean the keeping, raising and breeding of domesticated animals for 4-H, FFA or other similar youth projects.

ANIMAL, SMALL shall mean poultry, rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters, pygmy goats, pigs, goats, sheep, miniature horses, and other small domesticated animals other than a large animal or specialty animal.

ANIMAL, SPECIALTY shall include, but not limited to, fish, fur bearing animals, wild or undomesticated animals, amphibians, insects and birds, other than large or small animals.

ANIMAL WASTE PROCESSING shall mean the processing of animal waste and byproducts including but not limited to animal manure, animal bedding waste, a similar byproduct of an animal raising agricultural operation, for use as a commercial fertilizer or soil amendment and includes composting operations.

APARTMENT shall mean a building or portion thereof designed and used for occupancy by two or more individual persons or families living independently of each other.

APPEALABLE DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE COASTAL ZONE. In accordance with Public Resources Code Section 30603(a) as amended, any of the following shall constitute an appealable development:

A.     Coastal Zone developments approved by the City which are located between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or within 300 feet of the inland extent of any beach or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach, whichever is the greater distance.

B.     Coastal Zone developments approved by the City not included within paragraph A of this definition that are located on tidelands, submerged lands, public trust lands, within 100 feet of any wetland, estuary or stream, or within 300 feet of the top of the seaward face of any coastal bluff.

C.    Any Coastal Zone development which constitutes a major public works project or a major energy facility. The phrase “major public works project or a major energy facility” as used in Public Resources Code Sec. 30603(a)(5) in these regulations shall mean any proposed public works project, as defined by Section 13012 of the Coastal Commission Regulations (Title 14, California Administrative Code, Division 5.5) and Public Resources Code Section 30114, or energy facility, as defined by Section 13012 of the Coastal Commission Regulations and Public Resources Code Sec. 30107.

AQUACULTURE. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30100.2 as amended, “aquaculture” shall mean a form of agriculture that is devoted to the controlled growing and harvesting of fish, shellfish, and plants in marine, brackish, and fresh water. Aquaculture products are agricultural products, and aquaculture facilities and land uses shall be treated as agricultural facilities and land uses in all planning and permit issuing decisions governed by this title.

ARCADES shall mean a place of business where five or more electronic or electrical coin operated games are operated for compensation.

AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION shall mean a lot or portion of a lot used for the servicing of motor vehicles. Such servicing may include sale of motor fuel and oils, lubrication, incidental car washing, waxing and polishing, sales and service of tires, tubes, batteries, and service of auto accessories. Such servicing shall not include tire recapping, sale or rebuilding of engines, battery manufacturing or rebuilding, radiator repair or steam cleaning, body repair, painting or upholstery, or installation of auto glass.

AUTOMOBILE WRECKING shall mean the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts. The presence on any lot or parcel of land of five or more motor vehicles which for a period exceeding 30 days have not been capable of operating under their own power, and from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale shall constitute prima facie evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.

 

BARN shall mean a building used for the shelter of livestock raised on the premises, the storage of agricultural products produced or consumed on the premises, or the storage and maintenance of farm equipment and agricultural supplies used for the agricultural operations on the premises.

BASEMENT shall mean a level of a building partly or wholly underground where more than one half of its perimeter is less than or equal to four feet above the lower of natural or finished grade as defined in Section 30.16.010B6 of the Municipal Code.

BEACH shall mean the area lying seaward of the first contour line defining an elevation; 10 feet above mean sea level (North American Datum, 1929).

BED AND BREAKFAST HOME shall mean a single-family dwelling which is operated to provide lodging for pay, including overnight sleeping accommodations and breakfast, for one or more guests on a less than weekly basis.

BEDROOM shall mean a room that could be used for sleeping purposes having minimum widths of seven feet and having a closet, excluding bathrooms, kitchen, living room, and laundry.

BICYCLE SPACE shall mean an area that is permanently reserved and maintained for parking one bicycle either in an open rack or an enclosed structure or locker.

BLOCK shall mean all property fronting upon one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, terminus of dead end street, or City boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of the street which it intercepts.

BLUFF shall mean a scarp, or steep face of rock, decomposed rock, sediment or soil resulting from erosion, faulting, folding, filling, or excavation of the land mass. The bluff may be simple planar or curved surface or it may be steplike in section.

BLUFF, COASTAL. Pursuant to Section 13577(h) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, a “coastal bluff” shall mean: (1) those bluffs, the toe of which is now or was historically (generally within the last 200 years) subject to marine erosion; and (2) those bluffs, the toe of which is not now or was not historically subject to marine erosion, but the toe of which lies within an area otherwise identified in Public Resources Code 30603(a)(1) or (a)(2).

BLUFF EDGE shall mean the upper termination of a bluff. When the top edge of the bluff is rounded away from the face of the bluff as a result of erosional processes related to the presence of the steep bluff face, the edge shall be defined as that point nearest the bluff beyond which the downward gradient of the land surface increases more or less continuously until it reaches the general gradient of the bluff. In a case where there is a step-like feature at the top of the bluff face, the landward edge of the topmost riser shall be taken to be the bluff edge. In those cases where irregularities, erosion intrusions, structures or bluff stabilizing devices exist on a subject property so that a reliable determination of the bluff edge cannot be made by visual or topographic evidence, the Director shall determine the location of the bluff edge after evaluation of a geologic and soil report.

BUILDING shall mean any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.

BUILDING HEIGHT shall mean the vertical distance from the lower of the natural or finished exterior grade adjacent to the structure, to the highest portion of the structure immediately above. When a basement element or underground structures exist or are proposed, height is measured from the finished grade (above the underground parking or basement element) provided the finished grade is at or below the previous natural grade, to the highest portion of the structure immediately above. For properties located in and developing in conformance with the provisions of the R-30 Overlay, height is measured from the finished grade adjacent to the structure, to the highest portion of the structure immediately above. (See Section 30.16.010B6.)

BUILDING REMODEL shall mean a building that is being remodeled is capable of supporting or sheltering the use or occupancy permitted by the zoning designation assigned to the property. Once the structure or portion thereof is removed that prevents occupancy of the entire dwelling unit pursuant to the definition in Section 202 of the City’s Adopted Building Code, the structure shall be considered new and subject to the applicable standards, i.e., traffic impact fees, and other regulations. This policy would consider reroofing, second story addition over existing first floor, or exterior residing as a structural remodel provided the exterior support walls remain.

BUILDING SITE shall mean a legally created parcel or contiguous parcels of land in single or joint ownership, which provides the area and the open spaces required by this Code, exclusive of all vehicular and pedestrian rights-of-way and all other easements that prohibit the surface use of the property by the owner thereof.

BUSINESS CENTER shall mean a development in which businesses and structures are designed as an architecturally integrated and interrelated development. Such design is independent of the number of structures, lots, or parcels making up the center.

CALIFORNIA COASTAL ACT OR COASTAL ACT shall mean the California Coastal Act of 1976, Division 20 of the Public Resource Code, as amended.

CANOPY shall mean a permanent roof like structure extending from part or all of a building face and constructed of durable material which may not project over a public right-of-way.

CARPORT shall mean a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides used or intended to be used for vehicle storage for the occupants of the premises.

CATEGORICALLY EXCLUDED DEVELOPMENT shall mean a development by which the Coastal Commission has determined pursuant to Section 30610(e) of the Public Resources Code to have no potential for significant adverse environmental effects.

CELLULAR FACILITY shall mean an installation containing transmitters, receivers and control equipment necessary for interface between the mobile telephone and landbase telephone network.

CEMETERY shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.

CHAPTER THREE POLICIES shall mean those policies of the Coastal Act contained in Chapter Three as amended, commencing with Section 30200, which constitute the standards by which the adequacy of local coastal programs and permissibility of proposed development subject to the provisions of the Coastal Act is determined.

CHILD, for the purpose of family day care home regulations, shall mean a person who is under 18 years of age who is being provided care and supervision in a child day care facility.

CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY shall mean any child day care facility as defined in Section 1596.750 of the California Health and Safety Code other than family day care homes.

 

CHIMNEY shall mean a hollow shaft containing one or more passages vertical or nearly so, for conveying products of combustion.

CHURCH shall mean an institution which people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities. The term “church” shall not carry a secular connotation, and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held.

CLINIC shall mean a place for medical services to patients human or animal not involving the overnight housing of patients.

 

CLUB shall mean an association of persons (whether or not incorporated) for a common purpose, but not including groups organized solely or primarily to render a service as a business for profit.

COASTAL COMMISSION shall mean the California Coastal Commission.

COASTAL-DEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT OR USE. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30101 as amended, “coastal-dependent development or use” shall mean any development or use which requires a site on, or adjacent to, the sea to be able to function at all.

COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Pursuant to Section 30110 of the Public Resources Code as amended, a “coastal development permit” shall mean any license, certificate, approval or other entitlement for use granted or denied by any public agency which is subject to the provisions of Division 20 of the Public Resources Code as amended.

COASTAL LAND USE PLAN shall mean maps and text which indicate the kinds, location and intensity of land uses in the Coastal Zone and including resource protection and development policies.

COASTAL-RELATED DEVELOPMENT. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30101.3 as amended, “coastal-related development” shall mean any use that is dependent on a coastal-dependent development or use.

COASTAL RESOURCES include, but are not limited to, public access opportunities, visitor and recreational facilities, water-oriented activities, marine resources, biological resources, environmentally sensitive habitat areas, agricultural lands, and archeological or paleontological resources.

COASTAL ZONE. Pursuant to Section 30103(a) of the Coastal Act as amended, “Coastal Zone” shall mean that land and water area of the State of California from the Oregon border to the border of the Republic of Mexico, specified on the maps identified and set forth in Section 17 of that Chapter of the Statutes of the 1975-76 Regular Session enacting Division 20 of the Public Resources Code as amended, extending seaward to the state’s outer limit of jurisdiction, including all offshore islands, and extending inland generally 1,000 yards from the mean high tide line of the sea. In significant coastal estuarine, habitat, and recreational areas, it extends inland to the first major ridgeline paralleling the sea or five miles from the mean high tide line of the sea, whichever is less, and in developed urban areas, the zone generally extends inland less than 1,000 yards.

COASTAL ZONE DEVELOPMENT. Pursuant to Section 30106 of the Public Resources Code as amended, “Coastal Zone development” shall mean on land, in or under water, the placement or erection of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any gaseous, liquid, solid, or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code), and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of major vegetation other than for agriculture purposes, kelp harvesting, and timber operations which are in accordance with a timber harvesting plan submitted pursuant to the provision of the Z’berg-Nejedly Forest Practice Act of 1973 (commencing with Section 4511). As used in this section, “structure” includes, but is not limited to, any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line.

COASTLINE shall mean the area along the ocean margin, including the beaches, bluffs, and land area immediately landward thereof.

COMMUNITY APARTMENT shall mean a development in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment located thereon.

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR shall mean the Planning and Building Director of the City of Encinitas.

CONDOMINIUM shall mean an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store.

CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION shall mean the conversion of rental units, residential or commercial, into a condominium project.

CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY / ASSISTED LIVING / BOARD AND CARE shall mean a residential facility which provides limited care and assistance for elderly and/or handicapped persons. Congregate care facilities shall include common dining room, recreation and other common facilities. Congregate care facilities shall provide housing, food service, and assistance with personal care. Personal care means assistance with activities of daily living which maintain physical and psychosocial comfort (i.e. dressing, bathing, feeding, medication management, ambulating, etc.). Congregate care facilities shall be licensed by the State of California, Health and Welfare Agency, Department of Social Services, Community Care Licensing (California Code of Regulations Title 22, Division 6, Chapter 8).

CONGREGATE HOUSING / INDEPENDENT LIVING / RETIREMENT HOMES shall mean a multi-unit residential facility for residents in which no skilled nursing or direct personal care is given (except home health care and other supportive services provided by community agencies). Congregate housing facilities shall have separate private dwelling units but may include common dining, recreation and living areas. Congregate housing facilities need not be licensed by the State of California, Health and Welfare Agency.

CONVALESCENT HOME / SKILLED NURSING FACILITY shall mean a facility which provides 24 hour skilled nursing care (bed and ambulatory) for patients who need post operative convalescence, short term rehabilitation, are chronically ill and persons who are unable to care for themselves because of age or infirmity; but not including facilities whose major or primary function is for substance abuse rehabilitation or for the care and/or treatment of persons with mental or contagious diseases, disorders or afflictions. Convalescent Homes shall mean a facility licensed by the State of California, Health and Welfare Agency, Department of Health Services, Licensing and Certification Division (California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 5, Chapter 3).

CONVENIENCE STORE/MINI-MARKET shall mean a retail establishment containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, or 15% of total gross floor area if ancillary to a service station, whichever is less, utilized in whole or in part for the retail sale of a variety of frequently needed personal convenience items such as groceries, delicatessen items, staples, dairy products, pre-packaged foods, beverages, and sundries.

COSMETIC DESIGN STUDIO shall mean an establishment utilizing cosmetic preparations to enhance the natural features of a person or persons. The establishment and all technicians working in the establishment must possess all licenses and permits required by county and state codes. Cosmetic design studios may also include application of permanent make-up such as eye and lip liner, eyebrow enhancement, beauty marks, scar cover up and cheek coloring which is consistent with normal pigmentation of the client. The product of cosmetic design studios does not include graphical or color enhancement which is not generally recognized as make-up.

COTTAGE FOOD OPERATION shall mean a residential use where cottage food products are prepared or packaged for direct and/or indirect sale to consumers as defined by the California Health and Safety Code.

COUNTY RECORDER shall mean the County Recorder of the County of San Diego.

CO-WORKING SPACE shall mean a facility which provides a shared working environment and/or business resources (e.g., office space, meeting rooms, and office equipment).

CUSTOM MANUFACTURING refers to establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding two horsepower each or a single kiln not exceeding eight cubic feet in volume, and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those produced on site.

DAY CARE CENTER shall mean any child day care facility as defined by and subject to the California Health and Safety Code other than a family day care home, and includes infant centers, preschool and extended day care facilities.

DENSITY shall mean the total number of dwelling units permitted on a net acre of land.

DENTAL CLINIC, CANINE/FELINE shall mean a general dental clinic for the maintenance (or care) of canine/feline oral health only. All treatments are performed on an outpatient (leaving the same day) basis. No animals are boarded or kept at the premises after hours.

DEVELOPMENT shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill, or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land.

DORMITORY shall mean a building intended or used principally for sleeping accommodations.

DRIVE IN OR DRIVE THROUGH RESTAURANT shall mean a place of business which sells food products and/or beverages and which:

A.     Delivers such food products and/or beverages to customers immediately outside of the building from which they are sold by means of service, a window, counter, or similar method or device, or

B.     Delivers such food products and/or beverages to customers within a building which is designed in such a manner that a majority of the customers will remove such food products and/or beverages from the building for consumption either on the premises or in the immediate vicinity.

DWELLING shall mean a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy.

DWELLING, ATTACHED shall mean any dwelling structurally connected or within less than six feet of another dwelling located on the same parcel.

DWELLING, CARETAKER UNIT shall mean any dwelling unit which serves as the residence of a caretaker or superintendent (and family), for the establishment(s) on the property. A caretaker unit may only be allowed as accessory to the principal use(s) on the site and is subject to the area limitations set forth in Municipal Code Section 30.48.050C. (Section 30.48.060)

DWELLING, DETACHED shall mean any dwelling not structurally connected to another dwelling and maintains a minimum of five-foot setback between structures.

DWELLING, MULTIPLE shall mean a building containing more than two dwelling units, each of which is for occupancy by one family.

DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY shall mean a one-family dwelling, attached or detached, located on separate lots or parcels exclusively for residential occupancy.

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY shall mean a building or buildings on a single lot containing not more than two dwelling units. An accessory unit constructed in accordance with Encinitas Municipal Code Chapter 30.48 shall not be counted as a dwelling unit for purposes of this definition.

DWELLING UNIT shall mean one or more rooms and a single kitchen in a building or portion thereof designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes, in which all habitable rooms have interior access to the rest of the dwelling unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Building Director.

EASEMENT shall mean a grant of one or more of the property rights by a property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.

EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION shall mean an institution conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary, secondary, collegiate levels and including graduate schools, universities, vocational schools, non-profit research institutions, and religious institutions.

ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SERVICE STATION shall mean the primary use of a parcel of land as a retail charging facility consisting of multiple battery charging stations that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in a plug-in electric vehicle, and other incidental facilities, including, but not limited to, battery swap stations, convenience store/mini market and customer lounge.

EMERGENCY. Pursuant to Section 13009 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended and for the purposes of Section 30.80.180 (Emergency Permits) of this Municipal Code, “emergency” shall mean a sudden unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential public services.

EMERGENCY SHELTER shall have the same meaning as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e), as amended, as being: “housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

ENERGY FACILITY. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30107 of the Public Resources Code as amended, “energy facility” shall mean any public or private processing, producing, generating, storing, transmitting, or recovering facility for electricity, natural gas, petroleum, coal or other source of energy.

ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA. Pursuant to Section 30107.5 of the Public Resources Code as amended, “environmentally sensitive area” means any area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and development.

FAMILY shall mean one or more persons, an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group including unrelated individuals bearing the generic character of and living together as a relatively permanent unit sharing such needs as cooking facilities. Family shall also mean the persons living together including the licensee, the members of the licensee’s family, and persons employed as facility staff in the following facilities licensed to serve six or fewer persons: (1) a licensed “residential facility,” as that term is defined in the California Community Care Facilities Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 1500 et seq.; (2) a licensed “residential care facility for the elderly,” as that term is defined in the Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Act, California Health and Safety Act, Section 1569 et seq.; (3) a licensed “congregate care” or “intermediate care facility,” as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 1250; or (4) a licensed alcohol and drug abuse recovery treatment center, as defined in the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, California Health and Safety Code, Section 11000 et seq.

FAMILY DAY CARE HOME shall mean a home which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision of 12 or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and includes the following:

“Large family day care home” shall mean a home which provides family day care to seven to 12 children, inclusive, including children under the age of 10 years who reside at the home, as defined above;

“Small family day care home” shall mean a home which provides family day care to six or fewer children, inclusive, including children under the age of 10 years who reside at the home, as defined above.

FILL. Pursuant to Section 30108.2 of the Public Resources Code as amended, “fill” means earth or any material or substance, including pilings placed for the purposes of erecting structures thereon, placed in a submerged area.

FIRST PUBLIC ROAD PARALLELING THE SEA. Pursuant to Section 13577(i) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, the “first public road paralleling the sea” shall mean that road nearest the sea, as defined in this chapter which is:

A.     Lawfully open and suitable for uninterrupted use by the public;

B.     Maintained by a public agency;

C.    An improved, all-weather road open to motor vehicle traffic in at least one direction;

D.    Not subject to any restrictions on use by the public except during an emergency or for military purposes; and

E.     Connected with other public roads providing a continuous access system, and generally parallels and follows the shoreline of the sea so as to include all portions of the sea where the physical features such as bays, lagoons, estuaries, and wetlands cause the waters of the sea to extend landward of the generally continuous coastline.

Whenever no public road can be designated which conforms to all provisions of paragraphs 1 through 5 of this definition, and a public road does exist which conforms to all provisions of paragraphs 1 through 4 of this definition, the effect of designating the first public road paralleling the sea shall be limited to all parcels between the Pacific Ocean and such other public road; and those parcels immediately adjacent to the sea inland of such other public road.

FLEET STORAGE shall mean storage or parking of one or more vehicles used regularly in business operations. Excluded from this use type are automotive and equipment; sales/rentals; and the incidental parking of vehicles as an accessory use to a permitted use on the same premises. Typical uses include taxi fleets, mobile catering, truck storage or delivery truck fleets.

FLOODPLAIN shall mean the channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or river which has been or may be covered by floodwater; specifically, those areas shown as subject to inundation on the flood insurance rate maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the current City maps designating floodplains.

FLOODWAY shall mean the channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwaters; specifically, areas shown as flood channels on the flood insurance rate map as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the current City maps designating floodways.

FLOOR AREA shall mean the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts, courts and architectural projections not utilized as livable area.

FLOOR/AREA RATIO is the numerical value, expressed as a decimal fraction obtained by dividing the total floor area by the gross lot area of the lot or lots on which one or more structures are located.

FOOT-CANDLE shall mean a quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast onto a given point, measured as one lumen per square foot.

FRONTAGE shall mean the length of any one property line of a premises, which property line abuts a legally accessible street right-of-way.

FULLY SHIELDED shall mean an outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted.

GARAGE shall mean a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot for the parking and temporary storage of vehicles of the occupants of the premises.

GENERAL PLAN shall mean the General Plan of the City of Encinitas and shall consist of the General Plan maps and elements adopted by the City Council.

GOVERNMENT OFFICE shall mean a structure or facility that is operated by a government agency engaged in the provision of executive, management, administrative, consulting, or professional office type services including other similar incidental uses.

GRADE shall mean the average level of the finished ground surfaces within a 20-foot area surrounding a building. When measuring building height, the lower of natural or finished exterior grade shall be at any point adjacent to the structure.

GROSS AREA shall mean the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land before public or private streets, easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or parcel.

GROUP RESIDENTIAL shall mean shared living quarters, occupied by more than one person, which lack separate kitchen and bathroom facilities for each room or unit, as well as shared living quarters occupied by two or more persons not living together as a single housekeeping unit. This classification includes boarding houses, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and private residential clubs, but excludes residential care, general and residential care, limited.

GUEST HOUSE shall mean an accessory building which is designed to be occupied by one or more guests on a temporary basis.

HABITABLE SPACE shall mean a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable space.

HIGHWAY shall mean a street shown as a freeway, prime arterial, or major street on the General Plan of the City.

HOME OCCUPATION shall mean an occupation customarily conducted as an accessory use to a residential use entirely within a building containing a residential use or an attached garage.

HOSPITAL shall mean an institution for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, including surgery and primary treatment.

HOTEL shall mean a structure or portion thereof or groups of attached guest rooms or suites occupied on a transient basis for compensation.

INLAND EXTENT OF THE BEACH. Pursuant to Section 13577(g)(1) through Section 13577(g)(3) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, the “inland extent of the beach” shall be determined as follows: (1) from a distinct linear feature (e.g. a seawall, road, or bluff, etc.); (2) from the inland edge of the further inland beach berm as determined from historical surveys, aerial photographs and other records or geological evidence; or (3) where a beach berm does not exist, from the further point separating the dynamic portion of the beach from the inland area as distinguished by vegetation, debris or other geological or historical evidence.

INOPERATIVE ACTIVITY shall mean a business or activity that has ceased operation, except for temporary closures for repairs, alterations, or other similar situations at any given location for a period of at least 30 days.

JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT shall mean a residential dwelling unit that is no more than 500 square feet in area, contained entirely within an existing single-family residence, and with separate sanitation facilities from, or shared sanitation facilities with, the existing residence.

JUNK shall mean used machinery, scrap iron, steel, other ferrous and nonferrous metals, tools, implements or portions thereof, glass, plastic, cordage, building materials or other waste which has been abandoned from its original use and may be used again in its present or in a new form.

JUNKYARD shall mean any parcel, lot contiguous lots or portions thereof used for the keeping, storage, or salvaging of junk.

KENNEL shall mean any property where six or more dogs or cats or similar small animals, over the age of four months, are kept or maintained for commercial purposes.

KITCHEN shall mean an area used, or designated to be used, for the preparation of food.

LAMP shall mean a light bulb.

LEGAL shall mean authorized or permitted in accordance with defined procedures by ordinance or law.

LEGAL LOT shall mean (1) a parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number or letter designation, or a subdivision map, or parcel map recorded in the office of the County Recorder and created in conformance with the State Subdivision Map Act; (2) a parcel of real property shown on a recorded record of survey map, lot division plat, or other official map filed in the office of the County Recorder or County Engineer, or County Director of Planning when such map or plat was filed as the result of and was made a condition of a lot division approved by the County of San Diego under the authority of prior or existing County ordinances; (3) any parcel of real property which existed as a separate parcel on or before March 4, 1972, as evidenced by a valid deed recorded on or before that date; (4) a parcel of real property described in a recorded certificate of compliance, approved and filed by the County of San Diego or the City of Encinitas in accordance with the State Subdivision Map.

LIGHT SOURCE shall mean the element of a lighting fixture that is the point of origin of the lumens emitted by the fixture.

LIVING UNIT means a unit that provides the basic amenities for everyday living and includes but is not limited to a sleeping area, closet space, restroom, sitting/entertainment area, incidental kitchen facilities and/or common dining and recreational facilities.

LOADING SPACE shall mean an area, other than a street or alley, on the same lot with a building or a group of buildings which is permanently reserved and maintained for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.

LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM. Pursuant to Section 30108.6 of the Public Resource Code as amended, “local coastal program” shall mean a local government’s (1) land use plans, (2) zoning ordinances, (3) zoning district maps, and (4) other implementing actions, which, at the local level and when taken together, meet the requirements of, and implement the provisions and policies of Division 20 of the Public Resources Code, as amended.

LOT shall mean:

A.     A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or

B.     A parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, parcel map or subdivision map as filed in the office of the County Recorder or in the office of the Planning and Building Department, and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way, or easement determined by the City Engineer to be adequate for the purpose of access, or

C.    A parcel of real property abutting at least one public street or right-of-way or easement determined by the City Engineer to be adequate for the purpose of access and held under separate ownership from abutting property prior to February 1, 1972.

LOT AREA, GROSS shall mean the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land before public or private streets, easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or parcel.

 

LOT, CORNER shall mean a lot located at the intersection or interception of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an “Interior Lot.” See “LOT, INTERIOR” for further clarification.

LOT COVERAGE shall mean that percentage of a lot, exclusive of the ultimate street right-of-way, which when viewed directly from above, would be covered by the floor area of the building or buildings. Minor accessory structures such as patio covers, porches, open exterior decks and balconies, roof overhangs, pools, spas, freestanding open air gazebos and patios/decks shall not count toward the lot coverage requirement.

LOT DEPTH shall mean the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.

LOT, FLAG shall mean a lot which utilizes a narrow strip as its means of providing frontage on a street and/or providing vehicular access to the lot.

LOT, INTERIOR shall mean a lot other than a corner lot. An interior lot shall also mean a lot abutting a private street or private easement when all four of the following criteria are met: (1) a side lot line abuts a private street or private easement; (2) the private street or private easement has the potential to provide access to no more than 10 dwelling units; (3) the private street or private easement is less than 24 feet in recorded width; and (4) the subject property abutting the private street or private easement does not have legal and/or recorded vehicular access over the private street or easement.

LOT LINE shall mean a line bounding a lot as herein defined.

LOT LINE, FRONT shall mean on an interior lot, the front lot line is the property line abutting the street. On a corner or reverse corner lot, the front lot line is the shorter property line abutting a street, except in the following cases: (1) where the subdivision or parcel map specifies another line as the front lot line; or (2) where the setbacks for an existing home identify the front and rear lot lines as being the longest property line. In this case the Director of Planning and Building shall determine which property line shall be the front lot line. Similarly, the Director or authorized agency may allow the longest property line to be the front lot line where such a designation would result in a building envelope consistent with the character of surrounding development. On a through lot or a lot with three or more sides abutting a street or a corner or reverse corner lot with lot lines of equal length, the Planning and Building Director shall determine which property line shall be the front lot line for the purposes of compliance with yard and setback provisions of this title. On a private street or easement, the front lot line shall be designated as the edge of the easement.

LOT LINE, INTERIOR shall mean a side lot line not abutting a street. An interior side lot line shall also apply when all four of the following criteria are met: (1) a side lot line abuts a private street or private easement; (2) the private street or private easement has the potential to provide access to no more than 10 dwelling units; (3) the private street or private easement is less than 24 feet in recorded width; and (4) the subject property abutting the private street or private easement does not have legal and/or recorded vehicular access over the private street or easement.

LOT LINE, PANHANDLE shall mean a lot where a portion of the lot is less than 35 feet wide for a distance of 50 feet or more and which is designed or used to provide pedestrian or vehicle access to the part of the lot which is designed for use as a building site. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the authorized agency shall have the authority to determine whether a lot shall be considered a panhandle lot for purposes of applying the zoning standard.

LOT LINE, REAR shall mean a lot line not abutting a street and which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For panhandle shaped lots and lots at the terminus of a private road or easement the Planning and Building Director shall determine which property line shall be the rear lot line for purposes of compliance with yard and setback provisions of this chapter. This would typically be the shortest lot line most distant from the terminus of the panhandle or private road easement. The Director shall consider the existing envelope of development onsite when making such a determination, and, when no clear indication is present from existing development or historic building records, the Director shall have discretion to designate the rear lot line for a panhandle lot. In the case of an irregular shaped lot, a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than 10 feet shall be considered the rear lot line for purposes of measuring the rear setback. A lot which is bounded on all sides by streets may have no rear lot line.

LOT LINE, SIDE shall mean any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line.

LOT, THROUGH shall mean a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

LOT WIDTH shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

LUMEN shall mean a quantitative unit measuring the amount of light equal to the amount of light emitted in a unit solid angle by a uniform point source of one candle intensity.

MAIN BUILDING shall mean a building or structure which is devoted primarily to a principal use or uses; or, the only building on a lot or building site.

MAJOR ENERGY FACILITY. Pursuant to Section 13012 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, “major energy facility” shall mean facilities that cost more than $100,000.00 with an automatic annual increase in accordance with the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, except for those governed by the provisions of Public Resources Code Sections 30610, 30610.5, 30611 or 30624.

MAJOR POWER TRANSMISSION EASEMENT shall mean SDG&E major power transmission easements.

MAJOR PUBLIC WORKS. Pursuant to Section 13012 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, “major public works” shall mean facilities that cost more than $100,000.00 with an automatic annual increase in accordance with the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, except for those governed by the provisions of Public Resources Code Sections 30610, 30610.5, 30611 or 30624.

MASONRY WALL shall mean a solid wall composed of stone, brick, concrete, gypsum, hollow clay tile, concrete block or tile or other similar building units or materials or a combination of these materials laid up unit by unit and set in mortar.

MASSAGE PARLOR shall mean an establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation unless such treatment is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed by the State of California. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.

MEDICAL COMPLEX shall mean a development including several medical services under one, integrated complex typically with a medical hospital as the most significant principal use; other principal uses may include doctors’ offices, laboratories, medical research facilities, out-patient clinics, pharmacies, and other out-patient services. All uses are integrated functionally on the single complex with shared parking, ingress/egress, building design and landscaping.

MEZZANINE OR MEZZANINE FLOOR shall mean an intermediate floor placed in any story or room. When the total area of any such mezzanine floor exceeds 33-1/3% of the total floor area in that room, it shall be considered as constituting an additional story. The clear height above or below a mezzanine floor construction shall be not less than seven feet. An enclosed mezzanine shall be counted as a story.

MOBILEHOME shall mean a movable or transportable vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed as a permanent structure intended for occupancy for one family and having no foundation other than jacks, piers, wheels, or skirtings.

MOBILEHOME UNIT SPACE shall mean a plot of ground within a mobilehome park designed for the accommodation of one mobilehome unit.

MOTEL shall mean the same as “hotel.”

MUSEUM shall mean a non-profit institution displaying or preserving objects of artistic, scientific, cultural or historic value, and optionally creating objects with these values for the purpose of display on site.

NET ACREAGE, for the purpose of calculating density, shall mean the slope adjusted unconstrained gross acreage within the subject property. Constrained acreage shall include flood plains, beaches, permanent bodies of water, significant wetlands, major power transmission easements, railroad track beds, existing and future right-of-way and easements for public or private streets/roads, and the area contained within the panhandle portion of a panhandle lot in a zone where the minimum required lot size is 10,000 square feet or less. For properties located in and developing in conformance with the provisions of the R-30 Overlay, private access roads, parking lots, driveways, and drive aisles are not deducted from gross acreage. (See Section 30.16.010.B.2.)

NET LOT AREA shall mean total area exclusive of street within the boundary lines of a lot and the area contained within the panhandle portion of a panhandle lot in a zone where the minimum required lot size is 10,000 square feet or less.

NONCONFORMING LOT shall mean a lot, the area, frontage or dimensions of which do not conform to the provisions of this Code.

NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE shall mean a building, structure or portion thereof which was lawful when established but which does not conform to the provisions of this Code.

NONCONFORMING USE shall mean a use lawful when established but which does not conform to the provisions of this Code.

OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE shall mean an outdoor artificial illuminating device, outdoor fixture, lamp, and other similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or advertisement.

PACKING (agriculture/horticulture) shall mean the packing of fresh agricultural and horticultural products including the customary preparation for market of fresh produce and flowers produced both on and off premises. Assembly of boxes, cartons, crates and pallets for handling and transporting crops provided this use is accessory to agricultural or horticulture packing on the premises shall be permitted. (Note: There shall be no utilization of processes which result in substantial change in identity of the agricultural or horticultural product.)

PARCEL shall mean a contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same person.

PARK shall mean any park, playground, swimming pool, or golf course within the City which is under the City’s control, operation and management.

PARKING AREA shall mean an open area, other than a street or alley, which contains five or more motor vehicle parking spaces.

PARKING SPACE shall mean an unobstructed space or area other than a street or alley which is permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of one motor vehicle.

PARKWAY means that area of a public street that lies between the curb and sidewalk or between the sidewalk and the property line, or between the curb/edge of pavement and the property line of the adjacent property owner, which is used for planting purposes.

PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT shall mean two or more dwelling units, including dwelling units in developments commonly known as town or rowhousing, condominiums and cluster housing, together with related land, buildings and structures, planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or a programmed series of operations in accordance with detailed, comprehensive plans encompassing such elements as the circulation pattern and parking facilities, open space, utilities, and lots or building sites, together with a program for provision, operation and maintenance of all areas, improvements, facilities and services provided for common use of the residents thereof.

POULTRY shall mean chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese.

PRINCIPAL USE(S) shall mean the primary use(s) for which land or a building is or may be intended, occupied, maintained, arranged or designed.

PSYCHIATRIC FACILITY shall mean an institution in which care or treatment is given to persons suffering from mental illness, disease, disorder or ailment. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, psychiatric hospitals, day care treatment hospitals, long term care facilities, resident treatment centers, family homes (mentally ill), alcoholism, hospital, and facility for admission of drug addicts all as defined in Article 2 of Subchapter 1 of Title 9 of the California Administrative Code.

PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall mean a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other public uses.

 

PUBLIC TRUST LANDS. Pursuant to Section 13577(f) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, “public trust lands” shall mean all lands subject to the common law public trust for commerce, navigation, fisheries, recreation and other public purposes. Public trust lands include tidelands, submerged lands, beds of navigable lakes and rivers, and historic tidelands and submerged lands that are presently filled or reclaimed, and which were subject to the public trust at any time.

 

PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE YARD shall mean a lot or portion of a lot containing a public or semi-public use for the purposes of servicing and maintaining public facilities, such as, utilities, streets, drainage facilities, parks, beaches, environmental resources, open space, and the like. Maintenance and services type uses allowed on the lot include office, indoor and outdoor storage of supplies and materials, vehicles for maintaining such facilities, vehicle and equipment repair, and other similar type uses authorized through the use permit process.

PUBLIC WORKS. Pursuant to Section 30114 of the Public Resources Code as amended, “public works” shall mean the following:

A.     All production, storage, transmission and recovery facilities for water, sewerage, telephone and other similar utilities owned or operated by any public agency or by any utility subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission, except for energy facilities.

B.     All public transportation facilities, including streets, roads, highways, public parking lots and structures, ports, harbors, airports, railroads, and mass transit facilities and stations, bridges, trolley wires and other related facilities.

C.    All publicly financed recreational facilities, all projects of the State Coastal Conservancy, and development by a special district.

D.    All community college facilities.

QUALIFIED EMPLOYEE HOUSING, shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 17008 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time, may be provided by the employer and maintained in connection with the work or place where work is being performed and must comply with all provisions of Section 17000 of the California Health and Safety Code, including the appropriate permit(s) from State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) pursuant to the Employee Housing Act. Qualified employee housing not maintained in connection with any workplace and provided by someone other than an agricultural employer must comply with all provisions of Section 17008(b) of the California Health and Safety Code.

REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS. The purpose of reasonable accommodations is to provide provisions in accordance with federal and state fair housing laws (42 USCS Section 3600 et seq. and Government Code Section 12900 et seq.) for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to housing in the application of the city’s zoning laws. The term “disability” as used in this article shall have the same meaning as the terms “disability” and “handicapped” as defined in the federal and state fair housing laws.

RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC shall mean swimming pools, tennis courts, paddle tennis courts, and other similar uses as determined by the Planning and Building Director, which are available for use by persons who do not reside in the project (includes membership clubs).

RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY shall mean a center for the acceptance, by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable material from the public.

RECYCLING FACILITY shall mean a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable material.

RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY shall mean a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials.

REFUSE DISPOSAL SITE shall mean an area devoted to the disposal of refuse, including incineration, reduction, or dumping of ashes, garbage, combustible or noncombustible garbage or refuse, offal or dead animals.

RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION shall mean a structure or facility that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities including incidental uses such as assembly, work rooms, living quarters of a priest, minister or family, and day care and educational facilities, or other similar incidental uses.

REMODEL. (See “Building Remodel.”)

RESIDENTIAL CARE, GENERAL shall mean shared living quarters (without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit) for seven or more persons with physical or mental impairments that substantially limit one or more of such person’s major life activities when such persons are not living together as a family. This classification includes, but is not limited to, group homes, recovery facilities, and other establishments providing nonmedical care for persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. Children’s homes, congregate housing/independent living/retirement homes, congregate care facilities/assisted living/board and care, convalescent home/skilled nursing facility, foster care home and treatment center for substance abuse are also included in this classification.

RESIDENTIAL CARE, LIMITED shall mean shared living quarters (without separate kitchen and bathroom facilities for each room or unit) for six or fewer persons with physical or mental impairments that substantially limit one or more of such person’s major life activities. This classification includes, but is not limited to group homes, recovery facilities, and other establishments providing non-medical care for persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. Childrens’ homes, congregate housing/ independent living/retirement homes, congregate care facilities/assisted living/board and care, convalescent home/skilled nursing facility, foster care home and treatment center for substance abuse are also included in this classification.

RESIDENTIAL ZONE shall mean any property within the city which carries a zoning designation permitting the location of a residence. A residential zone does not include zones where a residence is permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit, other special permit.

RIGHT-OF-WAY shall mean an area or strip of land, either public or private, acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation, and intended to be occupied by a road, trail, railroad, utilities, and similar uses.

ROOF shall mean the external covering of a building or structure above or covering any exterior or interior vertical wall height.

ROOFLINE shall mean the top edge of the roof or top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.

SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA shall mean a device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TUROs and satellite microwave antennas.

SCHOOL shall mean any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and/or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the State of California. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Education. For the purposes of this section, “school” does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university.

SEA. Pursuant to Section 30115 of the Public Resources Code as amended, “sea” shall mean the Pacific Ocean and all harbors, bays, channels, estuaries, salt marshes, sloughs and other areas subject to tidal action through any connection with the Pacific Ocean, excluding nonestuarine rivers, streams, tributaries, creeks and flood control and drainage channels.

SECONDARY USE shall mean a purpose for which land or a building is or may be intended, occupied, maintained, arranged, or designed, which is less visible, prominent, or important than the principal use(s) on the same lot or parcel. A secondary use may but need not be an accessory use to the principal use(s).

SERVICE STATIONS shall mean the same as “Automobile Service Station.”

SETBACK, FRONT YARD shall mean the area which defines the depth of the required front yard. Setback shall be measured from the street line or the line established by the General Plan Circulation Element, from private roads and panhandles, and be measured therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the front yard setback of the zone in which the property is located.

SETBACK, REAR YARD OR SIDE YARD shall mean the area that defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured from the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard setback in the zone. Where the side or rear yard abuts a street and the side yard lot line is not otherwise an interior lot line, the distance shall be measured as set forth in “Setback, Front Yard.” Side yard setbacks are identified in terms such as 10′/10′ noting the minimum setback for each side yard. See “Lot Line, Interior” for further clarification.

SEXUALLY ORIENTED MERCHANDISE shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

SIDEWALK CAFE shall mean an area adjacent to and directly in front of a street level eating or drinking establishment located within the sidewalk area of the public right-of-way used exclusively for dining, drinking and pedestrian circulation. The encroachment area of a sidewalk cafe may be separated from the remainder of the sidewalk by railings, fencing or landscaping planter boxes or a combination thereof.

SIGN, PORTABLE shall mean a parked or stationary outdoor advertising sign, or a sign that is not a structure, or a sign located upon a vehicle or trailer for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity located in the same or nearby property, placed or parked so as to be visible from the public right-of-way, but not including signs on business or commercial vehicles, the primary purpose of which is the transporting of people and goods on the public right-of-way.

SIGN, PROJECTING shall mean any sign other than a wall sign which is attached to and projects from the wall or face of a building or structure including an arcade/marquee sign.

SIGN, ROOF shall mean any sign erected, painted upon, against, or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet of a building, and which is supported wholly or in part by the building. Any sign mounted upon its own standard which is supported wholly by structural anchorage to the ground, or mounted upon any accessory structure which does not constitute a building, shall be considered a roof sign where such sign projects over the roof of a building. Any roof, the slope of which varies not more than 45 degrees from a vertical plane, shall be considered wall space for the purpose of placement of wall signs.

SIGN, WINDOW shall mean any sign temporarily affixed to or displayed on the interior of an establishment so as to be readable from the exterior thereof.

SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOUSING means a facility providing six or more guest rooms or efficiency units in a “residential hotel” as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50519(b)(1), as may be amended from time to time, and shall be offered on a monthly basis or longer.

SITE PLAN shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures and uses and the exact manner of development proposed for a specific parcel of land.

SMALL ANIMALS shall mean pygmy goats, pigs, goats, sheep, poultry, rabbits, miniature horses, domestic animals and other such comparably sized animals distinguished from those described as large animals.

SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 6.10.

STABLE, COMMERCIAL shall mean equestrian facilities such as, but not limited to, riding academies, riding rings, or training areas for horses, mules, donkeys or ponies which are rented, shown, used or boarded on a commercial basis for compensation.

STABLE, PRIVATE shall mean facilities for the keeping of horses, mules, donkeys or ponies for the use of the owners or lessees of the property and owners of the boarded animals.

STORAGE OF NONOPERATING VEHICLES shall mean the storage of nonoperating motor vehicles and shall not include automobile wrecking. The presence on any lot or parcel of land of one or more motor vehicles not within an enclosed structure which for a period exceeding 30 days have not been capable of operating under their own power, and from which no parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale shall constitute prima facie evidence of the storage of nonoperating motor vehicles.

STORAGE AND PREPARATION OF VEHICLES WITHIN THE PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC ZONE (ASSOCIATED WITH NEW CAR DEALERSHIPS) shall mean the storage of new and used vehicles (associated with a new car dealership) on a lot or parcel of land owned and controlled by a governmental agency. Primary activities shall be limited to the delivery, parking and storage of new and used vehicles. Incidental uses to the storage of new and used vehicles shall be limited to vehicle preparation activities associated with preparing new and used vehicles for transfer to the dealership lot, and associated administrative activities. Vehicle preparation activities may include inspection for damage, installation of accessory parts (i.e., antennas, floor mats, hubcaps, roof racks, interior and exterior trim, windshields, etc.), installing new tires and brakes, and detailing, including washing, polishing, waxing, dressing tires, cleaning interiors, and steam cleaning engines. Minor vehicle maintenance may also be permitted and shall be limited to minor maintenance functions necessary to prepare vehicles for transfer to the dealership lot. Minor maintenance activities may include, minor engine tune-ups, oil changes, service of air-conditioning systems, repair of electronic equipment, and adding coolant to radiators. More involved mechanical repairs or maintenance shall be prohibited, including the repair or replacement of engines, transmissions, etc., aligning, repairing or replacing body components or body painting. In addition, only employees of the new car dealership and drivers of car carrier trucks shall be permitted to access the vehicle storage site, no customers shall be permitted on the vehicle storage site.

STORY shall mean that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.

STREET shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way or approved private thoroughfare or right-of-way determined by the City Engineer to be adequate for the purpose of access, which affords the principal means of access for abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, land, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except as excluded in this Code. The word “street” shall include all major and secondary highways, traffic collector streets, and local streets.

STRUCTURAL ALTERATION shall mean any change in or alteration to a structure involving a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, retaining walls, or similar components.

STRUCTURE shall mean a mobilehome or anything constructed or erected, building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on or in the ground or is attached to something having a location on or in the ground, including swimming and wading pools and covered patios, excepting paved areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar outdoor areas, and further excepting fences or walls six feet or less in height.

SUBMERGED LANDS. Pursuant to Section 13577(e) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, “submerged lands” shall mean lands which lie below the line of mean low tide.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT shall mean any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either (1) before improvement is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or State Inventory of Historic Places.

SUPPORTIVE HOUSING shall have the same meaning as defined in California Government Code Section 65582(g), as may be amended from time to time, as being housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an on-site or off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing is a residential use and is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. “Target population” means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities as described in Section 65582(i) of the State Government Code.

TATTOO PARLOR ESTABLISHMENT means any premises where a tattoo artist does tattooing for a fee or for other considerations. For purposes of this Code, TATTOOING means any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols, or any other indelible marks (except as defined in “Cosmetic Design Studio”) upon or under the skin with ink or colors, by the aid of needles or instruments.

TIDELANDS. Pursuant to Section 13577(d) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, “tidelands” shall mean lands which are located between the line of mean high tide and mean low tide.

TIME-SHARE ESTATE shall mean a right of occupancy in a time-share project which is coupled with an estate in the real property.

TIME-SHARE PROJECT shall mean a project in which a purchaser receives a right in perpetuity, for life, or for a term of years, to the recurrent exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit or segment of real property annually or on some other periodic basis, for a period of time that has been, or will be, allotted from the use or occupancy periods into which the project has been divided.

TIME-SHARE USE shall mean a license or contractual or membership right of occupancy in a time-share project which is not coupled with an estate in the real property.

TOBACCO, SMOKE, OR ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION SHOP shall mean any store, stand, booth, concession, or other place that either devotes more than 15% of its display floor area to tobacco products, or for the display or sale of tobacco or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for consumption or use. This definition includes electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation substances and hookahs.

TRANSIENT HABITATION UNIT shall mean living quarters intended exclusively for occupancy by transient persons for a period of 30 consecutive days or less and subject to Chapter 3.12 of the Municipal Code, Transient Occupancy Tax. A transient habitation unit may include a hotel or motel room or suite of rooms, a cabin or campground space, but does not include single-family or duplex units.

TRANSITIONAL HOUSING shall have the same meaning as defined in California Government Code Section 65582(j), as may be amended from time to time, as being buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance. Transitional housing is a residential use and is subject to only those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

TUTORING CENTER shall mean any educationally oriented facility that provides personalized academic assistance. The facilities themselves are not schools.

USE shall mean the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained.

WETLANDS. Pursuant to Section 30121 of the Public Resources Code as amended, “wetlands” shall mean lands within the Coastal Zone which may be covered periodically or permanently with shallow water and include saltwater marshes, freshwater marshes, open or closed brackish water marshes, swamps, mudflats, and fens.

WHOLESALING shall mean the selling of any type of goods for purpose of resale.

YARD shall mean any open space on the same lot with a building or dwelling which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed except for the projections permitted by this Code.

YARD, FRONT shall mean a space between the front yard setback and the front line or future street line, and extending the full width of the lot.

YARD, REAR shall mean a space between the rear yard setback and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot.

YARD, SIDE shall mean a space extending from the front yard, or from the front yard lot line where no front yard is required by this Code, to the rear yard or rear lot line.

ZONING CODE AND/OR ORDINANCE shall mean the zoning regulations of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 89-41; Ord. 91-03; Ord. 92-17; Ord. 92-19; Ord. 92-28; Ord. 93-07; Ord. 94-06; Ord. 94-11; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 95-20; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2000-15; Ord. 2001-08; Ord. 2002-02; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2005-03; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2010-13; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2018-01; Ord. 2018-02; Ord. 2019-04; Ord. 2019-01; Ord. 2019-14; Ord. 2019-15)

Chapter 30.08 ZONES
30.08.010 Establishment of Zones—Purpose and Intent.
In order to classify, designate, regulate and restrict the uses of land, buildings, and other structures to achieve the purposes of this Code and of the General Plan of the City of Encinitas, the following zones are established:

In addition to the zones identified in this chapter, there may be separate zones designated in individual specific plan areas. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, for zoning within a particular specific plan area.

A.     Residential Zones.

RR: Rural Residential is intended to provide for very low density single-family detached residential units on larger lots ranging in size from two to eight net acres with maximum densities of 0.5 to 0.125 units per net acre for compatibility with the more rural areas of the City. Parcels located in flood plain areas, which are designated as Rural Residential Flood Plain (RRFP), are designated 0.125 units per acre (eight net acre lots). Other parcels range from two net acre lot size to four net acre lot size depending on slope. One primary dwelling is permitted on each legal lot. Single-family units may be attached to other single-family units provided each unit is located on a separate legal lot with approval of a PRD.

RR-1: Rural Residential 1 is intended to provide for low density single-family detached residential units with minimum lot sizes of one net acre and maximum densities of one unit per net acre for rural area compatibility. One primary dwelling is permitted on each legal lot. Single-family units may be attached to other single-family units provided each unit is located on a separate legal lot with approval of a PRD.

RR-2: Rural Residential 2 is intended to provide for low density single-family detached residential units with minimum lot sizes of 21,500 net square feet and maximum densities of two units per net acre, as a transition from the rural to the more suburban areas within the City. One primary dwelling is permitted on each legal lot. Single-family units may be attached to other single-family units provided each unit is located on a separate legal lot with approval of a PRD.

R-3: Residential 3 is intended to provide for single-family detached residential units with minimum lot sizes of 14,500 net square feet and maximum densities of three units per net acre, as a rural to suburban transition. One primary dwelling is permitted on each legal lot. Single-family units may be attached to other single-family units provided each unit is located on a separate legal lot with approval of a PRD.

 

R-5: Residential 5 is intended to provide for lower density suburban development consisting of single-family detached units with minimum lot sizes of 8,700 net square feet and maximum densities of five units per net acre. One primary dwelling is permitted on each legal lot. Single-family units may be attached to other single-family units provided each unit is located on a separate legal lot with approval of a PRD.

R-8: Residential 8 is intended to provide for suburban single-family detached residential units with minimum lot sizes of 5,400 net square feet and maximum densities of eight units per net acre. One primary dwelling is permitted on each legal lot. Single-family units may be attached to other single-family units provided each unit is located on a separate legal lot with approval of a PRD.

RS-11: Residential RS-11 is intended to provide for single-family detached residential units with minimum lot sizes of 3,950 net square feet and maximum densities of 11 units per net acre. One primary dwelling is permitted on each legal lot. Single-family units may be attached to other single-family units provided each unit is located on a separate legal lot with approval of a PRD.

R-11: Residential 11 is intended to provide for a variety of residential development types found within the coastal areas, ranging from single-family detached units to single-family attached units, such as condominiums, townhouses, and senior housing. The minimum lot size is 3,950 net square feet and the maximum density is 11 units per net acre.

R-15: Residential 15 is intended to provide for higher density residential development within the coastal areas including single-family units (attached and detached), duplex units, and senior housing, with a maximum density of 15 units per net acre. A duplex is a permitted use on lots of 5,000 square feet gross or greater that existed prior to adoption of this Code (March 23, 1989).

R-20: Residential 20 is intended to provide for compatible high density multiple family residential development including apartments, condominiums, and senior housing, with a maximum density of 20 units per net acre.

R-25: Residential 25 is intended to provide for compatible high density multiple family residential development including apartments, condominiums, and senior housing, with a maximum density of 25 units per net acre.

R-30 OL: Residential 30 Overlay is intended to provide for compatible high density multiple family residential development including apartments, condominiums, and senior housing, with a maximum density of 30 units per net acre and a minimum density of 25 units per net acre. The purpose of the R-30 Overlay Zone is to diversify the housing options available in the community, and expand opportunities for creating affordable housing.

MHP: Mobile Home Park is intended to provide exclusively for mobilehome park development with a maximum density of 11 units per net acre for new or redeveloped parks.

B.     Commercial Zones.

OP: Office Professional is intended to provide primarily for the development of professional and administrative offices, with some accessory retail and service uses.

L-LC: Limited Local Commercial is intended to provide limited commercial uses conveniently located to serve the neighborhood while maintaining compatibility with a residential environment.

LC: Local Commercial is intended to provide shopping center and retail uses which serve local residents of the community, while maintaining compatibility with a residential environment.

Government Code: General Commercial is intended to provide a wide range of commercial activities, including retailing, wholesaling, and service uses, to accommodate City-wide or regional needs.

L-VSC: Limited Visitor Serving Commercial is intended to provide for hotel/motel uses as the primary use and ancillary uses specifically intended to serve the needs of persons visiting the City.

VSC: Visitor Serving Commercial is intended to provide for commercial activities which are specifically intended to serve the needs of persons visiting the City for business and recreational purposes.

C.    Light Industrial Zones.

LI: Light Industrial is intended to provide for light industrial and heavier commercial/service uses that can meet high development and performance standards; limited retailing can occur in conjunction with allowable uses.

BP: Business Park is intended to provide for modern light industrial, research and development, and administrative facilities subject to stringent development and performance standards.

D.    Public/Semi-Public Zones.

P/SP: Public/Semi-Public is intended to provide for activities operated by the City, County, or other governmental agencies such as the fire district, school districts, water districts, and sewer districts; other semi-public uses, such as hospitals and other private institutions may also be included.

E.     Open Space Zone.

ER/OS/PK: Ecological Resource/Open Space/Parks is intended to provide for land that is ecologically significant and has been set aside for preservation as open space, or land that has been set aside for the public’s use as active and passive recreational areas; no private development may occur within this zone.

F.     Special Purpose Overlay Zones. The following special purpose overlay zones are indicators of the presence of special physical or other types of planning related characteristics. These special purpose overlay zones may be applied individually or in combination to any underlying residential, commercial, light industrial, public/semi-public or open space zone. Where one or more special purpose overlay zone(s) exist, development must conform with both the underlying zone requirements, and those of any special purpose overlay zones. Property in the R-30 Overlay Zone must also conform with both the requirements of the R-30 Overlay Zone and those of any special purpose overlay zones.

SP: Specific Plan Overlay is intended to provide for comprehensive and systematic development of important properties in the City through adoption and implementation of a specific plan as described in Section 65450 et seq. of the California Government Code.

CBO: Coastal Bluff Overlay is intended to provide recognition of the bluff areas as dynamic land ocean interfaces that are subject to change as a result of natural and man-made factors, and which must be considered as a constraint to development.

H/IBO: Hillside/Inland Bluff Overlay is intended to provide recognition of hillside and inland bluff areas as sensitive natural features which represent significant constraints to development.

FPO: Floodplain Overlay is intended to provide recognition of major drainage courses as important constraints to both development and transport, requiring special consideration.

C/NRO: Cultural/Natural Resources Overlay is intended to provide recognition of areas containing important man-made cultural and historic resources, and ecologically sensitive plant and animal habitats, as constraints to development.

AGO: Agricultural Overlay is intended to provide recognition of prime agricultural areas as important resources whose productivity and viability may be impacted by surrounding development.

PFO: Public Facilities Overlay is intended to identify the general areas where public uses and facilities such as schools, fire and police stations, parks, and others will need to be located in the future.

SVC: Scenic/Visual Corridor Overlay is intended to identify those areas where significant aesthetic and visual resources are present.

SECRM: Southern El Camino Real Museum Overlay is intended to allow museums, subject to a major use permit, in a very limited portion of the RR-1 and R-3 zones characterized by a growing presence of institutional uses. A museum in this overlay zone may include one dwelling unit to house (1) a caretaker, and his or her family; or (2) a professional of the arts or sciences, and his or her family, whose primary responsibility is to create or participate in the museum’s exhibits and programs, and facilitate achievement of the museum’s goals.

G.    Transportation Corridor.

TC: Transportation Corridor is intended to ensure the preservation of certain public transportation rights-of-way to ensure adequate land is available for future transportation modes and accessory uses including: recreational trails, public parking and parks.

The actual density or intensity of development allowed within each residential, commercial, light industrial, and public/semi-public zone will depend on the existence of environmental constraints identified through the special purpose overlays and site specific environmental review with density calculated pursuant to Section 30.16.010B2. (Ord. 93-08; Ord. 94-02; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-04)

 

30.08.020 Official Zoning Map.
A.     The location and boundaries of the zoning designations and of specific plan areas shall be described by an ordinance and shall be depicted on the Zoning Map of the City of Encinitas, which is incorporated into this Code by this reference.

B.     The Zoning Map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within the Zoning Map, be subdivided into units and these parts and units may be separately employed for purposes of amending the Zoning Map or for any official reference to the Zoning Map.

C.    Changes in the boundaries of the zones, and changes in zone designations that occur with adoption or amendment of a specific plan, shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended Zoning Map, or part of the map, or unit of a part of the Zoning Map. This amended map, when adopted, shall become part of this Code. (Ord. 94-02)

 

30.08.030 Uncertainty of Zone Boundaries.
A.     Zone boundaries shall follow the center line of streets, highways, alleys or lot lines depicted on a recorded map, whenever possible.

B.     Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on the Zoning Map or any part or unit of the map, the following rules shall apply:

1.     Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines, or extensions thereof, or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries.

2.     In the case of unsubdivided property, and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map.

3.     Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the street or alley will acquire the classification of the property to which it reverts.

4.     Areas of dedicated streets or alleys other than those designated on the Zoning Map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this chapter, shall be deemed to be unclassified and, in the case of streets, permitted to be used for purposes lawfully allowed.

C.    Where the zone boundary line is uncertain or claimed to be uncertain, the determination of the City Council as to the location thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

 

30.08.040 Classification of Unclassified Lands.
Any property which, for any reason, is not clearly designated on the Zoning Map as being classified in any of the zones established herein, shall be deemed to be temporarily zoned Rural Residential until the land is otherwise classified after being processed as an amendment to the Zoning Map.

 

30.08.050 Prezoning of Property.
A.     The City may pre-zone unincorporated territory adjoining the City for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation to the City.

A pre-zoning map shall be developed and adopted in the same manner prescribed by this title for the classification or reclassification of property within the City.

B.     If a pre-zoning map for an area has been adopted, then such annexing property shall, upon becoming a part of the City, possess the classification indicated on the detailed pre-zoning map, and such portions of the pre-zoning map shall become a part of the City’s Zoning Map and thereafter be subject to all of the provisions of this title. All property annexed which is not pre-zoned shall automatically be classified Rural Residential.

Chapter 30.09 ZONING USE MATRIX*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-16. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 30.09.010 Zoning Use Matrix.
The Zoning Use Matrix below provides a listing of the various land uses which are allowed by right or use permit and those which are prohibited within each of the City’s zoning categories. In addition to the matrix below, individual specific plans provide a listing of various land uses allowed by right or use permit within each of the specific plan’s zoning categories. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, for a listing of allowed land uses. The following symbols are used to describe the relationship of the listed uses to each of the zones:

 

 

RR

=

Rural Residential

R

=

Residential

MHP

=

Mobile Home Park

OP

=

Office Professional

LC

=

Local Commercial

GC

=

General Commercial

VSC

=

Visitor Serving Commercial

LI

=

Light Industrial

BP

=

Business Park

P/SP

=

Public/Semi-Public

ER/OS

=

Ecological Resource/Open Space

L-LC

=

Limited Local Commercial

L-VSC

=

Limited Visitor Serving Commercial

OL

=

Overlay

 

 

“P”

Permitted by right

“C”

Conditional use permit required (major)

“Cm”

Conditional use permit required (minor)

“A”

Agriculture permit

“X”

Prohibited

All home-based businesses: please refer to Section 30.48.040L

 

 

USES

ZONES

RR; RR-1; RR-2

RS-11; R-3; R-5; R-8

R-11; R-15

R-20; R-25

R-30 OL

MHP

OP

LC

GC

VSC

LI

BP

P/SP

ER/ OS/
PK

L-LC

L-VSC

Accessory Building

P

P

P

P

P

P

X

P

P

P

P

P

P

X

P

P

Acupuncture

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

Cm

P

X

Cm

X

Adult Business (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P4

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Agricultural Equipment (Sale or Rent)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Agricultural & Horticulture Production

A

A

A

A

A36

A

A

A

A

X

A

A

A

X

A

X

Agricultural & Horticulture Packing

C

C

C

C

X

X

C

C

C

X

C

C

X

X

X

X

Agricultural—Road-Side Stand (when adjacent to Circulation Element Road)

A

A

A

A

A36

X

A

A

A

A

A

A

X

X

X

X

Alcoholic Beverage, Sales—Off Premises

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Ambulance Service (Private)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

Animal Grazing & Raising

P1

P1

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C2

X

X

Animal Shelter

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

C

X

X

X

Antique Sales, Retail (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

Cm

P

X

X

X

X

Cm

Appliance Sales & Repairs (Household & Small Appliances)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Aquarium, Commercial

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

Arcade Accessory (Non-Adult) (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Arcade Primary (Non-Adult) (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Art Gallery

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

P

P

Athletic Field

C

C

C

C

X

C

X

C

C

C

C

C

P

C2

X

X

Auction House (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Auditorium

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

Automobile Body Repair

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Automobile Elec. & Tune-Up

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Automobile Repair Garage

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Automobile Painting

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Automobile Rental

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Auto Sales, New and Used

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm5

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

Bakery (Retail)

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

P

P

C

X

X

P

P6

Bakery (Wholesale)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Bank/Savings & Loan

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

Barber & Beauty Shop (Cosmetologist)

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

P9

X

C

X

X

P

P6

Bar/Cocktail Lounge

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Bicycle Sales, Rental & Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

X

X

X

P

C/P7

Billiard, Pool Hall (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

X

Bird Raising

P1

P1

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Blueprinting & Photostatting

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Boat Building

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Boat Rental

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Boat Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

C

P

X

X

X

X

X

Body Painting

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Bookbinding

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Book Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

X

P

X

X

P

P

Borrow Pit

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

Bottling Plant

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Bowling Alley

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Building Materials Sales Enclosed

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Building Materials Storage Yard

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Burial Casket Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Burial Casket Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Cabinet Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Camps

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C2

X

X

Candle Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Candy & Confectionery Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Candy & Confectionery Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

Canvas Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Car Wash

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Carpet & Rug Cleaning Plant

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Catering Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Cellophane Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Cellular Facility

C

C

C

C

C36

C

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C2

P

P

Cemetery

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Ceramic Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Charitable Bins & Depositories

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Chiropractor

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

Cm

P

X

Cm

X

Church/Temple/ Religious Institution

C

C

C

C

C36

X

C

C

C

X

X

C

C

X

C

X

Clock Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Clothing Rental

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Club, Private

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

X

C

C

X

X

X

X

Club, Athletic or Recreational

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

X

Club, with Alcohol Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

C

Coins, Buy and Sell

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cold Storage Plant

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Communications Equipment Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Community Garden

A*

A*

A*

A*

A*36

A*

A*

A*

A*

X

A*

A*

A*

Cm**

A*

X

* See Chapter 30.33 (Urban Agriculture) for regulations related to community gardens.

** Limited to improved and unimproved park sites in the ER/OS/PK zone. See Chapter 30.33 (Urban Agriculture).

Conservatory of Music

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Contractor Storage Yard

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

Convenience Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

Convent and Monastery

C

C

C

C

C36

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Cork Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Corrugated Paper Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Cosmetic Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Cosmetic Design Studio

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Costume Rentals

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cottage Food Operations

P

P

P

P

P36

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Courts, Commercial (Badminton, Tennis, Racquetball, Others)

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

C

Custom Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

Cutlery Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Day Care Center

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm36

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

Cm

Cm

X

X

Cm

X

Dairy Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Dance Hall

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Delicatessen

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

X

P

C

X

X

Cm

X

Dental Clinic

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

Dental Clinic, Canine/Feline

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

Department Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Die Casting

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

Distributing Plant

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

 

 

 

USES

ZONES

RR; RR-1; RR-2

RS-11; R-3; R-5; R-8

R-11; R-15

R-20; R-25

R-30 OL

MHP

OP

LC

GC

VSC

LI

BP

P/SP

ER/ OS/
PK

L-LC

L-VSC

 

 

Dressmaking Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

Drive-Through Restaurant

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

Drug Wholesale

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Drug Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Dry Cleaning, Retail and Self-Service w/on-site cleaning permitted

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P11

X

X

X

X

X

P11

Dwelling Unit, Caretaker—Accessory to the Principal Use

X12

X12

X12

X12

X

X12

X12

X12

P2

P2

P2

P2

P2

Cm2

X12

X12

Dwelling Unit, One-Family

P

P

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Dwelling Unit, Two-Family

X

X

P10

P

P35

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Dwelling Unit, Three-Family

X

X

P

P

P35

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Dwelling Unit, Multiple Family

X

X

P

P

P35

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Educational Institution, Private

C

C

C

C

X

X

C

C

C

X

C

C

C

X

C

X

Educational Institution, Public

P

P

P

P

X

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Cm13

P

P

Electrical Appliance Assembly

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Electrical Distribution Substation

C

C

C

C

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

X

C

C

Electrical Sign Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Electrical Transmission Substation

 

 

 

 

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Emergency Shelter

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P*

P*

X

X

X

X

*As required by California Government Code § 65583(a)(4) (A-D), emergency shelters, as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 50801(e) that are in conformance with the provisions of Encinitas Municipal Code Chapter 30.36 shall be approved without any discretionary approvals (including such discretionary approvals as design review and use permit approval) and are exempt from the provisions of Chapter 23.06 (Citizen Participation Plan) and the California Environmental Quality Act; however, such uses are subject to the California Coastal Act.

Employment Agency

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

Enamel Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Engine Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Engraving, Machine Metal

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Equestrian Establishment

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C2

X

X

Equipment Sales & Rentals

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Family Day Care Home, Large (7 to 12 children—13+ children, see Day Care Center)

P14

P14

P14

P14

X

P14

P14

P14

P14

X

P14

P14

X

X

P14

X

Family Day Care Home, Small (6 or fewer children)

P

P

P

P

P36

P

P

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

P

X

Farmers’ Market

A*

A*

A*

A*

A*36

A*

A*

A

A

A

A

A*

A

A*

A*

A

 

* Limited to sites with an existing church, school, or agricultural use.

Feed and Grain Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Fiber Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Finance Company

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

Fire Prevention Equipment, Sales and Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Fire Station

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

Cm

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

X

P

P

Fish Hatchery

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

Cm

Cm17

X

X

Fleet Storage

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

C

X

X

X

Floor Covering, Retail

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Florist Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

P

X

C

X

X

P

P16

Food Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Frozen Food Locker

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Furniture Manufacturing and Repair

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P15

C

X

X

X

X

Furniture Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Furniture Transfer and Storage

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Garage, Public Parking

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

C

P

C

C

X

X

X

Garden Supplies

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Garment Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Gas Distribution, Meter and Control Station

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

X

X

Gas Engines, Retail Sales and Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Gem/Precious Stone Retail

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Gift Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

P

P

Glass and Mirrors, Retail

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Glass Edging and Beveling

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Glass Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Grocery Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

Glass Studio (Stained and others)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Golf Course & Club House

C

C

C

C

X

C

X

X

X

C

X

X

C

C2

X

C

Golf Driving Range (not part of golf course)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

C

C2

X

X

Group Exercise (including, but not limited to, dance studio, yoga, martial arts, Pilates or other similar group exercise class)

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

P

P

X

X

Cm

X

X

Cm

X

Group Residential

X

X

C

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Gymnasium, Public Health Club

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

C

X

P

X

X

X

C

Hair Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Hair Salon

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

P8

X

C

X

X

Cm

Cm

Hardware Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Hat Cleaning and Blocking

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Hat Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Hazardous Household Materials Collection Center

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm19

X

Cm19

X

X

X

Hazardous Waste Facility

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm19

X

X

X

X

X

Hazardous Waste Facility Specified

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm19

X

X

X

X

X

Health Food Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

P

P18

Heating Equipment Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Hiring Hall

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

Cm

X

X

X

Hobby Supply Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

Home & Business Maintenance Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Home Improve. Center

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Home Occupations

P

P

P

P

P36

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Horses, Raising (See Stable Comm. & Stable Private)

P1

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Horticultural Services

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

Cm

X

Cm

Cm

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Hospital

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Hospital, Convalescent

X

X

C

C

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Hospital, Nursing

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Hospital, Mental

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Hotel

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

P

X

X

X

X

X

P

Ice and Cold Storage Plant

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Ice Cream Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Ice Cream Parlor

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

P

Cm

Cm

X

X

P

P

Ice Sales, Storage and Retail

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Ink Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Interior Decorating Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Janitorial Supplies/Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Janitorial Services

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Jewelry Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Jewelry Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

P

P20

Kennel

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C1

X

X

X

X

X

Labs (Medical, Dental)

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Laboratories (Biochemical, Film, etc.)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Labor (Hiring Hall)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Land Reclamation Project

C

C

C

C

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C21

C

C

Lapidary Shop, Retail (Gems)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Laundry

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Laundromat

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Lawnmower Sales/Sales and Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Library

C

C

C

C

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

C

P

X

P

X

Lithographic Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Locksmith

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Lumber Yard

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Machinery Storage

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Machine and Tool Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Machine Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Mail Order House

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Manufacturing/ Assembly

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Market (Food)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

Market (wholesale)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Massage Parlor (City Clerk permit required)

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

Mattress Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Medical Complex

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

X

X

C23

X

X

X

Medical Equipment Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

Medical/Dental Office

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

Cm

P

X

Cm

X

Medical/Dental Clinic

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

Microwave Antenna/Tower

X

X

X

X

X

X

P22

X

P22

X

P22

P22

X

X

X

X

Mobile Home Park

X

X

C

C

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Mobile Home (Incl. Dwelling Unit)

P

P

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Mobile Home Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Mortuary and Funeral Parlor

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Motel

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

P

X

X

X

X

X

P

Motion Picture Studio

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Motorcycle Sales & Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Motor Vehicle Parts Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Motorcycle Sales Only

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P24

X

P24

Cm

X

X

X

X

Motor Manufacturing (Electrical)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Muffler Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Music/Record Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

Museum

X; RR-1 (C25)

X; R-3 (C25)

X

X

X

X

Cm

P

P

P

X

Cm

P

Cm2

X

Cm

Newsstand

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

P

P

P

X

X

P

P18

Newspaper Distribution

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Newspaper Printer

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Notions and Dry Goods Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Novelties Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Nurseries, Horticultural

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

Observatory

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Office (Business and Professional)

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

Cm

P

X

X

Cm

X

Office Equipment/ Supplies Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Open Air Theater

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

C

X

X

X

Optical Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Optical Products Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Orthopedic Devices Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Orthopedic Devices Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Outdoor Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

X

Cm

X

X

Cm

Packaging Business

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Paper Products Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Paper Product Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Parcel Delivery Service Office Only

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Parking Lot, Commercial

X

X

X

X

X

X

C26

X26

C

C

C26

C26

X

X

X

C

Parks and Recreational Areas

C

C

C

C

X

C

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Cm27

C

Cm

Pawnshop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Perfume Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Pest Control Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Pet Shop/Pet Grooming

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

Cm

X

Pharmacy

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

P

P

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

Photocopy Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Photoengraving & Finishing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Photofinishing, Retail

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

Cm

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Photographic Supplies

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

C

P

X

X

X

X

X

Photographic Studio

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

Cm

Cm

X

X

X

X

Plastics Fabrication

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Plumbing Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Plumbing Supply Yard

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Police/Sheriff Station/Jail

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

P

C

P

X

X

X

Post Office

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

Postal Annex, Private Ownership

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Pottery Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Pottery Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Prefabricated Building Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Printing

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Public Utilities: Office

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

Public Utility Service Yards

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

C

X

X

X

Qualified Employee Housing - 7 or More Employees37

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

X

P

P

P

P

P

X

Qualified Employee Housing – 6 or Fewer Employees38

P

P

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Radio/Television Broadcasting Studio

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Radio/Television Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Radio/Television Transmitter

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

C

C

X

X

X

X

Real Estate Office

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

Recording Studio

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

Cm

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Recreational Facilities Private

C

C

C

C

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

X

X

C18

C18

Recreational Facilities Public

C

C

C

C

X

C

C

C

C

P

C

C

P

C

X

C

Recreational Storage

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Recreational Vehicle Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

Recycling Facilities30

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

C30

C

X

X

X

Reducing Salon

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

Rental Recreational Surf Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Residential Care, Limited—6 or Fewer

P

P

P

P

P36

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Residential Care, General—7 or More28

C29

C29

C

C

C36

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Restaurant—No Alcohol Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

P31

P

P

P

P

P31

X

X

X

P

Restaurant—With Alcohol Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm31

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm31

X

X

X

Cm

Retail Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

Cm

Cm

X

X

P31

P31

Rubber Products Fabrication

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Rug Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Sash & Door Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Scales, Public

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Schools Private (Elementary, Jr. High, High School)

C

C

C

C

X

X

C

C

C

X

C

C

C

X

C

X

Schools Public (Elementary, Jr. High, High School)

P

P

P

P

X

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Cm2

P

P

Schools, Technical

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

C

C

C

X

X

X

Scientific Instruments Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Scientific Instruments Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Second Hand Dealer (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Second Hand Store (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Service Station, incl. Auto Repair and Car Wash

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

X32

Sewage Treatment Plant

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

Shoe Repair/Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Shoe Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Silk Screen Printing Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Sign Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Single Room Occupancy Housing

X

X

P40

P40

P35, 40

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Small Animal Hospital/Kennel

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

C1

C1

X

X

X

X

Soap Manufacturing (Cold Mix Only)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Soft Drink Manufacturing & Bottling

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Sporting Goods Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

X

Stable, Commercial

C

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C2

X

X

Stable, Private

P1

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Stadium

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

Stationery Store

X

X

X

X

X

X

P9

P

P

P

P

P

X

X

P

X

Stationery Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Steel Fabrication Plan

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

Stove Monuments and Tombstone Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Stone (Precious) Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Storage Building (Self-Storage, Boat, RV & Truck Rentals)

C33

C33

C33

C33

X

X

X

X

C

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Storage of Non-Operative Vehicles (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C34

X

C34

X

X

X

X

X

Storage and Preparation of Vehicles (Associated With New Car Dealerships)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C2

X

X

X

Storage of Sand, Gravel, etc.

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

X

X

Supportive Housing

P39

P39

P39

P39

P35, 39

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Surf Shop

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Retail

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

P

X

Cm

X

X

Cm

With Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

Cm

X

X

Cm

Rental

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

X

Swap Meet

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

X

Cm

X

X

Cm

Swimming Pool Supplies/Equipment Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Tailor Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Tattoo Parlor

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Telephone Answering Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Terminals and Stations (Taxi, Bus, Limousine, etc.) (City Clerk permit possible)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

Textiles Manufacturing Processing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Theaters and Places of Public Assembly

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

P

C2

X

C18

Tile Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Tile Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Tile Rebuilding/ Retreading

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Time-Share Project

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

X

X

X

X

X

C

Toiletries Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Tools Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Towing/Impounding of Vehicles

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

C

X

X

X

Toys Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Transfer, Moving and Storage

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Transient Habitation

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

C

C

X

X

C

X

X

C

Transitional Housing

P39

P39

P39

P39

P35, 39

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Truck Rental

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

X

X

X

Truck Repair

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Truck Sales

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

C

X

X

X

X

X

Tutoring Center

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Cm

X

X

Cm

X

X

X

X

Upholstery Installation

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Utility Lines-Sewer, Gas, Petroleum, Telephone, Electric

P

P

P

P

P36

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

Vending Machine Sales and Service

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Veterinarian

X

X

X

X

X

X

Cm

P

P

X

P

P

X

X

X

X

Vitamin Manufacturing

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Warehouse

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Water Reservoir

C

C

C

C

X

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C2

C

C

Wearing Apparel Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

P

P6

X

X

X

X

Cm

Cm

Welding Shop

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Wholesale Business

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

C

X

X

X

X

Wine Storage and Mfg.

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Wire Fabrication

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Wood Products Sales Retail

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

X

P

X

X

X

X

X

Wood Products Mfg.

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

Yard Products Mfg.

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

C

X

P

Cm

X

X

X

X

 

NOTES:

1     See Animal Regulations (Ch. 30.55).

2     Not permitted within Coastal Zone ecological resource areas.

3     Limited to aquaculture uses (as defined by this title) within the Coastal Zone.

4     This use must still meet the locational requirements of Title 30.

5     Incidental repairs permitted per state certification requirements.

6     Permitted in conjunction with a hotel or visitor service complex.

7     “C” is required when use stands alone or “P” when use is accessory to hotel.

8     Permitted when in conjunction with a hotel or office/professional complex.

9     Ancillary use.

10   Duplex is a permitted use on lots of 5,000 square feet gross or greater that existed prior to adoption of this Code. For R-15 zones.

11   For R-15 zones dry cleaning is permitted provided that this service is accessory to the main function of a hotel or motel.

12   Unless permitted as accessory use in conjunction with a major or minor use permit.

13   Within Coastal Zone ecological resource areas, public educational institution uses shall be limited to nature centers and interpretive facilities.

14   Accessory to a single-family home.

15   On-site sale permitted when product manufactured on-site.

16   In conjunction with a hotel or permitted use.

17   Within Coastal Zone ecological resource areas, fish hatchery uses shall be limited to aquaculture uses as defined by this title.

18   In conjunction with permitted use.

19   See Hazardous Waste Facility Regulations (Ch. 30.57).

20   In conjunction with a hotel.

21   Within coastal zone ecological resource areas, land reclamation project uses shall be limited to restoration projects.

22   Subject to the Accessory Use Regulations (Ch. 30.48) and Design Review Regulations (Ch. 23.08).

23   Medical complex may be approved up to a 1.0 FAR and maximum of 3 stories as established and approved by a major use permit.

24   Incidental repairs permitted per state certification regulations.

25   Museums allowed in RR-1 and R-3 only in Southern El Camino Real Museum Special Purpose Overlay Zone with a major use permit subject to limitations. See Municipal Code Sections 30.08.010F and 30.34.090.

26   Amended Ord. 90-12.

27   Within Coastal Zone ecological resource areas, parks and recreational area uses shall be limited to public uses.

28   Nonconforming residential care facilities for 7 or more legally established as of March 9, 2005, may be expanded or intensified through issuance of a conditional use permit (major) pursuant to Municipal Code Section 30.16.010B12.

29   Residential care facilities, general for 7 or more are permitted through issuance of a conditional use permit (major) only if the property is located on a prime arterial circulation element road as shown on the General Plan.

30   See Recycling Facilities (Ch. 30.56).

31   Permitted as an accessory use up to 10% of leasable square footage of the center, not to exceed 1,500 square feet, unless approved by a minor use permit.

32   Existing service station may expand with a major use permit.

33   When located on a prime arterial, outdoor storage of boats and RVs and limited truck rentals are considered.

34   The following issues will need to be addressed in addition to other site specific issues that may arise through the process: lighting, hours of operation, noise, visibility of operation, screening, size of property and use, maximum time period to store a vehicle, and site improvements.

35   Applicable only to sites within the R-30 Overlay zoning district proposed to be developed at a minimum density of 25 units per net acre and a maximum density of 30 units per net acre and proposed for at least 16 dwelling units. As required by Government Code Section 65583.2, residential development projects proposed to include at least 20 percent lower income units, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, and not including an application for a subdivision map, shall be approved as a use by right. A use by right may not be subject to any City discretionary approval that constitutes a project under the California Environmental Quality Act; however, such use by right does not exempt projects from design review or the requirements of the California Coastal Act.

36   Applicable only to uses that are accessory or ancillary uses to a residential use meeting all of the requirements of the R-30 Overlay zoning district.

37   Qualified Employee Housing of 7 or more employees is permitted as an accessory use in conjunction with an approved agricultural use per Section 30.48.040R.

38   Shall be deemed a single-family residence and subject to all municipal codes, regulations and other standards generally applicable to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

39   Supportive and Transitional Housing are residential uses and are subject to only those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

40   Single room occupancy housing is subject to all municipal codes, regulations and other standards generally applicable to multiple-family residential buildings in the same zone and specific standards as set forth in Section 30.16.050.

 

(Ord. 89-41; Ord. 90-12; Ord. 91-03; Ord. 92-23; Ord. 92-28; Ord. 94-02; Ord. 94-11; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2002-02; Ord. 2005-03; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-04; Ord. 2019-01; Ord. 2019-14; Ord. 2019-16)

Chapter 30.16 RESIDENTIAL ZONES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-09, 2020-10 and 2020-16. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 30.16.010 Development Standards.
A.     The development standards described in the tables below shall apply to the residential zones and are minimums unless otherwise stated. These standards shall apply to all land and buildings other than accessory buildings, permitted in their respective residential zones. In addition to the development standards provided in this chapter, each specific plan identified in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, may have separate development standards for residential zones in their jurisdictional boundaries. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, for development standards in residential zones within adopted specific plans.

For building height, see Section 30.16.010B6. For off-street parking requirements, see Chapter 30.54.

1.     Rural Residential Zones.

 

ZONE REQUIREMENTS

RR

RR-1

RR-2

a. Density (maximum dwelling units per net acre)

0.123 (8 acres for floodplain);

0.26—0.50 (2-4 acres depending on slope)

1.0

2.0

b. Midrange Density

(See Section 30.16.010B1 & B2)

0.125 (8 acres for floodplain);

0.38 (3 acres depending on slope)

0.75

1.5

c. Net Lot Area

2,4, or 8 acres

1.0 acre

21,500 sq. ft.

d. Lot Width (ft.)

110

110

100

e. Cul-de-sac Lot Width (ft.)

30 at front setback

30 at front setback

30 at front setback

f. Panhandle Width on a Flag Lot (ft.)

20

20

20

g. Lot Depth (ft.)

150

150

150

h. Front Yard Setback (ft.)

30

30

30

i. Side Yard Setback (ft.) for each interior side4,5

15/15

15/15

10/10

j. Side Yard Setback (ft.) street side5

20

15

15

k. Rear Yard Setback (ft.)

25

25

25

l. Lot Coverage (maximum percentage)

35%

35%

35%

 

 

2.     Single-Family Residential Zones.

 

ZONE REQUIREMENT

R-3

R-5

R-8

R-11/RS-11

a. Density (maximum dwelling units per net acre)

3.0

5.0

8.0

11.0

b. Midrange Density

(See Section 30.16.010B1 & B2)

2.5

4.0

6.5

9.5

c. Net Lot Area (sq. ft.)

14,500

8,700

5,400

3,950

d. Lot Width (ft.)

80

70

60

40

e. Cul-de-sac Lot Width (ft.)

30 at front setback

30 at front setback

30 at front setback

30 at front setback

f. Panhandle Width on a Flag Lot (ft.)

20

20

20

20

g. Lot Depth (ft.)

100

100

90

90

h. Front Yard Setback (ft.)

25

25

25

202

i. Side Yard Setback (ft.) for each interior side4,5

10/10

10/10

5/10

(RS-11) 5/5;

(R-11) 5/0-51

j. Side Yard Setback (ft.) street side5

10

10

10

10

k. Rear Yard Setback (ft.)

25

25

25

20

l. Lot Coverage (maximum percentage)

35%

35%

40%

40%

m. Floor Area Ratio

 

0.6

0.6

0.6 (Standard Lot Sizes); 0.5 (Substandard Lot)3

 

3.     Higher Density Single-Family and Multiple-Family Residential Zones.

 

ZONE REQUIREMENT

R-15

R-20

R-25

R-30 OL6

MHP

a. Density (Maximum dwelling units per net acre)

15.0

20.0

25.0

30.0

11.0

b. Midrange Density (See Section 30.16.010B1 & B2)

13.0

17.5

22.5

N/A

9.5

c. Net Lot Area (sq. ft.)

20,000

20,000

20,000

30,000

 

d. Lot Width (ft.)

100

100

100

100

 

e. Lot Depth (ft.)

150

150

150

150

 

f. Front Yard Setback (ft.)

20

20

20

10

 

g. Side Yard Setback (ft.) for each interior side (Standard Lot)5

15/15

15/15

15/15

10

 

h. Side Yard Setback (Substandard Lot) street side3,5

5/5

5/5

5/5

N/A

 

i. Street Side Yard Setback (Standard Lot) (ft.)5

20

20

20

10

 

j. Street Side Yard Setback (Substandard Lot)3,5

10

10

10

N/A

 

k. Rear Yard Setback (ft.)

15

15

15

10

 

l. Rear Yard Setback Where Alley Exists

20

20

20

10

 

m. Lot Coverage (maximum percentage)

40

40

40

65

 

n. Building Height (See 30.16.010B6)

 

 

 

 

 

o. Distance between buildings on the same lot less than 16 ft. in height

15

15

15

15

 

p. Distance between buildings on the same lot greater than 16 ft. in height

20

20

20

15

 

 

FOOTNOTES

1.    Requires a minimum 5-foot side yard setback for both side yards, unless a zero lot line development is proposed. For zero lot line development, a 5-foot minimum side yard setback is required for one side yard with a zero yard setback where the two units have common walls.

2.    See Section 30.16.010C4 and D10.

3.    Substandard lot under floor area ratio refers to a lot that does not meet the standard for lot area.

4.    See Section 30.16.010B9.

5.    See “Lot, Interior” in Section 30.04.010.

6.    A minimum net density of 25 dwelling units per acre is required in the R-30 OL Zone.

 

B.     All Residential Zones. The following development standards shall apply to all residential zones:

1.     In determining the mid-range or maximum number of dwelling units allowed for a property, multiply net acreage by the mid-range density or maximum density given in Section 30.16.010A. Any fraction of a dwelling unit shall be reduced to the next lower whole unit not less than one. However, for properties located in and developing in conformance with the provisions of the R-30 Overlay, or properties requesting a density bonus, any fraction of a dwelling unit shall be rounded up to the next whole unit.

2.     Net acreage is the slope adjusted gross acreage not including acreage of the flood plains, beaches, permanent bodies of water, significant wetlands, major power transmission easements, railroad track beds, existing and future rights-of-way and easements for public or private streets/roads, and the area contained within the panhandle portion of a panhandle lot in a zone where the minimum required lot size is 10,000 square feet or less. The portion of access roadways or easements internal to a project that are used exclusively to provide access to rear-loaded garages are not required to be deducted from gross acreage. Driveways providing access to dwelling unit(s) on one lot are not deducted from gross acreage. For properties located in and developing in conformance with the provisions of the R-30 Overlay, private access roads, parking lots, driveways, and drive aisles are not deducted from gross acreage.

a.     The slope adjustment shall be required and is as follows:

i.      All land in 0-25% slope of natural grade is allowed to use 100% of acreage.

ii.     All land in 25-40% slope of natural grade is allowed to use 50% of acreage.

iii.     All land in 40% + slope of natural grade is allowed to use 0% of acreage.

iv.    Five-foot contour maps available from the City shall be used for calculating the slope adjustment.

b.     The density of development shall be based on net acreage.

3.     Street setbacks shall be measured from the ultimate street right-of-way according to the City Engineer or the maximum required street width if the street is proposed to be private or is now a private street.

4.     When landscaping is required, landscaping shall consist predominantly of trees, shrubs, ground cover and decorative rocks, except for necessary walks, drives and fences. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, free from weeds, trash, and debris.

5.     Varieties of plants chosen for landscaping may be restricted through the development review process to protect or preserve views. All required plantings shall be maintained in good growing condition, and whenever necessary, shall be replaced with new plant materials to ensure continued compliance with required landscaping, buffering, and screening requirements. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a manner that will not depreciate adjacent property values or otherwise adversely affect adjacent properties.

6.     The following standards shall apply to building height limits for residential buildings.

a.     The standard height limit for residential buildings, shall be the lesser of two stories in the RR through R-25 and MHP zones and shall be the lesser of three stories in the R-30 Overlay zone or the following height, all as measured to the top of a flat roof (or in the case of a pitched roof to the top of the roof immediately above the exterior plane of the wall below, including roofing material):

•       26 feet—RR to RR-1 zones citywide, RR through RR-2 in the Olivenhain Community.

•       22 feet—RR-2 (except Olivenhain Community) through R-25 and MHP zone, and substandard lots in the Olivenhain Community.

•       35 feet – R-30 Overlay zone.

This height standard is subject to the following exceptions:

 



 



FLAT ROOF

R-30 OL Zone Building Height*



*      Projections meeting the standards of Section 30.16.040B.6.a.iii may exceed the 35-foot or 39-foot height limit, by a maximum of five feet to accommodate necessary equipment (such as elevator shafts and other mechanical equipment) and screening.

 

i.      On lots in R-3 to R-25 zones with greater than 10% slope, the building height at the uphill side of the lot shall not exceed 12 feet above the crown of the right-of-way. Where a street does not abut the uphill side of the sloped lot or a panhandle portion of a lot exists, this measurement shall be made at the property line located at the uphill side of the lot (excluding the panhandle of a lot) except as provided below. In no case shall the building exceed the applicable standard height limit at any point unless provided by the Code. Lot slope shall be determined in accordance with Section 30.16.010B6e.

 



ii.     In all zones, elements such as towers (maximum diagonal dimension of 12 feet), hips, gables, and spires may extend no more than four feet above the permitted standard height limit. A roof that extends above the permitted standard height limit shall have a minimum 3:12 pitch. Barreled roofs and roof decks shall be permitted provided the design of the roof or deck railings do not extend beyond the envelope of a projected pitch roof as authorized by this section. An additional maximum of a two-foot projection (beyond the elements extending up to four feet listed above) may be authorized by staff for chimneys, provided: (1) the perimeter of the chimney does not exceed 120 linear inches; and (2) the width of the chimney is no wider than 40 inches in any direction; and (3) a required non-decorative spark arrestor assembly may be added to the two-foot chimney; and (4) the building height plus projections do not exceed 30 feet in height for the RR through R-25 and MHP zones and 35 feet (flat roof) or 39 feet (pitched roof) for the R-30 Overlay zone.

iii.     In addition to the allowed projections specified in Section 30.16.010B.6.a.ii above, buildings in the R-30 Overlay zone may exceed the 35-foot or 39-foot height limit, as applicable, a maximum of five feet to accommodate necessary equipment (such as elevator shafts and other mechanical equipment) and screening, as long as any projections do not occupy more than 25% of the roof area and are set back a minimum of 10 feet from the edge of the wall plane on all sides.

iv.    Existing residential structures in the New Encinitas Community constructed at a height exceeding the aforementioned 22-foot/26-foot height may be remodeled or added to at the height of the existing structure. The height of the existing structure shall be documented through a height survey or other manner found satisfactory by the Development Services Director, and the proposed addition/remodel must also maintain substantially the same design character as the existing structure, also to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director.



b.     All building permit applications for residential buildings shall provide building height information at a sufficient number of locations to substantiate that no point of the structure exceeds the standard building height limit, projections do not exceed the height restrictions, and the structure contains no more than two stories.

c.     Natural grade shall be determined as follows. Natural grade may be determined by the Development Services Director, or authorized agency when a discretionary application is being reviewed, with consideration given to:

i.      The prevailing topography of the site which has existed for some period of time prior to review of a project under consideration. Documentation of the grade shown on photographs, historical topographic surveys and/or in geotechnical reports prepared by certified professionals may be utilized on a case by case basis to determine the natural grade for purposes of development. The review shall take into account the vegetation on the site, the existing earth forms at the time of the review and the expectation that a reasonable person would consider the grade to be natural. Small earth form irregularities in topography, such as pits or mounds and similar features may be disregarded;

ii.     Grading or other modifications of earth forms which result in gaining an advantage for future development, shall not be considered natural grade when substantial evidence can reasonably document that the grading or modifications of earth forms have resulted in circumvention of the regulations in the Municipal Code.

d.     For properties located in and developing in conformance with the provisions of the R-30 Overlay zone, building height is the vertical distance from the finished exterior grade adjacent to the structure to the highest portion of the structure immediately above. In the event of a conflict between this provision and other requirements of the Code, this standard shall control.

e.     The slope of a lot shall be determined as follows:

i.      For the purpose of determining whether a lot has a greater than 10% slope, the average lot slope within the building envelope (setback lines) must be established. The average lot slope is determined by calculating the total change in elevation from setback line to setback line (rise/run), and is established by placing three run-lines across the property and taking the combined average slope of the three lines. The lines are to follow the slope of the property; i.e., they are to be placed at right angles to the contour lines.

ii.     For properties in which the run-lines parallel the property lines, two run-lines shall be placed along the peripheral setback lines, with the third line placed down the center of the property. For situations in which the slope crosses the property at an angle, the three run-lines shall be placed in such a way as to reveal average slope of the entire building envelope, to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director. For properties of an irregular shape and topography, additional run-lines may be required on the site plan to the satisfaction of the Development Services Director.

iii.     Bluff-top properties with one property line located at the lower portion of the bluff shall not be subject to a designation of greater than 10% lot slope, unless, using the method of measurement described above, the portion of the property between the edge of bluff and the opposite setback line is determined to exceed 10%. A bluff exists when the vertical elevation between the top and the toe of the bluff is 10 feet or more.

iv.    All building permit applications for new residential construction or additions on which slope determination is an issue must provide topographic information in order for lot slope to be determined. For properties with an average slope of five percent or less, and for properties on which the owner is not disputing the degree of slope being greater than 10%, the topographic information may be provided by a note on the site plan indicating percentage of slope. For lots sloping greater than five percent on which slope determination is an issue, topographic information based on a permanent assumed benchmark shall be depicted on the site plan. The topographic information can be provided by the property owner, contractor, architect, designer, land surveyor or civil engineer. If substantial evidence is presented which indicates that the topographic information is inaccurate, a certified survey shall be provided from a professional land surveyor or civil engineer.

7.     Floor area ratio (FAR) shall limit the amount of floor area of a building on a lot. For purposes of determining FAR, the following floor area is excluded:

a.     Up to 400 square feet per dwelling unit for a garage or carport.

b.     Floor area covered by a roof of open construction, such as a trellis, sunscreen or lattice work, where the total square footage of the open spaces of the covering is 50% or more of the total square footage of the floor area below.

c.     Floor area whose walls are of open construction, such as a trellis, sunscreen or lattice work, or partial wall where 50% or more of the total square footage of the vertical planes of the perimeter of the bulk floor area is open. Columns to support structure above shall not count toward this 50%, such that typical open building recess areas and patios are not counted as floor area.

d.     Floor area which has less than five feet of headroom between the floor and the ceiling.

e.     That portion of the floor in the basement.

f.      Floor area used solely for the capture, distribution or storage of solar energy.

8.     An animal kennel that was lawfully established and was in existence on March 29, 1989 may expand and rebuild in accordance with the development standards for the zone in which it is located. When an expansion increases the intensity of the use, a major use permit shall be required. An increase in intensity would include, but not be limited to, an increase in animals, customers, and traffic, and a relocation or expansion of high activity areas (dog runs). When structural alterations are proposed that do not increase the intensity of the use, a design review permit shall be required pursuant to Chapter 23.08 of the Municipal Code. Such structural alterations would include, but not be limited to: building elevation redesign; landscaping, walkways and fences/walls, additions to utility rooms, office space and lobby space. The permit (major use permit and/or design review permit) shall be revoked only if the kennel is operated in a manner contrary to law or the use is removed by the owner.

9.     Additions to existing nonconforming residential structures that were legally constructed prior to March 29, 1989, shall have an interior side yard setback in accordance with the following:

a.     The existing interior side yard setback of the existing building may be maintained except that in no case shall the interior side yard setback of the addition be less than:

i.      10 feet for a 15-foot required side yard setback.

ii.     Five feet for a 10-foot required side yard setback.

iii.     In no case shall a side yard setback of less than five feet be permitted, including those existing structures located within a minimum five-foot side yard setback.

b.     Second story additions are allowed for an existing nonconforming two-story dwelling based on the setbacks of paragraph 9a of this subsection B.

c.     Additions in conformance with subsection 9a of this section shall be limited to one story for an existing nonconforming single story dwelling unless it is determined that no view issues exist. Should no view issues exist based on the filing of a conceptual review application and subsequent site analysis, the Director of Planning and Building shall approve a second story addition based on the setbacks of subsection 10a. If it is determined that view issues exist, the applicant may file a design review application to have their application considered at a public hearing scheduled before the Planning Commission.

d.     New construction on vacant lots or to replace demolished units shall comply with the established interior side yard setbacks unless otherwise permitted pursuant to Chapter 30.76 (Nonconformity Regulations) of the Municipal Code.

e.     Second story additions to existing single-story residential structures which comply with the setback standards in effect at the time of building permit application shall be processed in accordance with the standards contained in this chapter.

10.   Additions or enclosures for existing third story rooms and/or decks that were legally constructed prior to March 29, 1989 may be approved through the design review process if it can be found that the addition and/or deck enclosure:

a.     Maintains some of the significant views enjoyed by residents of nearby properties, and

b.     That the remodeled building is compatible in bulk and mass with buildings on neighboring properties, and

c.     That the floor area ratio prescribed for the zoning district in which the project is located is not exceeded.

11.   For single-family residential zones, the following development standards shall apply:

a.     Front yard setbacks within subdivisions of five or more lots should vary in a manner consistent with the pattern of development in the surrounding neighborhood and consistent with the provisions of the underlying zoning.

b.     Garage placement/design standards for single-family subdivisions:

i.      Garages shall be located to minimize or reduce their visual presence, to the extent practical.

ii.     In RR to R-3 Zones, the placement of garages on a single-family lot shall vary; e.g., (a) located in the rear of the lot but accessed from the front; (b) located in the front portion of the lot with either direct access or side loaded; or (c) accessed from the alley or side street, or combination. In R-5 to RS-11 Zones, the placement of garages on the lot is encouraged to vary, to the extent practical.

iii.     To the extent practical, access to the garage shall be from the alley or side street, if available.

c.     For a new tract front yard setbacks may be reduced up to 25% on a maximum of one-half of the dwelling units within a residential tract; however, no street setbacks shall be less than 20 feet to the garage for front entry garages, and 15 feet to the garage for side entry garages.

12.   Nonconforming general residential care facilities, if determined by City review as being lawfully established and in existence on the date of adoption of this Code section, may expand or rebuild in accordance with the development standards for the zone where it is located. When an expansion increases the intensity of the use, a major use permit shall be required. An increase in land use intensity may include, but not be limited to: an increase in the number of residents, traffic and/or noise impacts, or a relocation or expansion of outdoor activity areas.

13.   Replacement housing consistent with the requirements of Government Code Sections 65583.2(g)(3) and 65915(c)(3) shall be provided on any site listed in the City’s adopted housing element of the general plan, if the site is proposed for development and: (a) residences either exist on the site or existed on the site within the five-year period prior to submittal of the application; and (b) the residences were either deed-restricted, subject to rent control or any other limitation on rent, or occupied by low or very low income households.

C.    Single-Family Residential Zones (/RR-2/R-3/R-5/R-8/RS-11). In the single-family residential zones, the following development standards shall apply in addition to subsections A and B of this section:

1.     Residences shall be oriented with the rear of the residence toward collector and larger streets where possible, consistent with the pattern of development in the neighborhood.

2.     Walkways connecting with city sidewalk/trail systems shall where practical be provided in new residential developments.

3.     Driveway or other concrete or asphalt concrete areas available for parking shall not exceed 50% where practical of the required front yard area.

4.     To the extent practical, access to the garage shall be from the alley or side street, if available.

D.    Higher Density Single-Family and Multiple-Family Residential Zones (R-11/R-15/R-20/R-25). In the higher density single-family and multiple-family residential zones, including the conversion of apartments to condominiums, the following development standards shall apply in addition to subsections A and B of this section:

1.     A minimum of 10% of the floor area of the unit shall be provided as private open space for both ground floor units and units contained wholly on the second floor. For units wholly on the second floor this open space may be provided by outdoor decks.

2.     Architecturally compatible trash enclosures, and adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials, screened from view of the roadway, and convenient to all dwelling units within the project, shall be provided.

3.     A minimum of 15 feet wide of screen type landscaping shall be provided and maintained on the project side of any property line separating the project from a rural residential or single-family residential zone.

4.     A minimum of 250 cubic feet of lockable, enclosed storage area per unit shall be provided within a garage/carport area, or within the main building.

5.     Fully screened recreation vehicle parking areas shall be provided or the development shall prohibit all parking of recreation vehicles.

6.     A minimum of 30 trees per net acre shall be required as part of the project landscaping; the trees shall consist of a combination of box specimen and 15-gallon sizes. Smaller sized trees may be approved provided the trees reach a desired maturity height within three years after project occupancy.

7.     A masonry wall, or equal six feet in height from the highest finished grade may be required along the project’s rear and side property lines, unless the property line separates two higher density residential projects. Where the adjacent grade of abutting property is four feet or more lower or higher than the project site, the masonry wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height. No walls are required in front or street side yards unless needed for noise attenuation and/or privacy. All masonry walls greater than four feet in height shall be planted with vine cover material (or equal landscaping).

8.     The following recreation facilities shall be provided unless waived during the design review process:

a.     Children’s play area;

b.     Swimming pool;

c.     Family picnic area.

9.     Auxiliary Structures/Equipment and Utilities. The following development standards related to auxiliary structures/equipment and utilities shall apply:

a.     All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to, air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets and adjacent properties;

b.     All ground-mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air condition units, and trash receptacle areas and adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials, shall be completely screened from surrounding properties by use of a wall, fence, or landscaping, or shall be enclosed within a building;

c.     All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad-mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with an appropriate screening treatment. All new and existing utility connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground, with the exception of existing overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34.5 KV and long­distance and main trunk communications facilities. Transformer, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities may be placed above ground provided they are screened with landscaping;

d.     Trash receptacles and adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials enclosed by a six-foot high masonry wall with view-obstructing gates shall be provided in an acceptable location;

e.     Outdoor storage and sales areas shall be entirely enclosed by solid masonry walls not less than six feet in height to adequately screen such areas from view. Reasonable substitutions such as masonry, wood or metal pilasters with wrought iron or chain link and view obscuring material may be approved during design review. This requirement does not apply to agriculture uses authorized per Chapter 30.33 (Urban Agriculture) of the Municipal Code.

10.   The front yard setbacks may be reduced to 15 feet provided that the subject parcel is substandard in either size or the depth of the lot, and an alley abuts the rear of the parcel where the required parking is to be located. No paving (impervious surfaces) shall be permitted in the front yard other than a pedestrian sidewalk to the front entry with the rest of the front yard being landscaped.

11.   Residences shall be oriented with the rear of the residence toward collector and larger streets where possible, consistent with the pattern of development in the neighborhood.

12.   Walkways connecting with city sidewalk/trail systems shall where practical be provided in new residential developments.

13.   Driveway or other concrete or asphalt concrete areas available for parking shall not exceed 50% where practical of the required front yard area.

14.   To the extent practical, access to the garage shall be from the alley or side street, if available.

E.     Residential 30 Overlay Zone (R-30 Overlay). In the higher density multiple-family residential R-30 Overlay zone, the following development standards shall apply in addition to those in subsections A and B of this section:

1.     The R-30 Overlay regulations shall apply to all areas of the City so designated on the zoning map.

2.     The R-30 Overlay provisions apply in addition to existing underlying zoning designations. Uses and standards of the underlying zone continue to apply until such time as a development is approved conforming with the provisions of R-30 Overlay zone prescribed in this subsection E.

3.     In order to rely on the provisions of the R-30 Overlay zone, sites must be developed to a minimum density of twenty-five (25) dwelling units per net acre and must be large enough to accommodate a minimum of 16 multifamily units.

4.     Units may be either rental or ownership dwellings.

5.     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 30.41.080, sites in the R-30 OL Zone shall not be permitted to pay in-lieu fees as an alternative to satisfying the affordable housing requirements in Chapter 30.41.

6.     Façade Wall Plane Requirements. Articulation of the wall plane shall be required for all front elevations, and for all side and rear elevations visible from a public right-of-way:

a.     No more than 75% of a building façade shall be on a single plane;

b.     An average of a five-foot offset, with a minimum of one foot, is required for the remaining 25% of the building face.

7.     Requirements for Transitions of R-30 Overlay if Adjacent to Existing Single-Family Development. If parcels in the R-30 Overlay zone share a property line with an adjacent parcel developed with an existing single-family residential use or duplex units, the following additional setback requirements apply to proposed projects in the R-30 Overlay zone to provide an appropriate transition to the existing use.

a.     Additional Setback Required. The third story of residential uses in the R-30 Overlay zone shall be set back 30 feet from any property line adjacent to a parcel with an existing single family residential use or duplex units.

8.     Permitted Improvements in the Required Setback Areas. Permitted improvements include landscaping, pathways, storm water quality facilities, passive site amenities, surface parking or similar facilities.

9.     Maximum Average Unit Size. Maximum average size of dwelling units in the project shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area for rental projects and 1,150 square feet of floor area for ownership projects. Ownership projects include all projects with a condominium map or where units may be sold individually. For purposes of compliance with this requirement, only floor area within dwelling units shall be used to calculate the average unit size for a project.

10.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 30.54, however, units which are deed-restricted to be affordable to very-low and low income households (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 50105 and 50079.5, respectively) shall provide off-street parking as follows:

Studios and one bedroom – 1.0 space per unit.

Two bedrooms – 1.5 spaces per unit.

Three+ bedrooms – 2.0 spaces per unit.

Guest Parking – Inclusive in standards above.

11.   Private Storage Space. A minimum of 200 cubic feet of lockable, enclosed storage area per unit shall be provided within a garage or carport area, or within the main building.

12.   Private and Common Open Space.

a.     Private Open Space. A minimum of 100 square feet per unit shall be provided as private open space for both ground floor units and units contained wholly on the second and third floors. For units wholly on the second and third floors, this open space may be provided by outdoor decks.

b.     Common Amenity Space. A minimum of 200 square feet per unit shall be provided as common amenity open space to be made available for use by all residents and/or tenants. Common amenity space is permitted to be located within the perimeter setback area.

c.     Private and common area may be combined for a total of 300 square feet per unit overall, located on-site.

13.   Project development shall comply with development standards found in Sections 30.16.010D.2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, and 14. If there is a conflict between the standards of this section and subsection D, the development standards of this section supersede.

F.     Accessory Structures. In all residential zones except for the R-30 Overlay zone, the following development standards related to accessory structures shall apply (refer to Chapter 30.48, Accessory Use Regulations, for additional standards related to accessory uses, location, quantity permitted, size, etc. of permitted accessory structures):

1.     A detached accessory structure shall meet the setback requirements of the main building for the front and street side yard areas.

2.     An accessory structure shall comply with applicable floor area ratio standards with the exception to play houses, storage sheds, and other structures that do not require a building permit.

3.     A detached accessory structure may be located within a required interior side yard or rear yard setback area provided that such structure is located no closer than five feet to an interior side or rear lot line, and shall not cover more than 50% of the required interior side or rear yard.

4.     A detached accessory structure shall be at least six feet from the main structure or other structures on the property with eaves not less than four feet from the main structure or other structure. A detached accessory structure shall have no projections beyond the five-foot setback established by paragraph 3 of this subsection E except for roof eaves. Roof eaves may project a maximum of two feet into the required five-foot setback.

5.     Accessory structures located within a required side yard or rear yard setback area shall be limited to one story and 12 feet in height. Roofs pitched not less than 3:12 may extend an additional two feet to a maximum 14 feet, to peak of roof. Detached accessory structures that meet the main building setbacks and do not project into any required setback area may have a building height as outlined for residential structures. See subsection B6 of this section. See paragraph 10 of this subsection E for standards related to minor accessory structures.

6.     Swimming pools and spas may be located within the required interior or rear yard provided they are no closer than three feet to interior side and rear lot lines. Swimming pools may occupy more than 50% of the required rear yard. Pool equipment may be located no closer than three feet to interior side, street side or rear lot lines, and shall be fully screened (i.e., landscaping or fencing) from any adjacent property. Swimming pools and spas shall comply with all fencing requirements as set forth in subsection F3 of this section.

7.     Canopies and covers for patios/decks with the floor less than 30 inches above grade may extend into a required rear or interior side yard provided that portions of such structures extending into the required yard area meet the following:

a.     The canopy, covered patio or deck shall not exceed 12 feet in height or project closer than five feet to an interior side yard lot line or closer than 10 feet at the rear lot line;

b.     The canopy or covers for a patio/deck shall be entirely open on at least three sides except for necessary supporting columns;

c.     The canopy shall not cover more than 50% of the required interior side or rear yard.

8.     Architectural features of the primary structure, such as porches, steps, eaves, awnings, chimneys, decks, balconies, stairways, wing walls, or bay windows, window seats, fireplaces, planters, roof overhangs and other architectural projections which do not create additional livable area may project into any front or rear yard not more than four feet. Such projections are permitted to project into any side yard area no more than that identified below:

 

 

Required Side Yard Setback

Max. Vertical Projections

Max. Horizontal Projections

5 feet

6 feet

2 feet

10 feet

8 feet

3 feet

15 feet

N/A

5 feet

20 feet

N/A

5 feet



 

The maximum vertical projection is the vertical height of a projection that would be permitted in the side yard setback area. The height is measured from the lowest point of the architectural feature to the highest point within the side yard setback.

9.     Minor accessory structures refers to non-habitable structures such as small play houses and storage sheds that are accessory to a residential use and that are not otherwise regulated by this chapter and that are not regulated with a building permit under the Uniform Building Code. Such structures may be permitted to encroach to interior side and rear property lines subject to the following limitations:

a.     Minor accessory structures may be located within the interior side yard and rear yard setback provided that a minimum of five feet is maintained for clear access between the minor accessory structure and any other structure, other than a fence, retaining wall, or similar structure.

b.     Minor accessory structures shall be limited to one story with a maximum height limit of 10 feet.

c.     Minor accessory structures shall not exceed 120 square feet of floor area or projected roof area per structure. No more than four minor accessory structures shall be allowed on any site.

d.     Accessory structures that otherwise meet the above limitations but require a permit under the Uniform Codes for plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or any other purposes shall not be considered a minor accessory structure and shall be subject to the issuance of a building permit and shall be subject to the typical setback and height standards outlined for accessory structures.

e.     When located within five feet of a side or rear property line, minor accessory structures may not cumulatively extend for more than 50% of the length of a rear property line or for more than 25% of the length of a side property line.

10.   For those parcels located under the Coastal Blufftop Overlay Zone Section 30.34.020B shall apply.

G.    Fences and Walls. In all residential zones, the following development standards related to fences and walls shall apply.

1.     Fence Regulations. The following development standards shall apply to fences and walls.

a.     Front Yard. In any front yard within 15 feet from the property line or road easement, a fence shall be limited to four feet in height, but may be constructed to a maximum of six feet provided that the top two feet of the fence is of material being at least 50% open which provides for visibility through that portion of the fence, except as provided herein and in subsections D, E and F of this section.

b.     Street Side, Interior Side and Rear Yard. In any street side yard, interior side yard or rear yard, a fence shall be limited to six feet in height, except as provided herein and in subsections D, E and F of this section.

c.     Street Corner, Sight Distance. Within 15 feet of an intersection of two streets or a private easement providing vehicular access to two or more primary dwelling units,

a fence may not exceed four feet. A greater setback may be required by the Development Services Director if the proposed wall or fence is determined to be in an unsafe location.

2.     Noise Attenuation Wall. A six-foot solid wall may be approved in any required setback upon review of a noise study prepared by a recognized acoustical engineer demonstrating the need for a noise attenuation wall and, if required by the Development Services Director, an analysis of adjacent road intersection demonstrates that adequate sight distance is maintained.

The residential fence standards contained in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this subsection G are summarized as follows:

Maximum Fence Height

 

FRONT

STREET

STREET CORNER

INTERIOR SIDE REAR

4 feet solid + 2 feet 50% open

6 feet solid

4 feet solid

6 feet solid

6 feet solid w/15-foot setback

4 feet w/15 feet from corner

6 feet solid w/15-foot setback

 

 

3.     Pool Fencing Requirements. A minimum five-foot fence with self-latching gate shall be provided to enclose all pools and spas as set forth in the City Building Code.

4.     Temporary Fence Materials. Fiberglass sheeting, bamboo sheeting, or other similar temporary material shall not be permitted as a fencing material on street yard frontages.

5.     Tennis Court Fencing. Fences surrounding tennis courts may be located within an interior side yard or rear yard provided that the fence is located no closer than five feet to an interior side or rear lot line and said fence does not exceed 12 feet in height.

6.     Barbed Wire and Electrical Fencing. Barbed wire and electrical fencing are prohibited in all residential zones, except for the following:

a.     Barbed wire is permitted for agricultural uses only.

b.     High voltage electrical fencing is permitted for containment of large animals subject to the following regulations:

i.      Electrical fencing may be maintained on the property line at a maximum of six feet in height. When the electrical fence is adjacent to a public road or access easement, the electrical fence shall be located on the inside of a nonelectrical fence.

ii.     Permits shall be obtained from the Building Department unless exempt. UL (Underwriters Laboratory) approved and other recognized agencies approved electrical fencing is exempt from permits.

iii.     Appropriate signage shall be posted to give notice of the electrical fencing.

H.    Connectivity of Adjacent Land Uses. Interconnecting pedestrian and bicycle circulation and vehicular circulation shall be provided between adjacent residential properties to the extent feasible.

1.     Pedestrian and bicycle interconnecting circulation includes, but is not limited to, safe and clearly designated passages, walkways, trails, courtyards, breezeways, and/or bridges.

2.     The interconnection of pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall include, but not be limited to, the dedication of easements for future connectivity and circulation between adjacent land uses.

(Ord. 89-41; Ord. 90-16; Ord. 92-21; Ord. 92-30; Ord. 93-14; Ord. 93-18; Ord. 94-02; Ord. 94-11; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2005-03; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2010-13; Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-04; Ord. 2019-24)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 30.16.020 Special Provisions.
A.     Lot Area Averaging. The purpose of lot area averaging is to allow flexibility in lot design so as to minimize grading and preserve steep natural slopes and other environmental resources. The intent is that lots shall relate to the topography so as to ensure the preservation of unique topographic features, riparian or woodland areas, and other significant features of community importance. Lot area averaging shall not be used to create recreational or other open space for the exclusive use of the residents of the subdivision or for the use of the general public on a fee or membership basis, or for any other purpose for which approval of a planned residential development or specific plan would be the appropriate process.

1.     Use Permit Required. Lot area averaging for subdivisions creating four or fewer lots in a residential zone may be approved pursuant to a minor conditional use permit, and subdivisions creating five or more lots are subject to major conditional use permit approval as described in Chapter 30.74.

2.     General Requirements. Except where specifically modified in this section, all coverage, height, parking, and other requirements shall be as described in Chapter 30.16. Lot area averaging projects shall be subject to the following criteria:

a.     The density of development (number of available lots) is calculated by the method described in this chapter. Lots designed for residential use may be smaller than that allowed by the underlying zoning; however, the density allowed by the underlying zoning of the subdivision shall not be exceeded except as permitted through approval of a density bonus pursuant to Section 30.16.020C.

b.     The area(s) to be left as open space is determined and the available residential lots are distributed within the non-open space area of the property.

c.     All lots and easements in the subdivision designated for open space shall be permanently reserved in a manner that makes the City of Encinitas a party to and entitled to enforce the reservation. For purposes of this section, “open space” shall mean those areas deemed by the City to be of significant community importance including, but not limited to, riparian and woodland habitat, sensitive biological areas, unique topology, and so forth.

d.     None of the lots, except any remainder parcels, can be further subdivided. A note on the final map and a covenant to that effect shall be recorded.

e.     Private streets shall be permitted.

B.     Planned Residential Development. The planned residential development (PRD) regulations are intended to facilitate development of areas zoned for residential use by permitting greater flexibility and, consequently, more creative and imaginative designs for the development of such residential areas than is generally possible under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. These regulations are further intended to promote more economical and efficient use of land while providing a harmonious variety of housing choices, a higher level of residential amenities, and preservation of natural resources and open space. Affordable housing opportunities are encouraged through the application of this section, the density bonus provisions pursuant to subsection C, and the accessory unit provisions pursuant to Section 30.48.040T. A PRD may be approved for any residentially-zoned property. Attached unit development within a PRD is permitted in a single-family zone provided that the Planning Commission finds that such development is compatible with, and will not adversely affect neighboring properties.

1.     Use Permit Required. All planned residential development proposals are subject to approval of a major conditional use permit as described in Chapter 30.74.

 

2.     Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application for a use permit for a planned residential development, a prospective applicant shall consult with the Planning and Building Department to obtain information and to inform the Department of the applicant’s intentions.

3.     General Requirements.

a.     Planned residential developments shall relate harmoniously to the topography of the site, shall make suitable provision for the preservation of steep slopes, water courses, drainage areas, wooded areas, rock outcroppings, and similar natural features, and shall otherwise be designed to retain such natural features to the greatest extent possible.

b.     Lots and structures shall be designed to follow and not significantly alter the natural contour of the land.

4.     Development Criteria. All height and other requirements not specifically modified by this section shall be as described in Chapter 30.16. All parking requirements not specifically modified by this section shall be as described in Chapter 30.54.

a.     Density. The density of development (number of available lots or units) is calculated as described in this chapter. The maximum density allowed by the project area’s underlying residential zoning shall not be exceeded except as permitted through approval of a density bonus pursuant to Section 30.16.020C.

When a proposed project area contains two or more residential zones, the maximum number of dwelling units shall be the total of the dwelling units permitted under each of the component zones. The dwelling units in a PRD containing two or more residential zones may be distributed within the development without regard to the boundaries of the component zones provided that the authorized agency makes the following findings:

i.      The density transfer is compatible with existing development in the surrounding area; and

ii.     The transferred density is consistent with applicable General Plan land use designations and policies.

b.     The area(s) to be left as open space is determined and the available residential lots are distributed within the non-open space area of the property;

c.     None of the lots, including the open space lot(s) but excluding any remainder parcels, can be further subdivided. A note on the final map and a covenant to that effect shall be recorded.

d.     Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width and Depth, Lot Coverage. Lot areas, lot width and depth, and lot coverages for a PRD shall be determined as part of the approval for a major conditional use permit.

e.     Setback Requirements.

i.      Perimeter. Buildings will be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all exterior property boundaries unless the Planning Commission finds that a lesser setback is appropriate, based on site-specific design.

ii.     No building, except as provided hereafter, shall be closer than five feet from any interior vehicular or pedestrian way, court, plaza, open parking lot or any other surfaced area reserved for public use or for the use in common by residents of the planned development. Such setback shall be generally measured from the nearest edge of a surfaced area; provided however, that where no sidewalk exists in conjunction with a public or private street, such setback shall be measured from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way or private road easement.

iii.     Between Buildings. A minimum of 10 feet shall be provided between all single story buildings (except minor accessory structures as defined in this chapter) located on the same lot.

iv.    Setback for Garages Having Straight-in Access From a Public or Private Street. There shall be a minimum setback of 20 feet from a garage to the nearest edge of a sidewalk, or where no sidewalk exists, the easement or right-of-way edge of a private or public street. The setback may be reduced to five feet provided that the width of the street or private driveway is adequate to accommodate parking on one side. Garages directly facing a street or driveway having less than the 20-foot setback shall be equipped with an automatic garage door opener.

v.     All other minimum setback requirements (except for bluff setbacks and setbacks from environmental resources) may be determined by the Planning Commission as part of the conditional use permit approval for a PRD.

f.      Prior to approval of a PRD, the applicant shall submit plans illustrating the proposed building envelopes on individual lots.

5.     Open Space. A PRD shall contain developed and undeveloped open space areas. Developed open space areas are intended to provide recreational facilities for either the common use and enjoyment of the residents and guests of the PRD or public use, while undeveloped open space is intended to preserve the site’s natural features. Land occupied by buildings, streets, driveways, vehicle parking spaces and/or storage, and trash and recycling storage may not be counted toward meeting this requirement.

a.     Amount of Required Open Space. A minimum of 40% of the site area shall consist of open space for all portions of a PRD.

b.     Developed (Recreational) Open Space. From the required open space as determined in paragraph 5a of this subsection B, developed open space shall be provided at a minimum ratio of 365 square feet for each single-family unit, and 260 square feet for each multifamily unit. This requirement may be satisfied with active and/or passive recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, the following: spas, saunas, swimming pools, cabanas, recreation rooms, ball courts, athletic fields, barbecue areas, “tot lots,” and flat grassy play areas with an average slope of less than 15%.

As provided in Section 23.98.050E, the developed (recreational) open space may be credited toward the City requirements for park land dedication.

 

c.     Undeveloped Open Space. The remainder of the required open space may be either improved or left in its native state to preserve significant natural features such as steep slopes, sensitive biological habitat, rock outcroppings, water courses, drainage areas, and the like. Areas devoted to natural or improved flood control channels and those areas encumbered by flood control or drainage easements, as well as riding and hiking trails designated on a community or sub regional plan map, may be counted toward satisfying this portion of the open space requirement.

That portion of the required open space the City deems worthy of preserving in its native state shall be protected by a recorded open space easement (or other instrument satisfactory to the City) to which the City is a part.

d.     To increase its functionality, open space areas shall have a minimum dimension of at least 10 feet in width, and should be linked together to the extent feasible.

e.     All parts of the required developed (recreational) open space shall be reserved for use in common by the residents and guests of the PRD. Alternatively, an applicant may elect to dedicate the open space to the City for public use, if such dedication is acceptable to the City. Areas designated for permanent open space shall be reserved for the use and enjoyment of the residents and their guests in a manner which makes the City a party to and entitled to enforce the reservation. If the developed open space is dedicated to the City for public use, adequate provisions for public use shall be made to the satisfaction of the Planning and Building Department and Parks Department. This is not to exclude public use of riding and hiking trails located within undeveloped open space as identified in paragraph 5c of this subsection B.

f.      Phasing. If the PRD is to be developed in phases, the PRD plan shall coordinate improvement of the open space, construction of buildings, and other improvements so that each development stage achieves a proportionate share of the total open space and recreational amenities.

6.     Street Improvements. All public streets within or abutting the proposed planned development shall be dedicated and improved to City specifications for the particular classification of street. When the developer desires to retain any private streets within the development, such streets and their maintenance shall conform to the applicable provisions of Municipal Code Chapter 24.29, and shall be consistent with the private road standards as adopted by the City Council.

7.     Parking and Recreational Vehicle Storage. Recreational vehicle storage facilities are not required. However, all open parking areas and any provided storage facilities shall be adequately screened with landscaping from nearby residences within the development, residentially zoned properties adjacent to the development boundaries, and any significant public views into the project. Parking spaces reserved for the storage of recreational vehicles or equipment shall not be counted toward fulfilling the development’s minimum parking requirement.

8.     The minimum lot size, design, setback (except for bluff setbacks and setbacks from environmental resources) and coverage standards for residential zones may be modified or reduced through a PRD project to allow for smaller lots, including individual “postage-stamp” lots with individual attached dwelling units.

9.     In planned residential developments, the need for trash receptacle areas and adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials will be evaluated on a case by case basis. If it is determined that a development project must provide the aforementioned areas, trash enclosures and adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials must be architecturally compatible with the development, screened from view of the roadway and convenient to all dwelling units within the project.

C.    Density Bonus Regulations.

1.     The purpose of this subsection is to specify how compliance with Government Code Sections 65915, 65915.5, 65915.7, and 65917 (“State Density Bonus Law”) will be implemented, as required by Government Code Section 65915(a).

2.     Definitions. The definitions found in State Density Bonus Law shall apply to the terms contained in this subsection.

3.     Applicability. A “housing development” as defined in State Density Bonus Law shall be eligible for a density bonus and other regulatory incentives that are provided by State Density Bonus Law when the applicant seeks and agrees to provide low, very-low, senior or moderate income housing units or units intended to serve transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons in the threshold amounts specified in State Density Bonus Law. A “housing development” includes only the residential component of a mixed use project.

A “commercial development” as defined in subsection C.11 shall be eligible for a commercial development bonus as provided in subsection C.11.

4.     Application Requirements.

a.     Any applicant requesting a density bonus and any incentive(s), waiver(s), parking reductions, or commercial development bonus provided by State Density Bonus Law shall submit a density bonus report as described below concurrently with the filing of the planning application for the first discretionary permit required for the housing or commercial development. The requests contained in the density bonus report shall be processed concurrently with the planning application. The applicant shall be informed whether the application is complete consistent with Government Code Section 65943.

b.     The density bonus report shall include the following minimum information:

i.      Requested Density Bonus for a Housing Development.

(A)   Summary table showing the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the zoning and general plan excluding any density bonus units, proposed affordable units by income level, proposed bonus percentage, number of density bonus units proposed, total number of dwelling units proposed on the site, and resulting density in units per acre.

(B)   A tentative map and/or preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, showing the number and location of all proposed units, designating the location of proposed affordable units and density bonus units.

(C)   The zoning and general plan designations and assessor’s parcel number(s) of the housing development site.

(D)   Calculation of the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the city’s zoning regulations and general plan for the housing development, excluding any density bonus units.

(E)   A description of all dwelling units existing on the site in the five-year period preceding the date of submittal of the application and identification of any units rented in the five-year period. If dwelling units on the site are currently rented, income and household size of all residents of currently occupied units, if known. If any dwelling units on the site were rented in the five-year period but are not currently rented, the income and household size of residents occupying dwelling units when the site contained the maximum number of dwelling units, if known.

(F)   Description of any recorded covenant, ordinance, or law applicable to the site that restricted rents to levels affordable to very low or lower income households in the five-year period preceding the date of submittal of the application.

(G)   If a density bonus is requested for a land donation, the location of the land to be dedicated, proof of site control, and reasonable documentation that each of the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915(g) can be met.

ii.     Requested Incentive(s) for a Housing Development. In the event an application proposes incentives for a housing development pursuant to State Density Bonus Law, the density bonus report shall include the following minimum information for each incentive requested, shown on a site plan if appropriate:

(A)   The city’s usual development standard and the requested development standard or regulatory incentive.

(B)   Except where mixed-use zoning is proposed as an incentive, reasonable documentation to show that any requested incentive will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or rents.

(C)   If approval of mixed use zoning is proposed, reasonable documentation that nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, that the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing development will be located, and that mixed use zoning will provide for affordable housing costs or rents.

iii.     Requested Waiver(s) for a Housing Development. In the event an application proposes waivers of development standards for a housing development pursuant to State Density Bonus Law, the density bonus report shall include the following minimum information for each waiver requested on each lot, shown on a site plan if appropriate:

(A)   The city’s usual development standard and the requested development standard.

(B)   Reasonable documentation that the development standards for which a waiver is requested will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by Government Code Section 65915.

iv.    Requested Parking Reduction for a Housing Development. In the event an application proposes a parking reduction for a housing development pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(p), a table showing parking required by the zoning regulations, parking proposed under Section 65915(p), and reasonable documentation that the project is eligible for the requested parking reduction.

v.     Child Care Facility for a Housing Development. If a density bonus or incentive is requested for a child care facility in a housing development, reasonable documentation that all of the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915(h) can be met.

vi.    Condominium Conversion. If a density bonus or incentive is requested for a condominium conversion, reasonable documentation that all of the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915.5 can be met.

vii.    Commercial Development Bonus. If a commercial development bonus is requested for a commercial development, the application shall include the proposed partnered housing agreement and the proposed commercial development bonus, as defined in subsection C.11, and reasonable documentation that each of the standards included in subparagraph C.11.c has been met.

viii.   Fee. Payment of any fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for staff time necessary to determine compliance of the Density Bonus Plan with State Density Bonus Law.

5.     Density Bonus.

a.     In determining the total number of units to be granted, each component of any density calculation, including base density and bonus density, resulting in fractional units shall be separately rounded up to the next whole number.

b.     When calculating the number of affordable units needed for a given density bonus, any fractions of affordable dwelling units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

 

c.     Each housing development is entitled to only one density bonus. If a housing development qualifies for a density bonus under more than one income category or additionally as senior housing or as housing intended to serve transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons, the applicant shall select the category under which the density bonus is granted. Density bonuses from more than one category may not be combined.

d.     The density bonus units shall not be included in determining the number of affordable units required to qualify a housing development for a density bonus pursuant to State Density Bonus Law.

e.     The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than the housing development is entitled to, or no density bonus, but no reduction will be permitted in the percentages of required affordable units contained in Government Code Section 65915(b), (c), and (f). Regardless of the number of affordable units, no housing development shall be entitled to a density bonus of more than 35 percent.

6.     Incentives.

a.     Incentives include “incentives and concessions” as defined in State Density Bonus Law. The number of incentives that may be requested shall be based upon the number the applicant is entitled to pursuant to State Density Bonus Law.

b.     Nothing in this subsection requires the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including, but not limited to, the provision of financial subsidies, publicly owned land, fee waivers, or waiver of dedication requirements. The city, at its sole discretion, may choose to provide such direct financial incentives.

7.     Local Coastal Plan Consistency.

a.     State Density Bonus Law provides that it shall not be construed to supersede or in any way alter or lessen the effect or application of the California Coastal Act of 1976, and further provides that the granting of a density bonus or an incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a local coastal plan amendment.

b.     For development within the coastal zone, any requested density bonus, incentive(s), waiver(s), parking reduction(s), or commercial development bonus shall be consistent with all applicable requirements of the certified Encinitas Local Coastal Program, with the exception of density.

8.     Review Procedures. All requests for density bonuses, incentives, parking reductions, waivers, or commercial development bonuses shall be considered and acted upon by the approval body with authority to approve the development within the timelines prescribed by Government Code Sections 65950 et seq., with right of appeal to the City Council.

a.     Eligibility for Density Bonus, Incentive(s), Parking Reduction, and/or Waiver(s) for a Housing Development. To ensure that an application for a housing development conforms with the provisions of State Density Bonus Law and the Coastal Act, the staff report presented to the decision-making body shall state whether the application conforms to the following requirements of state law:

i.      The housing development provides the affordable units or senior housing required by State Density Bonus Law to be eligible for the density bonus and any incentives, parking reduction, or waivers requested, including the replacement of units rented or formerly rented to low and very low income households as required by Government Code Section 65915(c)(3).

ii.     Any requested incentive will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or rents; except that, if a mixed-use development is requested, the application must instead meet all of the requirements of Government Code Section 65915(k)(2).

iii.     The development standards for which a waiver is requested would have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by Government Code Section 65915.

iv.    The housing development is eligible for any requested parking reductions under Government Code Section 65915(p).

v.     If the housing development is in the coastal zone, the requested density bonus and any requested incentive(s), waiver(s), or parking reduction(s) are consistent with all applicable requirements of the certified Encinitas Local Coastal Program, with the exception of density.

vi.    If the density bonus is based all or in part on donation of land, all of the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915(g) have been met.

vii.    If the density bonus or incentive is based all or in part on the inclusion of a child care facility, all of the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915(h) have been met.

viii.   If the density bonus or incentive is based all or in part on the inclusion of affordable units as part of a condominium conversion, all of the requirements included in Government Code Section 65915.5 have been met.

b.     If a commercial development bonus is requested for a commercial development, the decision-making body shall make a finding that the development complies with all of the requirements of subparagraph C.11.c, that the city has approved the partnered housing agreement, and that the commercial development bonus has been mutually agreed upon by the city and the commercial developer. If the project is in the coastal zone, the decision-making body shall also find that the commercial development bonus is consistent with all applicable requirements of the certified Encinitas Local Coastal Program, with the exception of density.

c.     The decision-making body shall grant an incentive requested by the applicant unless it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:

i.      The proposed incentive does not result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety code, or for affordable rents, as defined in Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code; or

ii.     The proposed incentive would be contrary to state or federal law; or

iii.     The proposed incentive would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the housing development unaffordable to low and moderate income households. For the purpose of this subsection, “specific adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date that the application for the housing development was deemed complete.

d.     The decision-making body shall grant the waiver of development standards requested by the applicant unless it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:

i.      The proposed waiver would be contrary to state or federal law; or

ii.     The proposed waiver would have an adverse impact on any real property listed in the California Register of Historic Resources; or

iii.     The proposed waiver would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety or the physical environment, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the housing development unaffordable to low and moderate income households. For the purpose of this subsection, “specific adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date that the application for the housing development was deemed complete.

e.     If any density bonus, incentive, parking reduction, waiver, or commercial development bonus is approved pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall enter into an affordable housing agreement or senior housing agreement with the city pursuant to subsection C.9.

9.     Affordable Housing Agreement and Senior Housing Agreement. Except where a density bonus, incentive, waiver, parking reduction, or commercial development bonus is provided for a market-rate senior housing development, the applicant shall enter into an affordable housing agreement with the city, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to be executed by the City Manager, to ensure that the requirements of this subsection are satisfied. The affordable housing agreement shall guarantee the affordability of the affordable units for a minimum of 55 years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program; shall identify the type, size and location of each affordable unit; and shall specify phasing of the affordable units in relation to the market-rate units.

Where a density bonus, waiver, or parking reduction is provided for a market-rate senior housing development, the applicant shall enter into a restrictive covenant with the city, running with the land, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to be executed by the City Manager, to require that the housing development be operated as “housing for older persons” consistent with state and federal fair housing laws.

The executed affordable housing agreement or senior housing agreement shall be recorded against the housing development prior to final or parcel map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for the housing development. The affordable housing agreement or senior housing agreement shall be binding on all future owners and successors in interest.

10.   Design and Quality.

a.     The city may not issue building permits for more than 50 percent of the market rate units until it has issued building permits for all of the affordable units, and the city may not approve any final inspections or certificates of occupancy for more than 50 percent of the market rate units until it has issued final inspections or certificates of occupancy for all of the affordable units.

b.     Affordable units shall be comparable in exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to market-rate units in the same housing development. Interior finishes and amenities may differ from those provided in the market rate units, but neither the workmanship nor the products may be of substandard or inferior quality as determined by the city.

c.     The number of bedrooms of the affordable units shall at least equal the minimum number of bedrooms of the market-rate units.

11.   Commercial Density Bonus.

a.     The following definitions shall apply to this subsection C.11:

i.      “Commercial development” means a development project for nonresidential uses.

ii.     “Commercial development bonus” means a modification of development standards mutually agreed upon by the city and a commercial developer and provided to a commercial development eligible for such a bonus under subparagraph C.11.c. Examples of a commercial development bonus include an increase in floor area ratio, increased building height, or reduced parking.

iii.     “Partnered housing agreement” means an agreement approved by the city between a commercial developer and a housing developer identifying how the commercial development will provide housing available at affordable ownership cost or affordable rent consistent with subparagraph C.11.c. A partnered housing agreement may consist of the formation of a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity recognized by the state in which the commercial developer and the housing developer are each partners, members, shareholders, or other participants, or a contract between the commercial developer and the housing developer for the development of both the commercial development and the housing development.

b.     When an applicant proposes to construct a commercial development and has entered into a partnered housing agreement approved by the city, the city shall grant a commercial development bonus mutually agreed upon by the developer and the city. The commercial development bonus shall not include a reduction or waiver of fees imposed on the commercial development to provide for affordable housing.

c.     The partnered housing agreement shall include all of the following provisions:

i.      The housing development shall be located either: (A) on the site of the commercial development; or (B) on a site within the city that is within one-half mile of a major transit stop and is located in close proximity to public amenities, including schools and employment centers.

ii.     At least 30 percent of the total units in the housing development shall be made available at affordable ownership cost or affordable rent for low-income households, or at least 15 percent of the total units in the housing development shall be made available at affordable ownership cost or affordable rent for very low-income households.

iii.     The commercial developer must agree either to directly build the affordable units; donate a site consistent with subparagraph (i) above for the affordable units; or make a cash payment to the housing developer for the affordable units.

d.     Any approved partnered housing agreement shall be described in the city’s housing element annual report as required by Government Code Section 65915.7(k).

12.   Interpretation. If any portion of this subsection conflicts with State Density Bonus Law or other applicable state law, state law shall supersede this subsection. Any ambiguities in this section shall be interpreted to be consistent with State Density Bonus Law. (Ord. 93-08; Ord. 93-14; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2015-05; Ord. 2016-07; Ord. 2017-13)

 

30.16.030 Mobile Home Park Zone (MHP).
A.     The provisions of this section, inclusive, shall be known as the “Mobilehome (Manufactured Home) Regulations.” The purpose of these provisions are to:

1.     Supplement the zone regulations applied to mobilehomes with additional standards and procedures which will promote a satisfactory living environment for residents of mobilehomes and will permit a mix of mobilehomes and other types of housing within the county.

2.     Better facilitate utilization of mobilehomes as a housing resource.

3.     Permit greater diversity in the types of mobilehome parks.

B.     Application. The provisions of this section, inclusive, shall be known as the “Standard Mobilehome Park Regulations.” These provisions shall apply to all uses classified in the mobilehome residential use type.

C.    Use Permit Required. A standard mobilehome park may be authorized where permitted by the use regulations upon the issuance of a major use permit as provided by the use permit procedure.

 

D.    Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application for a use permit for a mobilehome park, a prospective applicant shall consult with the Planning and Building Department to obtain information to inform the Department of the applicant’s intentions. The applicant shall provide a map showing the proposed mobilehome park site, existing topography, adjoining road rights-of-way, and public access.

E.     General Standards—Standard Mobile Parks.

1.     Minimum Area. A standard mobilehome park shall be not less than five acres in area.

2.     Density. A standard mobilehome park shall conform to the applicable density regulations.

3.     Reclassification. Prior to final construction approval for any new or expanded standard mobilehome park, the owner shall obtain a zone reclassification to a MHP zone. Such reclassification requirement may be waived by the Director when a tentative subdivision map is filed concurrently with the related use permit appreciation.

4.     Factory-Built Housing. Factory-built housing shall be attached to a permanent foundation system and conform to all other requirements of Section 18611 of the Health and Safety Code.

F.     General Development Criteria—Standard Mobilehome Parks.

1.     Compatibility with Adjacent Land Uses. The standard mobilehome park shall be designed and developed in a manner compatible with and complementary to existing and potential residential development in the immediate vicinity of the project site. Site planning on the perimeter shall give consideration to protection of the property and its residents from adverse surrounding influences, as well as protection of the surrounding areas from potentially adverse influences within the development. A mobilehome park shall relate harmoniously to the topography of its site, make suitable provision for reservation of water courses, wooded areas, rough terrain, and similar natural features and areas, and shall otherwise be so designed as to use such natural features and amenities to best advantage.

2.     Setback—Perimeter. Mobilehome and building within a standard mobilehome park shall maintain the following setbacks.

a.     A side yard and rear yard setback of at least 15 feet from the exterior boundary of the mobilehome park.

b.     A setback of 50 feet from the centerline of any street along the exterior boundary of the mobilehome park, except that when such street has a right-of-way greater than 60 feet, a setback of 20 feet shall be maintained from the nearest edge of the street right-of-way.

 

3.     Setbacks. No recreational area or facility specified in the major use permit as being intended for the use of more than one family shall be permitted within 100 feet of an external boundary which adjoins, or is separated only by a boundary street from land in any residential zone; provided, however, that where permanent intervening open space at least 100 feet in width exists on adjacent property, this restriction may be modified.

4.     Open Space. At least one substantial area of group usable open space shall be provided. Such area shall:

a.     Be of such size and shape that each side of the rectangle inscribed within it is at least 100 feet in length.

b.     Include outdoor recreational facilities for both active and passive recreation.

5.     Recreational Facilities. Completely enclosed indoor recreation facilities shall be provided and shall consist of not less than 10 square feet for each dwelling unit. Outdoor recreational facilities shall provide for both active and passive recreation. This recreation area shall be landscaped, improved and maintained.

6.     Interior Access Drives. Interior private access drives shall be paved with at least two inches of asphaltic concrete to a width of not less than 25 feet. All corners shall have a minimum 25-foot radius.

7.     Storage Area. Common storage areas shall be provided with an enclosed fenced area for the residents of the mobilehome park for the storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, travel trailers, and other licensed or unlicensed vehicles. This area shall total not less than 50 square feet for each mobilehome lot. All storage on a mobilehome lot shall be in accordance with the provisions of Title 25 of the California Administrative Code.

8.     Sewer and Water. Each mobilehome lot in a mobilehome park shall be provided with water and sewer connections in accordance with Title 25 of the California Administrative Code. Water shall be provided by a water supplier having a valid permit from the California Department of Health or the Department of Health Services. Public sewers shall be provided by a public agency which has obtained discharge requirements approved by the appropriate California Water Quality Control Board. Individual sewer disposal systems shall be approved by the Department of Health Services.

9.     Undergrounding. All sewer and water facilities, electric, gas, telephone, and television signal distribution systems shall be placed underground.

10.   Antennas. A master antenna television (MATV) system shall be provided with underground cable service to at least all mobilehome and other buildings containing dwelling units. This MATV system shall be provided at no charge for service. This requirement may be met by the provision of an underground cable television (CATV) system by a county-licensed CATV operator. No other television antennas shall be permitted unless authorized by the major use permit.

11.   Fire Protection. On and off-site fire hydrants and other fire protection facilities shall be installed as specified in the major use permit and shall be of a type approved by the chief of the local fire protection district.

 

12.   Night Lighting. Artificial light shall be provided and maintained for walks, driveways, parking areas, and other facilities as specified in Title 25 of the California Administrative Code, to assure safe and convenient nighttime use.

13.   Street Access. Each mobilehome park shall have direct vehicular access from a publicly maintained street. This requirement does not apply to the expansion of an existing mobilehome park when adequate access is obtained through the existing portion of the mobilehome park.

G.    Mobilehome Lot Development Criteria—Standard Mobilehome Parks. For purposes of mobilehome lot development criteria as used in this section, mobilehome shall also include factory-built housing as defined in Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code.

1.     Density of Occupation. Each mobilehome lot shall be designed to be occupied by one mobilehome and uses thereto.

2.     Lot Size. Each mobilehome shall have the minimum size indicated below based on its occupancy.

 

Occupancy

Minimum Lot Size (excluding interior access drives)

A mobilehome not more than 14 feet in width containing 1 dwelling unit

1,850 square feet

A mobilehome more than 14 feet in width containing 1 dwelling unit

3,000 square feet per dwelling unit

 

3.     Coverage. Not more than 75% of the area of a mobilehome lot shall be covered by the mobilehome and its accessory structures.

4.     Setback from Interior Access Drive. Each mobilehome lot shall have a front yard setback of not less than five feet extending the entire width of the mobilehome lot. A front yard will be measured from the nearest element of the mobilehome or any mobilehome accessory structure to the closest edge of the interior access drive.

5.     Side Yard Setback. Each mobilehome lot shall have a side yard in accordance with Title 25 of the California Administrative Code of not less than three feet in width along the entire length of the mobilehome lot. A mobilehome lot containing a mobilehome having a height of more than one story shall have a side yard of not less than five feet in width along the entire length of the mobilehome lot.

6.     Rear Yard Setback. Each mobilehome lot shall have a rear yard in accordance with Title 25 of the California Administrative Code of not less than three feet and shall extend across the entire width of the mobilehome lot. A mobilehome lot containing a mobilehome having a height of more than one story shall have a rear yard of not less than five feet along the entire width of the mobilehome lot.

7.     Access. All mobilehome lots and recreation facilities shall have access only from an interior access drive.

8.     Homes on a Permanent Foundation. No dwelling unit shall be placed on a permanent foundation in a mobilehome park where tenants rent or lease spaces to accommodate their individually owned units. These provisions shall not apply to subdivided parks where the dwelling units are not owned by the tenants or to parks where the minimum term of lease for a space is 55 years.

9.     Number of Dwelling Units to be Specified. Each lot in a mobilehome park shall be designated on the plot plan of the related use permit and shall specify the number of dwelling units permitted.

H.    Modification of Requirements. Modification of the development criteria of subsections F and G of this section may be granted by the approving authority when it determines that such modification would not be detrimental to the subject development, adjacent properties and residents, the public interest, or the General Plan. No modification shall be granted from any requirements specified in Title 25 of the California Administrative Code which are not subject to local modification.

I.      Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted. The following accessory uses and structures may be permitted in mobilehome parks provided that they conform to the requirements of Title 25 of the California Administrative Code:

1.     Convenience Structures. Awnings; portable, demountable, or permanent cabanas; storage cabinets and buildings; fences or windbreaks; carports; garages or porches; greenhouses; bathhouses; and other accessory structures permitted by Title 25 of the California Administrative Code.

2.     Recreational Facilities. Parks, playgrounds, riding and hiking trails, golf courses, lakes, stables and riding rings, recreational buildings, clubhouses, community centers, and similar uses and facilities; provided that all such uses and facilities are designed for and limited to use by residents of the mobilehome park and their guests, and that such uses and facilities are not authorized on the individual mobilehome lots.

J.     Subdivision of Existing Mobilehome Parks, Additional Requirements. A standard mobilehome park may be subdivided in accordance with the applicable provisions of City’s Municipal Code relating to subdivisions and shall also comply with the following additional requirements.

1.     Parks Established by Use Permit. Prior to approval of a final map for a standard mobilehome park, the owner shall apply for modification of the related use permit to add a condition to require reservation and maintenance of all common areas for common use and enjoyment of the residents in a manner which makes the City or a public district or a public agency a party to an entitled to enforce the reservation. Such reservation shall include arrangements, satisfactory to County Counsel, to assure maintenance of all buildings, structures, streets and landscaping located within the common areas.

2.     Parks Established Without Use Permit. An existing mobilehome park which was not established pursuant to the mobilehome park regulations may be subdivided only upon determination by the Director that such mobilehome park was legally established in accordance with the nonconformity regulations.

3.     All Existing Mobilehome Parks. All applications to subdivide an existing mobilehome park shall be accompanied by the following additional information and/or documents.

a.     The number of spaces within the existing park.

b.     A list of names and addresses of all tenants within the park for use by the Department in giving notice.

c.     The date of manufacture and size of each mobilehome and the current replacement value affected by the relocation. The replacement value shall be determined in the same manner as used by standard insurance replacement criteria.

d.     The estimated cost of relocation of each mobilehome affected by the proposed change of use.

e.     The length of tenancy by each tenant.

f.      The estimated income, age and number of tenants affected by the proposed change of use.

g.     The number of alternative sites available to the tenants including written commitments from the owners of those parks to accept the relocated units and tenants.

h.     A time table for vacating the existing park.

i.      A statement and concept plan indicating what use the park site is intended to accommodate.

j.      Evidence satisfactory to the Director that mutually acceptable agreements have been reached on the part of the park owner and all tenants to vacate the park upon recording of a final map. Such evidence may include, but is not limited to, the following:

i.      Written agreements to relocate mobilehomes; and

ii.     Assistance of low- and moderate-income tenants in the form of payment by the park owner of 80%, up to a maximum of $2,000.00, of the cost of relocating the mobilehome to another mobilehome park within 100 miles.

k.     If such evidence specified in paragraph 3j of this subsection J is not included in the application for subdivision, then the Director shall recommend reasonable conditions to mitigate any adverse impact on tenants of the mobilehome park to the approving authority to be included as a condition in the resolution of conditional approval for the subdivision.

4.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C of this section, a park owner who elects to give a five-year notice to subdivide may file a tentative map if evidence is provided that the following provisions will be completed before approval of the tentative map:

a.     The mobilehome park owner shall provide evidence that a notice to vacate pursuant to Section 798.56(f) of the Civil Code has been issued, and

b.     Informed each tenant of the rent and location of a number of available spaces equal to the number of occupied units to be displaced, and

c.     Assisted each tenant in relocating the tenant’s mobilehome to any new space within 100 miles in accordance with the following schedule:

 

 

If Tenant Vacates Before End Of

Portion of Expenses Paid by Owner

Up to a Maximum Of

1st year

80%

$2,000

2nd year

60%

1,500

3rd year

40%

1,000

4th year

20%

500

5th year

-0-

-0-

(Ord. 94-11; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.16.040 Packing Plant.
A.     Purpose. The provisions of this section, inclusive, shall be known as the “Packing Plant Regulations.” The purpose of this section is:

1.     To allow existing greenhouse operations to operate as a packing plant for fresh agricultural and horticultural products produced both on and off premises.

2.     To permit greater diversity for existing greenhouse structures.

3.     Existing greenhouses shall mean those greenhouses legally existing on the date of adoption of this section, July 27, 1994.

4.     The provisions of this section shall apply when the use of the property for packing of products exceeds 50% of the area and/or physical use of the premises during a six-month period of time.

B.     Application. The provisions of this section, inclusive, shall be known as the “Packing Plant Regulations.” These provisions shall apply to existing greenhouses in residential zones only.

C.    Major Use Permit Required. An existing greenhouse operation that meets the general standards listed below may revise its use to operate a packing plant upon issuance of a major use permit. A traffic study prepared in conformance with traffic engineering industry standards and an environmental initial assessment (AEIS) to determine impacts as required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) will be required unless information is submitted which will support the finding that the project is exempt from the requirement to prepare the traffic and/or environmental documents.

All required and/or applicable permits, including, but not limited to, the following, are to be obtained: building permits, fire permits, coastal development permits and engineering permits.

D.    General Standards (Applicable Upon Issuance of a Major Use Permit).

1.     Applicability. Existing greenhouse operations are permitted to revise the use to packing of fresh agricultural and horticultural products. These products can be produced either on or off premises. No other products other than agricultural and horticultural and other prepackaged customarily associated products may be packed or processed on the premises.

2.     Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for a parcel containing the packing plant operation is 2.5 acres. In the event that two or more contiguous lots are needed to comply with the minimum lot size standard, it will be necessary to process a lot consolidation application for development purposes. At such time that the operation ceases to exist and all applicable structures are removed from the premises, a request to rescind the lot consolidation may be submitted to the City of Encinitas to return the lots to the status prior to lot consolidation.

3.     Location. The property is to be located on a circulation element road or on a property where the traffic impacts to the residential street would have similar or less of an impact than a greenhouse operation, as shown by a complete traffic study to be submitted at the time of application.

4.     Density. The packing plant shall conform to the applicable density regulations of the underlying zone if dwelling units are a part of the project.

5.     Setbacks. The packing plant structures shall conform to the applicable setbacks for the zone where the property is located. All other standards not established in this section, including hours of operation, will be determined through the major use permit.

6.     Drainage Fees and Traffic Fees. Drainage fees and traffic fees will be calculated pursuant to the current fee schedule. Drainage fees are based on all new impervious surfaces; traffic fees are based on average daily trips, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

7.     Parking. The number of standard parking spaces required will be based on one parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area of the buildings unless a parking study by a qualified traffic engineer indicates fewer parking spaces would adequately handle the generated parking. No off-site parking will be counted toward the total parking space requirement. Loading/unloading spaces (docks) are to be located at the interior of the lot and screened from view of the neighbors.

8.     On-site Circulation. Interior circulation shall be required to facilitate the ease of vehicular movement without creating a disturbance to adjoining properties or street systems.

E.     Performance Standards.

1.     Noise. A noise study is required to provide evidence that the packing plant noise levels do not exceed the noise levels for the particular zone where the property is located. Heavy equipment and refrigeration machines are to be located in the interior of the building as far away as possible from the walls nearest to the property lines to avoid noise intrusion upon the neighbors.

2.     Lighting. All light sources shall be shielded in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets or adjoining properties.

3.     Screening. The packing plant is to be designed in such a way that it is screened so as to not have a visual or noise impact on adjacent residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 94-11; Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.16.050 Single Room Occupancy Housing.
A.     Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to allow the development of reduced-size dwelling units, defined as single room occupancy (SRO) housing units, with limited parking requirements to provide additional options for affordable housing opportunities. These SRO regulations are considered to be in addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning districts where SRO development is permitted.

B.     Density. For purposes of this section only, a “single room occupancy housing unit”, regardless of existence of a kitchen or kitchenette, shall be considered a “dwelling unit” for purposes of density.

 

C.    Standards.

1.     Single Room Occupancy Housing Units. The following standards shall apply to single room occupancy units. In the event of conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply.

a.     Unit Size. The minimum size of a unit shall be 150 square feet and the maximum size shall be 500 square feet.

b.     Bathroom Facilities. An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full bathroom facilities. A partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink; a full bathroom facility shall have a toilet, sink, and bathtub, shower, or bathtub/shower combination. If a full bathroom facility is not provided, common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with California Building Code for congregate residences with at least one full bathroom per every three units on a floor. The shared shower or bathtub facility shall be accessible from a common area or hallway. Each shared shower or bathtub facility shall be provided with an interior lockable door.

c.     Kitchen. An SRO unit is not required to, but may contain partial or full kitchen facilities. A full kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator, and a stove, range top, or oven. A partial kitchen is missing at least one of these appliances. If a full kitchen is not provided, common kitchen facilities shall be provided within the project for every 10 units or portion thereof or have at least one full kitchen per floor.

d.     Closet. Each SRO shall have a separate closet.

2.     Single Room Occupancy Housing Facility. In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district, the following standards shall apply to single room occupancy hotels. In the event of conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply.

a.     Common Area. Ten square feet of interior common space per unit shall be provided, with at least 200 square feet in area of interior common space, excluding janitorial storage, laundry facilities, and common hallways. All common areas shall comply with all applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessibility and adaptability requirements.

b.     Laundry Facilities. Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and dryer for every 10 units, with at least one washer and dryer per floor.

c.     Cleaning Supply Room. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility.

d.     Facility Management. An SRO facility with seven  or more units shall have an on-site manager and shall include a dwelling unit designated for the manager. An SRO facility with less than seven units shall provide a management office on-site.

e.     Facility Management Plan. A management plan shall be submitted with the development application for an SRO housing facility and shall be approved by the Development Services Director. The management plan shall contain management policies, maintenance plans, rental procedures, tenant rules, and security procedures.

 

f.      Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 30.54.030, unless the applicant provides substantial evidence demonstrating that the actual parking need is lower, subject to the approval of the Development Services Director.

g.     Accessibility. All SRO facilities shall comply with all applicable ADA accessibility and adaptability requirements. (Ord. 2019-16)

Chapter 30.20 COMMERCIAL ZONES
30.20.010 Development Standards.
A.     The development standards described in the table below shall apply to the commercial zones and are minimums unless otherwise stated. These standards shall apply to all land and buildings permitted in their respective commercial zones. In addition to the development standards provided in this chapter, each specific plan identified in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, may have separate development standards for commercial zones in their jurisdictional boundaries. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, for development standards in commercial zones within adopted specific plans.

 

ZONE REQUIREMENT

ZONE

OP

L-LC/LC

GC

L-VSC/VSC

1. Net Lot Area (sq. ft)

10,000

10,000

10,000

10,000

2. Lot Width (ft.)

100

100

100

100

3. Lot Depth (ft.)

100

100

100

100

4. Front Yard Setback (ft.)*

20

20

20

20

5. Side Yard Setback for each interior side (ft.)*

10/10

10/10

10/10

10/10

6. Side Yard Setback street side (ft.)*

20

20

20

20

7. Rear Yard Setback (ft.)

0

0

0

0

8. Lot Coverage (maximum percentage)

40%

30%

30%

35%

9. Building Height (maximum)

See Section 30.20.010C6

30 feet or 2 stories, whichever is less

 

 

 

10. Floor Area Ratio (maximum)

0.75

0.75

1.0

1.0

11. Off-Street Parking

(see Ch. 30.54)

 

 

 

12. Landscaping

15%

15%

15%

15%

*      Those zones or portions of zones located within specific plan areas shall have front yard and street side yard setbacks ranging from 0-20 feet with interior side yard setbacks ranging from 0-10 feet. Setbacks shall be established through design review and based on existing on- and off-site conditions, prevailing commercial district character, project design, traffic/circulation, building and site design, and the like.

 

B.     Site Planning. The following development standards related to general site planning shall apply:

1.     Site planning shall include consideration of adjoining parcels in terms of building configuration, building design, and scale of landscaping materials, circulation/parking configuration and access.

2.     The location of freestanding signs shall be integrated with other site planning elements, particularly building location and orientation, landscaping, and access points.

3.     All uses shall be located within an enclosed building unless authorized by a minor use permit. This requirement does not apply to agricultural uses authorized per Chapter 30.33 (Urban Agriculture) of the Municipal Code.

C.    Building Design. The following development standards related to building design shall apply:

1.     Visual relief shall be provided for linear buildings by the use of architectural projections or recessed areas that create the appearance of smaller adjoining buildings.

2.     The proportion, size, and shape of new or renovated buildings shall be compatible with existing desirable structures in the same area.

3.     All buildings are encouraged to minimize energy consumption, using such features as:

a.     Cogeneration;

b.     Solar access;

c.     South facing windows with eave coverage;

d.     Double glazed windows;

e.     Deciduous shade trees;

f.      Earth berming against exterior walls;

g.     Good ventilation;

h.     Efficient lighting;

i.      Day lighting.

4.     Buildings with a monochromatic appearance shall be avoided through the use of complementary colors.

5.     All signs associated with the buildings and site shall be integrated in terms of both architecture and color and shall comply with applicable City sign regulations contained in Chapter 30.60.

6.     Building heights may be modified or lowered in order to maintain a reasonable portion of the significant views enjoyed by nearby properties.

7.     Floor area ratio (FAR) shall limit the amount of floor area of a building on a lot or lots. For purposes of determining FAR, the following floor area is excluded.

a.     Floor area covered by a roof of open construction, such as a trellis, sunscreen or lattice work, where the total square footage of the open spaces of the covering is 50% or more of the total square footage of the floor area below.

b.     Floor area whose walls are of open construction, such as a trellis, sunscreen or lattice work, or partial wall where 50% or more of the total square footage of the vertical planes of the perimeter of the bulk floor area is open. Columns to support structure above shall not count toward this 50%, such that typical open building recess areas and patios are not counted as floor area.

c.     Floor area which has less than five feet of headroom between the floor and the ceiling.

d.     That portion of the floor in the basement.

e.     Floor area used solely for the capture, distribution or storage of solar energy.

D.    Additional Setbacks and Separation from Adjacent Land Uses. The following development standards related to setbacks and separation from adjacent land uses shall apply:

1.     A minimum setback of 25 feet shall be required wherever a lot in a commercial zone abuts a lot in any residential zone. This setback may be used for required open off-street parking areas;

2.     Where a commercial use abuts property in any residential zone, a masonry wall of no less than six feet in height and may be increased to eight feet to resolve any noise or visual impacts measured from the highest finished grade at the property line shall be erected and maintained as separation between the commercial and residential uses. Where the adjacent grade of the abutting residential property is four or more feet lower or higher than the commercial site, the masonry wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height. In addition, 15 gallon trees, 25 feet on center, and shrubbery between the trees shall be installed and maintained along the inside of the wall in a raised planter at least five feet in width to provide a dense landscape screen. Smaller sized trees may be approved provided the trees reach a desired maturity height within three years after project occupancy;

3.     To allow for flexibility in building design and variation/offset in the line of exterior building walls, an average setback may be used for front and street side yards which is not less than the minimum setback required by this chapter. Where an averaged setback is used, the minimum setback for any portion of the building shall be no less than 10 feet;

4.     Required front and street side yards shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall consist predominantly of plant materials except for necessary walks and driveways;

5.     Whenever off-street parking areas are situated across the street from property in a residential zone, a masonry wall or berm three feet in height shall be erected in the landscaped area between the required landscape area and the parking area to adequately screen the parking area from the residential properties.

E.     Access, Circulation, and Parking. The following development standards related to access, circulation, and parking shall apply:

1.     Where feasible, access shall be taken from adjoining collector or local roadways, rather than from a primary arterial or major roadway;

2.     Where access to a primary arterial or major roadway is necessary, access shall be limited to one point for each 300 feet of frontage or one point per parcel if frontage is less than 300 feet;

3.     Access points to adjoining lots shall be shared wherever feasible;

 

4.     Major access points to centers or groups of parcels sharing a single point of ingress and egress shall be coordinated with openings in existing or planned medians and access points on the opposite side of the roadway;

5.     Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation, and parking arrangements shall be required to facilitate the ease of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular movements between adjacent residential and non-residential land uses to the extent feasible;

a.     Pedestrian and bicycle interconnecting circulation includes, but is not limited to, safe and clearly designated passages, walkways, trails, courtyards, breezeways, and/or bridges.

b.     The interconnection of pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall include, but not be limited to, the dedication of easements for future connectivity and circulation between adjacent land uses.

6.     Sidewalks or other safe pedestrian walkways shall be located along streets in all commercial areas;

7.     Parking areas shall be screened by earth mounding, landscaping, low decorative walls, lowering the grade of the parking area below the street grade, or a combination of any of these methods.

F.     Auxiliary Structures/Equipment and Utilities. The following development standards related to auxiliary structures/equipment and utilities shall apply:

1.     All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to, air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets and adjacent properties;

2.     All ground mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, and trash receptacle areas, shall be completely screened from surrounding properties by use of a wall, fence, or landscaping, or shall be enclosed within a building;

3.     All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with an appropriate screening treatment. All new and existing utility connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground, with the exception of existing overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34.5 KV and long distance and main trunk communications facilities. Transformer, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities may be placed above ground provided they are screened with landscaping;

4.     Trash receptacles and adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials enclosed by a six-foot high masonry wall with view obstructing gates shall be provided in an acceptable location;

5.     Outdoor storage and sales areas shall be entirely enclosed by solid masonry walls not less than six feet in height to adequately screen such areas from view. Reasonable substitutions such as masonry, wood or metal pilasters with wrought iron or chain link and view obscuring material may be approved during design review. This requirement does not apply to temporary outdoor sales areas, car lots, or agricultural uses authorized per Chapter 30.33 (Urban Agriculture) of the Municipal Code.

G.    Landscaping. The following development standards related to landscaping shall apply:

1.     Landscaping in parking areas shall be predominantly trees to provide shade and visual relief;

2.     A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees shall be used for site landscaping, but deciduous trees shall be used primarily along southern and western building exposures to reduce summer sun exposure and increase winter sun exposure;

3.     Landscaping in parking areas shall include one 15-gallon tree for every six parking spaces evenly distributed throughout the parking area. Smaller sized trees may be approved provided the trees reach a desired maturity height within three years after project occupancy;

4.     Site landscaping shall include a combination of trees, shrubbery, vines, and groundcovers, all of which shall be drought tolerant;

5.     All landscaped areas shall be watered by an automatic irrigation system and regularly maintained in a healthy and thriving condition free of weeds, trash, and debris;

6.     A minimum of 15% of the site area shall be landscaped and street trees, at least 15 gallons in size, shall be provided at an average of every 40 feet along all street frontages;

7.     Varieties of plants chosen for landscaping may be restricted through the development review process to protect or preserve views. All required plantings shall be maintained in good growing condition, and whenever necessary, shall be replaced with new plant materials to ensure continued compliance with required landscaping, buffering, and screening requirements. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a manner that will not depreciate adjacent property values or otherwise adversely affect adjacent properties.

H.    Lighting. The following standards related to lighting shall apply:

1.     Lighting placed upon the building shall be architecturally integrated;

2.     All light sources shall be shielded in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets or adjoining properties. Illuminators should be integrated within the architecture of the building. Freestanding lamp posts shall be no taller than 18 feet. The intensity of light at the boundary of any commercial zone shall not exceed 75-foot lamberts from a source of reflected light.

I.      In addition to the above, a medical complex shall be allowed up to three stories and up to a 1.0 floor area ratio. FAR shall be established through a conditional use permit and approved by the authorized agency.

J.     Accessory Structures and Walls/Fences. The following development standards related to accessory structures and walls/fences shall apply:

1.     Accessory structures shall not be located in front of or on the street side of the main building(s);

2.     Accessory structures shall meet all of the setback requirements for main buildings;

3.     Architectural features, such as canopies, eaves, steps, balconies, stairways, and others may project not more than four feet into any required setback area;

4.     In any required front or street side yard area, a wall or fence shall not exceed four feet in height. In the required front or street side yard, where a retaining wall is used to increase usable lot area, a wall or fence not exceeding four feet in height may also be erected, provided that the wall or fence is set back a minimum of five feet from the retaining wall;

5.     Electrical fencing is prohibited. Barbed wire is permitted for security purposes. Design review under the authority of the Planning and Building Director shall be required when the barbed wire is visible from a public street.

K.     Condominium Conversion. The conversion of the project to condominium ownership shall meet all requirements of the zone to the maximum extent possible within the constraints of the existing development. In no case shall the requirements for the screening of storage/sales areas or mechanical equipment be waived. (Ord. 89-41; Ord. 93-14; Ord. 94-02; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-24)

 

30.20.020 Special Provisions.
A.     Planned Commercial Development. The planned commercial development (PCD) regulations are intended to facilitate development of areas zoned for commercial use by permitting greater flexibility in the commercial land use regulations and site development standards where flexibility or coordinated planning for a commercial site or contiguous commercial sites under multiple ownership will enhance the potential for superior urban design.

1.     Applicability. A planned commercial development proposal may be approved for any commercially zoned property as defined in Chapter 30.20.

2.     Zoning Map Amendment and Major Use Permit Required. Adoption of a PCD proposal shall be by amendment to the zoning map pursuant to Chapter 30.72 (Zoning Amendments), but the zoning map amendment shall not alter the commercial use regulations or development standards of the underlying zoning district. A major use permit, pursuant to Chapter 30.74 (Use Permits), approving a planned commercial development plan and/or text shall be adopted by the City Council at the same time as the zoning map amendment for the purpose of including conditions relating to the timing of development, transfer of floor area ratio (FAR), design, modification and restriction of uses, modifications to site development standards, and other appropriate matters.

3.     Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application for a zoning map amendment and major use permit for a planned commercial development proposal, it is recommended that a prospective applicant shall consult with the Planning and Building Department to obtain information and to inform the Department of the applicant’s intentions.

4.     Allowable Modifications to Development Standards and Use Regulations of the Underlying Zoning District. After a duly noticed public hearing, the following changes in development standards and use regulations may be approved as part of a planned commercial development plan and/or text:

a.     Allowable FAR may be transferred between contiguous lots or parcels within all commercial zoning districts with a planned commercial development proposal, provided that an instrument satisfactory to the City Attorney and Planning and Building Director shall be recorded limiting FAR on all contiguous lots or parcels from and to which FAR is transferred and the cumulative overall maximum FAR for all contiguous lots or parcels within the boundaries of the proposed PCD is not exceeded.

b.     Site development standards (not including maximum FAR, maximum building height standards, and maximum height of freestanding signs) of the base zoning district or overlay district with which a PCD designation is combined may be modified by a planned commercial development plan and/or text. In addition, the number of parking spaces required may be modified only as provided by Chapter 30.54 (Off-Street Parking).

 

c.     A planned commercial development plan and/or text may further restrict uses permitted in the underlying base district, but it may not permit additional uses that would not normally be permitted by right or by use permit within the underlying base zoning district in which the planned commercial development site plan and/or text is located. In all cases, a PCD plan and/or text may not increase the percentage of non-principal uses and required off-street parking allowed on the ground floor of property zoned for visitor-serving commercial (L-VSC and VSC).

5.     Application for Designation. A proposal for a PCD zoning map amendment and a major use permit for a PCD plan and/or text may be initiated by the City Council, or by 100% of the owners of the contiguous land area within the boundaries of the proposed planned commercial development as prescribed by Chapters 30.72 and 30.74 of this title.

An application initiated by property owners shall include:

a.     A map indicating the proposed boundaries of the PCD; the property limits of each property owner; and the applicable zoning and land use designations.

b.     A planned commercial development plan and/or text consisting of a map and textual material as may be necessary to delineate land uses and locations, existing and projected building types and designs, height and FAR, including any proposals for transfer of FAR, site development standards, including setbacks and lot coverage, existing and proposed open space, circulation, parking, and any other pertinent information as prescribed by Chapter 30.74.

c.     A comparison between underlying zoning district use regulations and development standards and any proposed modifications to these use regulations and development standards, together with a traffic report analyzing the resulting impacts on the traffic-carrying capacity of affected streets.

d.     A statement of justification for any requested modifications to use regulations or development standards and a description of the proposed means of mitigating any identified adverse effects.

e.     A statement of justification specifically addressing the required findings of fact for approval of a PCD proposal as specified in Section 30.20.020A6c.

f.      Any other informational items deemed necessary by the Planning and Building Director in order to fully analyze and review the proposed development.

6.     Adoption of a PCD Zoning Map Amendment and a PCD Plan and/or Text.

a.     The Planning Commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the application in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 30.72 and Chapter 30.74. Following the hearing, the Planning Commission may recommend approval of the zoning map amendment and the major use permit for the plan and/or text if they implement the purposes for which designation of a PCD is proposed, and shall transmit the application to the City Council.

b.     The City Council shall hold a duly noticed public hearing as provided by Chapters 30.72 and 30.74 on any PCD proposal transmitted to the City Council by the Planning Commission.

c.     Following the duly noticed public hearing, the City Council may adopt a zoning map amendment for a planned commercial development designation for the area described in the application and a major use permit for a planned commercial development plan and/or text only after making the findings of fact as prescribed by Chapters 30.72 and 30.74 in addition to the following findings of fact:

i.      That the approval of a planned commercial development zoning designation and a planned commercial development plan and/or text:

(A)   Will enhance the potential for superior urban design in comparison with commercial development under the regulations that would exist if the planned commercial development plan and/or text were not approved;

(B)   Is consistent with the adopted Land Use Element of the General Plan/Local Coastal Plan and other applicable General Plan/Local Coastal Plan policies;

(C)   Is consistent with all applicable provisions of the adopted Municipal Code and other applicable provisions of the Local Coastal Program Implementation Plan, except as otherwise modified by the PCD plan and/or text;

(D)   Is compatible with existing development in the surrounding area it will directly affect;

(E)   Includes adequate provisions for utilities, services, and emergency vehicle access, and public service demands will not exceed the capacity of existing systems and/or systems upgrades to be constructed concurrently with development of the PCD; and

ii.     That traffic expected to be generated by development in accordance with the planned commercial development plan and/or text will not exceed the City’s established acceptable capacity standard on all affected streets, as defined in the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

d.     The City Council’s final determination on a zoning map amendment for a planned commercial development proposal shall be by ordinance pursuant to Chapter 30.72. The adopting ordinance shall include a reference to the major use permit approving the planned commercial development plan and/or text for the property and a list of the modifications to the base zoning district regulations and permitted uses.

e.     The City Council’s final determination on a major use permit for a planned commercial development plan and/or text proposal shall be by written resolution pursuant to Chapter 30.74.

7.     Effective Date—Expiration of Approval—Extension of Approval—Modification of Approval.

a.     Effective Date. A planned commercial development plan and/or text shall become effective on the same date the ordinance adopting the planned commercial development zoning map amendment becomes effective or, when subject to the jurisdiction of the California Coastal Commission, upon the effective date of the Coastal Commission’s action on the Local Coastal Plan amendment pursuant to the provisions of this title.

In cases where only a planned commercial development text is approved, the planned commercial development text shall become effective on the same date the ordinance adopting the planned commercial development zoning map amendment becomes effective or, when subject to the jurisdiction of the California Coastal Commission, upon the effective date of the Coastal Commission’s action on the Local Coastal Plan amendment pursuant to the provisions of this title, and shall remain in effect indefinitely, unless a subsequent zoning map amendment is approved by the City Council.

b.     Expiration of Approval. A major use permit approving a planned commercial development plan and/or text shall lapse two years after the effective date of approval, or at an alternate time specified as a condition of approval unless:

i.      A grading permit has been issued and grading has been diligently pursued; or

ii.     A building permit has been issued. If the construction authorized by the building permit has not started within the time period specified in the City’s adopted building code, or, if the construction authorized by the building permit has started within the time period specified in the City’s adopted building code, but is not diligently pursued thereafter, the major use permit shall be deemed null and void; or

iii.     An occupancy permit has been issued; or

iv.    The approval is extended pursuant to Section 30.20.020A7c.

c.     Extension of Approval. The Director may, upon written request by the applicant, grant reasonable extensions of up to a total of two additional years for the major use permit approving a planned commercial development plan and/or text, provided no change in City policies has occurred which would be in conflict with the project. A request for such an extension shall be filed with the Director at least 15 days prior to the expiration of the major use permit, together with the required application fee. Upon proper filing of an application for extension, public notice shall be made according to the provisions of Chapter 30.01 as modified by Chapter 30.74. A public hearing is not required.

d.     Modification of Approval. A request for modifications in a major use permit for a planned commercial development plan and/or text, or a modification to the planned commercial development plan and/or text that would affect a condition of approval of the major use permit, shall be treated as a new application. The Director may waive the requirement for a new application if the modifications requested are minor, do not involve substantial alterations or addition to the planned commercial development plan and/or text or the conditions of approval, and are consistent with the intent of the approval or otherwise found to be in substantial conformance consistent with Section 30.74.105 of this title.

8.     Change of Zoning Map. Each PCD planned commercial development proposal shall be shown on the official zoning map by a “-PCD” designator applied to the base zoning district designation, numbered and identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting ordinance. The Director shall cause the official zoning map to be modified immediately following the effective date of the ordinance or, when subject to the jurisdiction of the California Coastal Commission, upon the effective date of the Coastal Commission’s action on the Local Coastal Plan amendment pursuant to the provisions of this title.

9.     Grading and Building Permits. All proposed structures or alterations must be consistent with the adopted planned commercial development plan and/or text for the issuance of grading and building permits.

B.     Time-Share Projects. Time-share projects as defined in Chapter 30.04 of this Code shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to the development standards and design criteria of the commercial zone as established by this chapter:

1.     All time-share projects shall require a major use permit. In addition to the mandatory findings required for the issuance of a conditional use permit under Chapter 30.74 (Use Permits), the authorized agency shall also find:

a.     That the time-share project is located in reasonable proximity to an existing resort or public recreation area, and therefore can financially and geographically function as a successful time-share project, and the project will thus not be disruptive to existing or future uses in the surrounding neighborhood.

b.     All proposals for time-share projects shall be accompanied by a detailed description of the methods to be employed to guarantee the adequacy, stability and continuity of a satisfactory level of management and maintenance. A management and maintenance plan shall be approved as, and made a part of, the permit for the project and shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office referenced to the subject property to ensure to successors in interest.

c.     For proposals in the Coastal Zone, the management and maintenance plan shall also demonstrate how a reasonable number of units within the time-share resort project will be made available to the general public for reasonably priced transient overnight accommodations during the course of each calendar year. The plan shall include an aggressive marketing program to maximize exposure of rental possibilities to a broad spectrum of the public. For properties located in all visitor serving commercial zones within the Coastal Zone, the specific criteria for the aggressive marketing program would be related to the specific project and would be reviewed and conditioned as part of the coastal development permit application to ensure 25% of the units are made available for the general public at all times. The marketing strategy would include a specific program to make sure that all vacant units are made available to the general public.

d.     A sales plan shall address the time, location and methods that will be used to sell the time-share resort estates or uses. Factors to be defined in the plan shall include, but are not limited to: the location, length, and marketing methods that will be used. The sales plan shall include such information as the Director requests for the purpose of determining that the sales effort of the project will not create a traffic or safety problem and will not otherwise be a nuisance to the neighborhood.

2.     The maximum time increment for recurrent exclusive use of occupancy of a time-share unit shall be no more than 30 consecutive days nor more than a total of 60 days in any 12-month period. However, a time-share project may include a permanent on-site management residence.

3.     Approval of a time-share project shall include approval to operate a hotel in the event that the project cannot be successfully marketed as a time-share project. (Ord. 95-02; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01)

Chapter 30.24 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONES
30.24.010 Development Standards.
A.     The development standards described in the table below shall apply to the light industrial zones and are minimums unless otherwise stated. These standards shall apply to all land and buildings permitted in their respective light industrial zone. In addition to the development standards provided in this chapter, each specific plan identified in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, may have separate development standards for industrial zones in their jurisdictional boundaries. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, for development standards in industrial zones within adopted specific plans.

 

ZONE REQUIREMENT

ZONE

LI

BP

1. Net Lot Area (sq. ft)

20,000

20,000

2. Lot Width (ft.)

100

100

3. Lot Depth (ft.)

150

150

4. Front Yard Setback (ft.)

20

20

5. Side Yard Setback (ft.) for each interior side

10/10

10/10

6. Side Yard Setback (ft.) street side

20

20

7. Rear Yard Setback (ft.)

0

0

8. Lot Coverage (maximum %)

40%

40%

9. Building Height (maximum) see Section 30.24.010C6

30 feet or 2 stories, whichever is less

 

10. Floor Area Ratio (maximum)

0.75

0.75

11. Off-Street Parking

(See Ch. 30.54)

 

12. Landscaping

15%

15%

 

B.     Site Planning. In all light industrial zones, the following development standards related to general site planning shall apply:

1.     Site planning shall include consideration of adjoining parcels in terms of building configuration, building design, scale of landscaping materials, circulation/parking configuration and access.

2.     The location of freestanding signs shall be integrated with other site planning elements, particularly building location and orientation, landscaping, and access points.

3.     All uses shall be located within an enclosed building unless authorized by a minor use permit.

C.    Building Design. In all light industrial zones, the following development standards related building design shall apply:

1.     Visual relief shall be provided for linear buildings by the use of architectural projections or recessed areas that create the appearance of smaller adjoining buildings.

2.     The proportion, size, and shape of new or renovated buildings shall be compatible with existing structures in the same area.

3.     All buildings are encouraged to minimize energy consumption, using such features as:

a.     Cogeneration;

b.     Solar access;

c.     South facing windows with eave coverage;

d.     Double glazed windows;

e.     Deciduous shade trees;

f.      Earth berming against exterior walls;

g.     Good ventilation;

h.     Efficient lighting;

i.      Day lighting.

4.     Buildings with a monochromatic appearance shall be avoided through the use of complementary colors.

5.     All signs associated with the buildings and site shall be integrated in terms of both architecture and color and shall comply with applicable City sign regulations contained in Chapter 30.60.

6.     Building heights may be modified or lowered in order to maintain a reasonable portion of the significant views enjoyed by nearby properties.

7.     Floor area ratio (FAR) shall limit the amount of floor area of a building on a lot or lots. For purposes of determining FAR, the following floor area is excluded.

a.     Floor area covered by a roof of open construction, such as a trellis, sunscreen or lattice work, where the total square footage of the open spaces of the covering is 50% or more of the total square footage of the floor area below.

b.     Floor area whose walls are of open construction, such as a trellis, sunscreen or lattice work, or partial wall where 50% or more of the total square footage of the vertical planes of the perimeter of the bulk floor area is open. Columns to support structure above shall not count toward this 50%, such that typical open building recess areas and patios are not counted as floor area.

c.     Floor area which has less than five feet of headroom between the floor and the ceiling.

d.     That portion of the floor in the basement.

e.     Floor area used solely for the capture, distribution or storage of solar energy.

D.    Additional Setbacks and Separation from Adjacent Land Uses. In all light industrial zones, the following development standards related to setbacks and separation from adjacent land uses shall apply:

1.     A minimum setback of 25 feet shall be required wherever a lot in the light industrial zone abuts a lot in any residential zone. This setback may be used for required open off-street parking areas.

2.     Where a light industrial use abuts property in any residential zone, a masonry wall (or equal) of no less than size six feet in height and may be increased to eight feet to resolve any noise or visual impacts measured from the highest finished grade at the property line shall be erected and maintained as separation between the industrial and residential uses. Where the adjacent grade of the abutting residential property is four or more feet lower or higher than the industrial site, the masonry wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height. In addition, 15-gallon trees, 25 feet on center, and shrubbery between the trees shall be installed and maintained along the inside of the wall in a raised planter at least five feet in width to provide a dense landscape screen. Smaller sized trees may be approved provided said trees reach a desired maturity height within three years after project occupancy.

3.     To allow for flexibility in building design and variation/offset in the line of exterior building walls, an average setback may be used for front and street side yards which is not less than the minimum setback required by this chapter. Where an averaged setback is used, the minimum setback for any portion of the building shall be no less than 10 feet.

4.     Required front and street side yards shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall consist predominantly of plant materials except for necessary walks and driveways.

5.     Whenever off-street parking areas are situated across the street from property in a residential zone, a masonry wall or berm three feet in height shall be erected in the landscaped area, between the required landscape area and the parking area, to adequately screen the parking area from the residential properties.

E.     Access, Circulation, and Parking. In all light industrial zones, the following development standards related to access, circulation, and parking shall apply:

1.     Where feasible, access shall be taken from adjoining collector or local roadways, rather than from a primary arterial or major roadway.

2.     Where access to a primary arterial or major roadway is necessary, access shall be limited to one point for each 300 feet of frontage or one point per parcel if frontage is less than 300 feet.

3.     Access points to adjoining lots shall be shared wherever feasible.

4.     Major access points to centers or groups of parcels sharing a single point of ingress and egress shall be coordinated with openings in existing or planned medians and access points on the opposite side of the roadway.

5.     Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation, and parking arrangements shall be required to facilitate the ease of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular movements between adjacent residential and non-residential land uses to the extent feasible;

 

a.     Pedestrian and bicycle interconnecting circulation includes, but is not limited to, safe and clearly designated passages, walkways, trails, courtyards, breezeways, and/or bridges.

b.     The interconnection of pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall include, but not be limited to, the dedication of easements for future connectivity and circulation between adjacent land uses.

6.     Sidewalks or other safe pedestrian walkways shall be located along streets in all light industrial areas.

7.     Parking areas shall be screened by earth mounding, landscaping, low decorative walls, lowering the grade of the parking area below the street grade, or a combination of any of these methods.

F.     Auxiliary Structures/Equipment and Utilities. In all light industrial zones, the following development standards related to auxiliary structures/equipment and utilities shall apply:

1.     All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to, air conditioning units, and mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on site parking areas, adjacent public streets and adjacent properties.

2.     All ground-mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units, and trash receptacle areas, shall be completely screened from surrounding properties by use of a wall, fence, or landscaping, or shall be enclosed within a building.

3.     All utility connections shall be designed to coordinate with the architectural elements of the site so as not to be exposed except where necessary. Pad mounted transformers and/or meter box locations shall be included in the site plan with an appropriate screening treatment. All new and existing utility connections within the boundaries of the project shall be placed underground, with the exception of existing overhead power transmission lines in excess of 34.5 KV and long distance and main trunk communications facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities may be placed above ground provided they are screened with landscaping.

4.     Trash receptacles and adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials enclosed by a six-foot high masonry wall with view obstructing gates shall be provided in an acceptable location.

5.     Outdoor storage and sales areas shall be entirely enclosed by solid masonry walls not less than six feet in height to adequately screen such areas from view. Reasonable substitutions such as masonry, wood or metal pilasters with wrought iron or chain link and view obscuring material may be approved during design review.

G.    Landscaping. In all light industrial zones, the following development standards related to landscaping shall apply:

1.     Landscaping in parking areas shall be predominantly trees to provide shade and visual relief.

2.     A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees shall be used for site landscaping, but deciduous trees shall be used primarily along southern and western building exposures to reduce summer sun exposure and increase winter sun exposure.

3.     Landscaping in parking areas shall include one 15-gallon tree for every six parking spaces evenly distributed throughout the parking area.

4.     Site landscaping shall include a combination of trees, shrubbery, vines, and groundcovers, all of which shall be drought tolerant.

5.     All landscaped areas shall be watered by an automatic irrigation system and regularly maintained in healthy and thriving condition free of weeds, trash, and debris.

6.     A minimum of 15% of the site area shall be landscaped and street trees at least 15 gallons in size shall be provided at an average of every 40 feet along all street frontages.

7.     Varieties of plants chosen for landscaping may be restricted through the development review process to protect or preserve views. All required plantings shall be maintained in good growing condition, and whenever necessary, shall be replaced with new plant materials to ensure continued compliance with required landscaping, buffering, and screening requirements. All landscaping shall be maintained in a manner that will not depreciate adjacent property values or otherwise adversely affect adjacent properties.

H.    Lighting. In all light industrial zones, the following standards related to lighting shall apply:

1.     Lighting placed upon the building shall be architecturally integrated.

2.     All light sources shall be shielded in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets or adjoining properties. Illuminators should be integrated within the architecture of the building. Freestanding lamp posts shall be no taller than 18 feet. The intensity of light at the boundary of any commercial zone shall not exceed 75-foot lamberts from a source of reflected light.

I.      Accessory Structures and Walls/Fences. In all light industrial zones, the following development standards related to accessory structures and walls/fences shall apply:

1.     Accessory structures shall not be located in front of or on the street side of the main building(s).

2.     Accessory structures shall meet all of the setback requirements for main buildings.

3.     Architectural features, such as canopies, eaves, steps, balconies, stairways, and others may project not more than four feet into any required setback area.

4.     In any required front or street side yard area, a wall or fence shall not exceed four feet in height. In the required front or street side yard, where a retaining wall is used to increase usable lot area, a wall or fence not exceeding four feet in height may also be erected, provided that the wall or fence is set back a minimum of five feet from the retaining wall.

5.     Electrical fencing is prohibited. Barbed wire is permitted for security purposes. Design review under the authority of the Planning and Building Director shall be required when the barbed wire is visible from a public street.

J.     Condominium Conversion. In all light industrial zones, the conversion of the project to condominium ownership shall meet all requirements of the zone to the maximum extent possible within the constraints of the existing development. In no case shall the requirements for the screening of storage/sales areas or mechanical equipment be waived. Specific waivers of other development standards may only be granted through the design review process. (Ord. 89-41; Ord. 93-14; Ord. 94-02; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2019-24)

Chapter 30.26 ADULT BUSINESSES
30.26.010 Zoning and Locational Restriction—Distance From Sensitive Uses.
A.     In addition to the requirements of this section, no adult businesses shall be established or located in any area in the City other than the General Commercial Zone (GC) and the ER-C zone of the Encinitas Ranch Specific Plan.

B.     In those zoning district(s) where the adult businesses regulated by this section would otherwise be permitted uses, it shall be unlawful to establish any adult business if the location is within 750 feet of any existing residential zone, park, religious institution, school, or child day care facility. The distances set forth above shall be measured between the nearest property line of the facility or tenant space housing the adult business or the proposed adult business, and the nearest property line included within the residential zone, park, religious institution, school or child day care facility, along a straight line extended between the two points.

C.    No building permit or zoning clearance, business tax receipt, adult business regulatory permit, or other permit or entitlement for use shall be legally valid if issued to any adult business proposed to operate or to be established in the City except if the zoning and locational requirements set forth above are satisfied. (Ord. 2002-02)

 

30.26.020 Subsequent Location of Sensitive Uses.
An adult business or establishment operating as a conforming use with an approved adult business regulatory permit from the City shall not be rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of residential zones, religious institution(s), school(s), day care facility, or park(s) within the locational limitations of Section 30.26.010. For purposes of this section, a use shall be deemed to be subsequently located if it occurs following the date an application for an adult business regulatory permit is filed pursuant to Chapter 6.10. (Ord. 2002-02)

 

30.26.030 Regulations Non-Exclusive.
The provisions of this section regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City of Encinitas. (Ord. 2002-02)

 

30.26.040 Public Nuisance.
In addition to the penalties set forth in this title, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. (Ord. 2002-02)

Chapter 30.28 PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC ZONE
30.28.010 Development Standards.
A.     The development standards described in the table below shall apply to the Public/Semi-Public Zone and are minimums unless otherwise stated. These standards shall apply to all land and buildings other than accessory buildings, which are regulated under Section 30.20.010J.

 

ZONE REQUIREMENT

P/SP ZONE

1. Net Lot Area (sq. ft)

10,000

2. Lot Width (ft.)

80

3. Lot Depth (ft.)

100

4. Front Yard Setback (ft.)

20

5. Side Yard Setback (ft.)

10/10 for each interior side

6. Side Yard Setback (ft.) street side

20

7. Rear Yard Setback (ft.)

10

8. Lot Coverage (maximum %)

50%

9. Building Height (maximum)

30 feet or 2 stories, whichever is less

10. Floor/Area Ratio (maximum)

0.50

11. Off-Street Parking

(See Chapter 30.54)

 

B.     Additional Development Standards. In the Public/Semi-Public Zone, all of the development standards identified for the commercial zone shall apply except those in Section 30.20.010A and D2.

C.    When authorized with approval of a major use permit, a medical complex may have a FAR of up to 1.0 and a maximum building height of three stories. For purposes of this section, a rooftop enclosure used solely to house mechanical equipment on a hospital structure may not be considered a story, provided the enclosure does not occupy more than one-third of the area of the floor immediately below and is set back a minimum 15 feet from the roof parapet or exterior wall plane of the floor immediately below. The mechanical enclosure criteria does not apply to a medical office building.

D.    Specified buildings associated with a public high school on a minimum 10-acre site may exceed the 30-foot height standard, provided any such building exceeding 30 feet is located a minimum 100 feet from exterior property boundaries, as follows: 40 feet maximum height for a theater/performing arts center or gymnasium; 34 feet maximum height for classrooms or any athletic building other than a gymnasium. Existing athletic field lights may exceed the height limits.

E.     Access, Circulation and Parking. In all public/semi-public zones, the following development standards related to access circulation, and parking shall apply:

1.     Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation, and parking arrangements shall be provided to facilitate the ease of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular movements between adjacent residential and non-residential land uses to the extent feasible.

2.     Pedestrian and bicycle interconnecting circulation includes, but is not limited to, safe and clearly designated passages, walkways, trails, courtyards, breezeways, and/or bridges.

3.     The interconnection of pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall include, but not be limited to, the dedication of easements for future connectivity and circulation between adjacent land uses.

(Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2007-05; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-24)

Chapter 30.32 ECOLOGICAL RESOURCE/OPEN SPACE/PARKS ZONE
30.32.010 Development Standards.
A.     Because use of land within the Ecological Resource/Open Space/Parks Zone is restricted to limited public activities and facilities, all forms of development are required to obtain a conditional use permit. In addition, conditionally permitted uses within Coastal Zone ecological resource areas designated ER/OS/P shall be restricted to essential utilities and utility lines, agricultural and horticultural production uses (limited to aquaculture*), public educational institution uses (limited to nature centers or interpretive facilities), fish hatchery uses (limited to aquaculture*), land reclamation project uses (limited to restoration projects), parks and recreational area uses (limited to public uses) and public recreational facility uses only as specified in Chapter 30.09 (Zoning Use Matrix) of this title.

B.     The developmental characteristics of public recreational activities vary greatly depending upon the specific site proposed for such activity; therefore, each activity or facility proposed will be subject to the standards described in the table below and are minimums unless otherwise stated. Other development standards contained in Chapters 30.16 and 30.20 may be applied through the conditional use permit process, as necessary, to insure compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding existing and planned uses.

C.    In addition to the development standards provided in this chapter, each specific plan identified in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, may have separate development standards for the Ecological Resource/Open Space/Parks Zone in their jurisdictional boundaries. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, for development standards in Ecological Resource/Open Space/Parks Zone within adopted specific plans.

 

 

ZONE REQUIREMENT

ER / OS ZONE

1. Lot Coverage (maximum %)

50%

2. Building Height (maximum)

30 ft. or 2 stories, whichever is less

3. Off-Street Parking

(See Chapter 30.54)

 

*      Aquaculture operations shall be land-based and shall not require intake or discharge from coastal waters. The operations shall use closed loop circulation systems and must use municipal water and sewer. In addition, operations shall be planned, sited, designed and managed to protect the quality and biological productivity of coastal waters, including the ocean, rivers, streams, wetlands, estuaries, lakes, and groundwater.

 

D.    Access, Circulation and Parking. In all ecological resource/open space/parks zones, the following development standards related to access, circulation, and parking shall apply;

1.     Reciprocal ingress and egress, circulation, and parking arrangements shall be considered to facilitate the ease of pedestrian and bicycle movements between adjacent land uses.

2.     Pedestrian and bicycle interconnecting circulation includes, but is not limited to, safe and clearly designated passages, walkways, trails, courtyards, breezeways, and/or bridges.

3.     The interconnection of pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall include, but not be limited to, the dedication of easements for future connectivity and circulation between adjacent land uses.

(Ord. 94-02; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2019-24)

Chapter 30.33 URBAN AGRICULTURE
30.33.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for agricultural uses and to establish a simplified permit for all agricultural uses in this title requiring a discretionary action.

B.     It is the intent of this chapter to further the greater public interest in allowing urban agriculture, which can provide multiple benefits to the community. Urban agriculture connects residents to the broader food system, builds community, and offers local food access, education, and economic development potential. Urban agricultural also encourages sustainable practices that protect the environment, public health, and animal welfare.

C.    In addition to the regulations set forth in this chapter, other chapters in the Municipal Code and each specific plan, identified in Chapter 30.84 (Specific Plans), have additional or separate regulations for agriculture. (Ord. 2016-08)

 

30.33.020 General requirements.
Urban agriculture activities shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and regulations, including, but not limited to, Certified Local Coastal Program, steep slope encroachment, grading, stormwater quality, clearing of natural vegetation, and buffers from sensitive habitat, wetlands and bluffs. (Ord. 2016-08)

 

30.33.030 Community garden.
A community garden is permitted with an agriculture permit in all zones except the L-VSC and VSC Zones and shall be subject to the following standards:

A.     Limitations. A community garden is prohibited within the Coastal Appeal Zone of the ER/OS/PK Zone.

B.     Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between sunrise and sunset. No motorized equipment shall be used on-site before 7:00 a.m. nor after 7:00 p.m.

C.    Parking. No parking is required if adequate on-street parking is available within 400 feet.

D.    Water Use. Potable water efficient irrigation techniques such as drip irrigation or micro-spray systems with timers to control watering times are encouraged. All hoses shall be equipped with a positive shut-off trigger nozzle. Mulching of planted areas is encouraged to retain plant moisture.

E.     Composting. Composting as an accessory use may be performed on-site within a composting container subject to the following standards:

1.     Composted materials shall be only those materials generated on-site or contributed by active members of the community garden.

2.     Composting containers shall be as close as practicable to the center of the property and/or community garden.

F.     The keeping of chickens (hens only, not roosters) at a community garden shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:

1.     Number of chickens and location of enclosure for chickens at a community garden shall comply with requirements of Chapter 30.55 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

2.     Sales. A community garden that sells its produce to a retailer, shall not locate the planting areas down slope from the enclosure and animal waste may not be used to fertilize the community garden. (Ord. 2016-08)

 

30.33.040 Agriculture permit.
A.     Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide procedures for the review and, where necessary, the imposition of special conditions of approval on proposed projects which involve special site or design requirements, operating characteristics or potential adverse effects on the surrounding area.

B.     Scope of Section. This section applies to all projects which are required by the provisions of the Encinitas Municipal Code to obtain an agriculture permit.

C.    Prohibitions.

1.     Without first having obtained an agriculture permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct a project when such a project is required by the provisions of the Encinitas Municipal Code to obtain an agriculture permit.

2.     No building permit or other development permits shall be issued relating to a project for which an agriculture permit is required by the provisions in the Encinitas Municipal Code until the agriculture permit is obtained.

3.     In the Coastal Zone, an agricultural permit shall not be issued without a coastal development permit.

D.    Authority to Grant Permit. The Director of Planning and Building is authorized to render a final determination on an application for an agriculture permit for a project.

E.     Notice. When a notice is required by the provisions of this section, notice shall be made in accordance with Section 30.01.070 (Noticed, Public Hearings) as modified by the following:

1.     The notice shall indicate the time prior to which written objections must be filed.

2.     When not specifically designated “adjacent property owners” as defined in Section 30.01.070 (Noticed, Public Hearings), public notice shall be mailed to all occupants and property owners of property located within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the hearing or the 20 nearest occupants and property owners, whichever creates the greater number of notices.

3.     An application for an agriculture permit for a project which requires an application for a use permit or any other discretionary permit shall be noticed as part of the noticing procedures required by this Code for such other applications.

4.     When a hearing is required, if the date, time and place of a subsequent hearing or a continued hearing is announced at the noticed time and place, no additional notice is required for the second or continued hearing, unless required by law. If no such announcement is made at the noticed time and place, the second or continued hearing shall be noticed in accordance with Chapter 30.01 as modified by this section.

F.     Procedure.

1.     Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application for an agriculture permit, a prospective applicant shall consult with the Planning and Building Department to obtain information and to inform the Department of the applicant’s intentions. Attending a staff advisory committee meeting satisfies this requirement.

2.     The owner or the owner’s authorized agent of the real property on which the project is proposed shall make application for an agriculture permit to the Director on a form approved by the Director. To be received, the application must be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council, together with whatever additional plans and information the Director deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section. The application shall include plans, maps and displays in sufficient detail to explain the proposed project’s compliance with the regulations contained in this section.

3.     The Director shall provide to the applicant the dates, times and places for consideration of the application and place the matter on the agenda of the authorized body.

4.     The Director is authorized to approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve an application for an agriculture permit in accordance with the provisions of this section, pursuant to Section 2.28.090.

G.    Final Determination.

1.     A final determination on the application for an agriculture permit shall be made by notice of determination by the Director setting forth the facts which support the action.

2.     An application for an agriculture permit shall be approved upon satisfying the following findings:

a.     Appropriate controls are in place that will ensure the project does not have a negative impact on adjacent properties, their owners and occupants, or the surrounding neighborhood.

b.     The proposed location, size, height, operations and other significant features of the use will be compatible with and is appropriate to the area in which it is located.

c.     The proposed use does not negatively affect the environment and has adequate safeguards in place to ensure ongoing protection of the environment.

d.     The proposed use is consistent with land uses permitted by the zone within which the site is located, and land uses consistent with the General Plan land use designation of the site.

e.     All applicable development standards are met.

3.     The final determination shall be posted at City Hall and mailed by first class mail to the applicant and shall become final 15 calendar days thereafter unless an appeal is filed*. (*See Chapter 1.12.020 through 1.12.060.)

H.    Imposition of Conditions.

1.     The Director shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect and enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding area, and to ensure that the proposed project for which agriculture permit approval is sought fully meets the criteria as set forth in this section.

2.     No agriculture permit shall require a condition which is not reasonably related to the project for which the agriculture permit is requested.

I.      Covenant. At the discretion of the Director, to accomplish the purposes of this section, the agriculture permit may be issued in the form of a covenant to be signed by the permittee and recorded with the County Recorder.

J.     Substantial Conformance with Agriculture Permit.

1.     Prior to the issuance of a building permit or any other permit required for the construction of a project for which an agriculture permit has been issued, the Director shall determine whether the plans submitted for such construction permit are in substantial conformance with the agriculture permit.

2.     The Director has the authority to find minor changes to project plans to be in substantial conformance if:

a.     No project condition is changed or deleted;

b.     No feature, facility or amenity is deleted or substantially altered which had been considered essential to the project’s quality, safety or function by the decision making body;

c.     No additional lots are added;

d.     No private or public open space is reduced in area or in its potential for use and enjoyment;

e.     The shape and bulk of structures, exterior building materials, landscaping, parking and access are substantially in conformance with the spirit and intent of the agriculture permit decision;

f.      The grading plan will not increase or decrease the final grade on any part of the site by more than three feet over or under the plan approved by the agriculture permit decision, unless the Director finds that the project is not substantially altered by the grading change; and

g.     No significant changes are made which, in the opinion of the Director, should be reviewed by the body which approved the original agriculture permit.

 

3.     A final determination made under this section shall be posted at City Hall and will be effective 15 calendar days thereafter, unless an appeal is filed. The City Council shall be notified of the final determination. If the determination is that the construction is in conformance, the applicant may proceed, at the applicant’s own risk, during the 15 calendar day appeal period. The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal the decision, or the applicant may apply for a modification of the agriculture permit.

K.     Modification of Agriculture Permit. An applicant may apply for a modification of a valid agriculture permit. The application procedures, hearings and notifications for any modification shall be the same as for a new application. If the Director finds that the modification is minor, and is required due to circumstances beyond the applicant’s control, the application for modification shall be given priority in scheduling for a decision.

L.     Expiration and Extension of Permit.

1.     At any time after two years from the date of approval or the expiration date of any extension granted in accordance with the Municipal Code, the City may require a noticed public hearing to be scheduled before the authorized agency to determine if there has been demonstrated a good faith intent to proceed in reliance on this approval. If the authorized agency finds that a good faith intent to proceed has not been demonstrated, the application shall be deemed expired as of the date of approval (or the expiration date of any extension). The determination of the authorized agency may be appealed to the City Council within 15 calendar days of the date of the determination.

2.     The Director may, upon written request by the applicant, grant reasonable extensions of up to a total of two years for the agriculture permit; provided no change in City policies has occurred which would be in conflict with the project. A request for such an extension shall be filed with the Director at least 15 calendar days prior to the expiration of the agriculture permit, together with the required application fee. Upon proper filing of an application for extension, public notice shall be made according to the provisions of Chapter 30.01 as modified by this chapter. A public hearing is not required.

M.    Suspension or Revocation of Agriculture Permit.

1.     The Director shall suspend any agriculture permit and issue no certificate of occupancy if the project is not constructed in compliance with the agriculture permit. The notice of suspension shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail and posted on the project site and regular public notice shall be provided.

2.     The suspension of the agriculture permit and the suspension of all related permits shall be lifted by the Director if:

a.     The applicant has completed all necessary changes to bring the project into compliance with the original agriculture permit, or with the agriculture permit as amended by an appeal or modification; or

b.     The final appeals body has determined that no violation of the agriculture permit exists.

c.     Additional conditions may be imposed as a condition of lifting the suspension.

3.     Following public notice, a suspended agriculture permit may be revoked by the Director when the responsible party cannot demonstrate the ability to resolve the issues resulting in the suspension involving noncompliance with conditions of the entitlement.

N.    Reapplications. At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of a disapproval of an application before filing a new application seeking substantially the same agriculture permit for any of the same property.

O.    Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a final determination made under the authority of this section may seek review by filing an appeal pursuant to the procedures within Chapter 1.12 of the Municipal Code.

A final determination by the Director shall be appealed only to the City Council. (Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2019-14)

Chapter 30.34 SPECIAL PURPOSE OVERLAY ZONES
30.34.010 Specific Plan Overlay Zone.
A.     The Specific Plan Overlay Zone is derived from Section 65450 et seq., of the California Government Code which provides for the preparation and adoption of specific plans for all or any part of the area covered by the General Plan to insure its systematic implementation. Each specific plan must be consistent with the General Plan and the specific plan may not allow more intensive land uses than those described in the General Plan for each land use designation.

B.     The specific plan is intended to regulate development within the City in accordance with the General Plan by allowing the creation of specific development criteria for certain areas and properties to promote more functional use of land, revitalization of existing development, and greater compatibility with surrounding land uses and environmental conditions.

 

30.34.020 Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone.
A.     Applicability. The Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone regulations shall apply to all areas of the City where site-specific analysis of the characteristics of a parcel of land indicate the presence of a coastal bluff.

B.     Development Standards. In addition to development and design regulations which otherwise apply, the following development standards shall apply to properties within the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone. In case of conflict between the following standards and other standards, regulations and guidelines applicable to a given property, the more restrictive shall regulate.

1.     With the following exceptions, no principal structure, accessory structure, facility or improvement shall be constructed, placed or installed within 40 feet of the top edge of the coastal bluff. Exceptions are as follows:

a.     Principal and accessory structures closer than 40 feet but not closer than 25 feet from the top edge of the coastal bluff, as reviewed and approved pursuant to subsection C, Development Processing and Approval, of this section. This exception to allow a minimum setback of no less than 25 feet shall be limited to additions or expansions to existing principal structures which are already located seaward of the 40-foot coastal blufftop setback, provided the proposed addition or expansion is located no further seaward than the existing principal structure, is set back a minimum of 25 feet from the coastal blufftop edge and the applicant agrees to remove the proposed addition or expansion, either in part or entirely, should it become threatened in the future. Any new construction shall be specifically designed and constructed such that it could be removed in the event of endangerment and the property owner shall agree to participate in any comprehensive plan adopted by the City to address coastal bluff recession and shoreline erosion problems in the City.

b.     Minor accessory structures and improvements located at grade, including landscaping, shall be allowed to within five feet of the top edge of the coastal bluff. Precautions must be taken when placing structures close to the bluff edge to ensure that the integrity of the bluff is not threatened. For the purposes of the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone, “minor accessory structures and improvements” are defined as those requiring no City approval or permit including a building or grading permit, and not attached to any principal or accessory structure which would require a permit. Grading for reasonable pedestrian access in and around a principal or accessory structure may be permitted by the City Engineer following review of a site specific soils report.

c.     Essential public improvements providing coastal access, protecting natural resources, or providing for public safety, as reviewed and approved pursuant to subsection C, Development Processing and Approval, of this section, including but not limited to, walkways leading to approved public beach access facilities, open fences for safety or resource protection, public seating benches, lighting standards, and signs.

d.     Drainage improvements within five feet of the top edge of coastal bluff as required to satisfy paragraph 5 of this subsection B.

2.     With the following exceptions, no structure, facility, improvement or activity shall be allowed on the face or at the base of a coastal bluff. Exceptions are:

a.     Public beach access facilities, as reviewed and approved pursuant to subsection C, Development Processing and Approval, of this section.

b.     Preemptive measures, as defined, justified and approved pursuant to subsection C, Development Processing and Approval, of this section.

c.     Landscape maintenance, as provided by paragraph 3 of this subsection B.

3.     Except as a part of approved preemptive measures pursuant to subsection C of this section, no grading or scraping shall be allowed on a bluff face, nor shall naturally occurring drought tolerant vegetation be voluntarily removed from the bluff face. Removal of nonnative vegetation in order to enhance the stability of the bluff face shall be allowed provided that the vegetation removal does not result in a bluff devoid of erosion protective vegetation. In order to preserve the bluff face in its then existing condition as much as reasonably necessary to prevent erosion, planting, trimming, removal of vegetation and other landscape related maintenance is allowed when accomplished by hand methods (i.e., no mechanical devices, other than customary hand tools).

All proposed grading and fill shall comply with the City’s Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, Chapter 23.24 of the Municipal Code.

4.     Existing legal structures and facilities within 40 feet of a bluff edge or on the face of a bluff may remain unchanged. Interior remodeling of existing buildings that does not involve changes to the existing foundation is allowed, but no expansion of building square footage or addition of stories within the 40-foot area shall be allowed except as permitted pursuant to paragraph 1a of this subsection B. Routine maintenance of existing facilities is allowed.

5.     With development of any new building or expansion of the floor area of an existing building, all drainage and runoff on the property shall be collected and delivered to approved drainage facilities. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission following recommendations from the City Engineer, all drainage shall be diverted away from within five feet of the edge and face of the bluff. Drainage improvements provided shall include roof drains. Any existing drainage systems which deliver runoff to or over the edge of the bluff shall be removed.

6.     Landscaping on beach bluff properties shall avoid the use of ice plant, and emphasize native and drought-tolerant plants in order to minimize irrigation requirements and reduce potential slide hazards due to over-watering. Landscaping materials shall be installed and maintained so as to assure that neither during growing stages nor upon reaching maturity will such materials obstruct views to and along the ocean and other scenic coastal areas from public vantage points. Irrigation shall be limited to hose bibs or water saving irrigation systems with automatic timers. No permanent irrigation system shall be permitted within 40 feet of the coastal bluff edge.

7.     Buildings and other structures shall be sited, designed and constructed so as not to obstruct views to and along the ocean and other scenic coastal areas from public vantage points.

8.     The design and exterior appearance of buildings and other structures visible from public vantage points shall be compatible with the scale and character of the surrounding development and protective of the natural scenic qualities of the bluffs.

9.     The City shall develop and adopt a comprehensive plan, based on the Beach Bluff Erosion Technical Report (prepared by Zeiser Kling Consultants Inc., dated January 24, 1994), to address the coastal bluff recession and shoreline erosion problems in the City. If a comprehensive plan is not submitted to, reviewed and approved by the Coastal Commission as an amendment to the City’s Local Coastal Program by November 17, 1996, then no additions or expansions to existing structures shall be permitted on coastal blufftop lots except for minor additions or expansions that comprise no greater than a 10% increase above the existing gross floor area or 250 square feet, whichever is greater, provided such additions/expansions are located at least 40 feet or more from the bluff edge, the addition/expansion is constructed in a manner so that it could be removed in its entirety, and the applicants agree to participate in any future comprehensive plan adopted by the City to address coastal bluff recession and shoreline erosion problems in the City. In addition, until such a comprehensive plan is approved by the City of Encinitas and the Coastal Commission as an amendment to the LCP, the City shall not permit the construction of seawalls, revetments, breakwaters, cribbing, or similar structures for coastal erosion except under circumstances where an existing principal structure is imminently threatened and, based on a thorough alternatives analysis, an emergency coastal development permit is issued and all emergency measures authorized by the emergency coastal permit are designed to eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts on local shoreline sand supply.

C.    Development Processing and Approval. In addition to findings and processing requirements otherwise applicable, the following establishes specific processing and finding requirements for proposed development within the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone. The Planning Commission shall be the authorized agency for reviewing and granting discretionary approvals for proposed development within the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone. Recommendations to the Planning Commission shall come from staff and qualified City consultants.

1.     Development and improvement in compliance with the development standards in subsection B, Development Standards, proposing no structure or facility on or within 40 feet of the top edge of the coastal bluff (except for minor accessory structures and improvements allowed pursuant to paragraph B1b of this section), and proposing no preemptive measure as defined below, shall be subject to the following: submittal and acceptance of a site-specific soils report and geotechnical review described by subsection D, Application Submittal Requirements, of this section. The authorized decision-making authority for the proposal shall make the findings required based on the soils report and geotechnical review for any project approval. A second story cantilevered portion of a structure which is demonstrated through standard engineering practices not to create an unnecessary surcharge load upon the bluff area may be permitted 20% beyond the top edge of bluff setback if a finding can be made by the authorized agency that no private or public views would be significantly impacted by the construction of the cantilevered portion of the structure.

2.     Development proposing principal or accessory structures (other than minor accessory structures and improvements) closer than 40 feet but not closer than 25 feet from the top edge of the bluff, proposing any essential public improvement on or within 40 feet of the top edge of the bluff, and/or proposing any preemptive measure shall be subject to the following requirements. For purposes of the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone, a “preemptive measure” is defined as any structure, device or facility necessary to strengthen a portion of the bluff and/or retard erosion when there is a demonstrated threat to a principal structure at the top of the bluff, as demonstrated in the required geotechnical report. A second story cantilevered portion of a structure which is demonstrated through standard engineering practices not to create an unnecessary surcharge load upon the bluff area may be permitted 20% beyond the top edge of bluff setback if a finding can be made by the authorized agency that no private or public views would be significantly impacted by the construction of the cantilevered portion of the structure.

a.     Submittal and acceptance of a site-specific soils report and geotechnical report as required by subsection D, Application Submittal Requirements, of this section. Any approval by the Planning Commission or, on appeal*, by the City Council must be able to make the findings below for the proposal based on the soils and geotechnical report. (*See Chapter 1.12.)

b.     When a preemptive measure is proposed, the following findings shall be made if the authorized agency determines to grant approval:

i.      The proposed measure must be demonstrated in the soils and geotechnical report to be substantially effective for the intended purpose of bluff erosion/failure protection, within the specific setting of the development site’s coastal bluffs. The report must analyze specific site proposed for development.

ii.     The proposed measure must be necessary for the protection of a principal structure on the blufftop to which there is a demonstrated threat as substantiated by the site specific geotechnical report.

iii.     The proposed measure will not directly or indirectly cause, promote or encourage bluff erosion or failure, either on site or for an adjacent property, within the site-specific setting as demonstrated in the soils and geotechnical report. Protection devices at the bluff base shall be designed so that additional erosion will not occur at the ends because of the device.

iv.    The proposed measure in design and appearance must be found to be visually compatible with the character of the surrounding area; where feasible, to restore and enhance visual quality in visually degraded areas; and not cause a significant alteration of the natural character of the bluff face.

v.     The proposed device/activity will not serve to unnecessarily restrict or reduce the existing beach width for use or access.

c.     No preemptive measure at the base of the bluff or along the beach shall be approved until a comprehensive plan is adopted as Council policy for such preemptive treatment, for at least the corresponding contiguous portion of the coastal bluff. Preemptive measures approved thereafter shall be consistent with the adopted plan.

D.    Application Submittal Requirements. Each application to the City for a permit or development approval for property under the Coastal Bluff Overlay Zone shall be accompanied by a soils report, and either a geotechnical review or geotechnical report as specified in subsection C, “Development Processing and Approval,” of this section. Each review/report shall be prepared by a certified engineering geologist who has been prequalified as knowledgeable in City standards, coastal engineering and engineering geology. The review/report shall certify that the development proposed will have no adverse affect on the stability of the bluff, will not endanger life or property, and that any proposed structure or facility is expected to be reasonably safe from failure and erosion over its lifetime without having to propose any shore or bluff stabilization to protect the structure in the future. Each review/report shall consider, describe and analyze the following:

1.     Cliff geometry and site topography, extending the surveying work beyond the site as needed to depict unusual geomorphic conditions that might affect the site.

2.     Historic, current and foreseeable cliffs erosion, including investigation or recorded land surveys and tax assessment records in addition to land use of historic maps and photographs where available and possible changes in shore configuration and sand transport.

3.     Geologic conditions, including soil, sediment and rock types and characteristics in addition to structural features, such as bedding, joints and faults.

4.     Evidence of past or potential landslide conditions, the implications of such conditions for the proposed development, and the potential effects of the development on landslide activity.

5.     Impact of construction activity on the stability of the site and adjacent area.

6.     Ground and surface water conditions and variations, including hydrologic changes caused by the development (e.g., introduction of irrigation water to the groundwater system; alterations in surface drainage).

7.     Potential erodibility of site and mitigating measures to be used to ensure minimized erosion problems during and after construction (i.e., landscaping and drainage design).

8.     Effects of marine erosion on seacliffs and estimated rate of erosion at the base of the bluff fronting the subject site based on current and historical data.

9.     Potential effects of seismic forces resulting from a maximum credible earthquake.

10.   Any other factors that might affect slope stability.

11.   Mitigation measures and alternative solutions for any potential impacts.

The report shall also express a professional opinion as to whether the project can be designed or located so that it will neither be subject to nor contribute to significant geologic instability throughout the life span of the project. The report shall use a current acceptable engineering stability analysis method and shall also describe the degree of uncertainty of analytical results due to assumptions and unknowns. The degree of analysis required shall be appropriate to the degree of potential risk presented by the site and the proposed project.

In addition to the above, each geotechnical report shall include identification of the daylight line behind the top of the bluff established by a bluff slope failure plane analysis. This slope failure analysis shall be performed according to geotechnical engineering standards, and shall:

a.     Cover all types of slope failure.

b.     Demonstrate a safety factor against slope failure of 1.5.

c.     Address a time period of analysis of 75 years.

Any newly proposed structure, other than a minor accessory structure or improvement, or a preemptive measure, which is proposed closer than 40 feet to the edge of the bluff shall be demonstrated to be behind the identified daylight line. Analysis methods alternate to a slope failure plane analysis which predict an equivalent level of safety may be proposed, and must be accepted in the City’s review of the geotechnical report.

Finally, each geotechnical report for a project including a proposed preemptive measure shall address those points specified in subsection C of this section as well as the following:

a.     Maximum expected wave height, design wave height, design constraints and frequency of overtopping;

b.     Normal and maximum tidal ranges;

c.     Estimated erosion rate with and without the proposed preemptive measure;

d.     Percent of beach quality sand within the bluff;

e.     Effect of the proposed structure on adjoining properties;

f.      Potential/effect of scouring at base of proposed structure;

g.     Design life of structure/maintenance provisions;

h.     Alternatives to the project design. Project alternatives shall include, but not be limited to, no project, relocation/removal of threatened portions of or the entire home and beach nourishment;

i.      Construction area and technique of construction;

j.      Certification that the structure is designed to withstand storms comparable to the winter storms of 1982-83.

E.     Temporary Emergency Protection Devices. Notwithstanding other regulations of the City, the City Manager or designee may permit the installation of temporary emergency protection/retention facilities (such as riprap, walls, erosion control devices, etc.) on or at the base of a coastal bluff if:

1.     Enclosed or principal buildings at the top of an ocean bluff are threatened by a potential bluff failure/collapse.

2.     The threat is imminent. A statement of a state-licensed engineer or engineering geologist establishing an imminent threat may be required if the City Engineer is not able to determine the imminent threat.

3.     The minimum size of rock rip-rap when placed as a temporary protective barrier, shall be three tons. If recommended in writing by a certified engineering geologist, smaller filter rock may be permitted behind and beneath the armor rock rip-rap in order to further cushion the bluff against wave action and to assist in maintaining sand behind the barrier. For placement of rip-rap, a site plan showing the limits of rip-rap to the satisfaction of the City Engineer shall constitute a construction plan. Documentation shall be provided that the proposed temporary protection is the minimum necessary to address the emergency and to assure minimal encroachment onto the sandy beach area. In addition, construction access and staging plans shall be submitted which document that no public beach parking areas will be utilized for the interim storage of materials or equipment and that overnight storage of equipment of materials will not be permitted on the sandy beach.

4.     Construction plans, prepared by a state-licensed civil engineer, are submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval, along with any supporting reports and design calculations as required by the City Engineer to verify the adequacy of the design.

5.     A covenant is provided which includes an obligation by the property owner to the City that the property owner will comply with all coastal regulations and conditions imposed by the California Coastal Commission including submitting and processing an application in order to receive a grant of approval for a permanent protection facility as applicable under the Municipal Code and the California Coastal Act. The property owner shall execute the City’s covenant prior to the installation of the protective facility, and submit it to the City Manager or designee together with the following:

a.     The covenant must have attached as Attachment “A” a legal description of the ocean bluff property owned by the property owner.

b.     The covenant must have attached as Attachment “B” a description of the proposed, protective retention barrier; the description must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Engineer.

c.     When the property owner executes the covenant, the property owner’s signature must be notarized.

d.     Security shall be provided by the owner in the form of a cash deposit, letter of credit or other deposit reasonably acceptable to the City Engineer, in order to guarantee the removal of any debris on the public beach when the debris is reasonably related to coastal bluff failure or construction to repair a bluff failure. The amount of security shall be fixed by the City in order to provide funding for removal of the debris if the applicant or applicant’s agents do not remove the debris from the public beach within a reasonable time.

e.     Following the property owner’s compliance with the above requirements, the City Manager or designee shall, in accordance with the authority granted to the City Manager by this chapter, authorize the property owner access rights across public property under the control of the City of Encinitas in order to construct the protective facility. When requesting access, the property owner shall submit an access plan showing approximate times of access, frequency of access and type of equipment which will need to access the site. The access plan shall be reviewed and approved by the designated official authorizing the access over public property.

f.      The amount of the deposit required in paragraph 5d of this subsection E shall be equal to 25% of the estimated construction cost of the temporary facility. This amount can be reduced by the City Engineer based upon an estimate of the costs to remove the debris furnished to the City Engineer by the property owner’s engineer or contractor. If the engineer’s estimate is not readily available, the City Engineer may estimate the cost of improvements and debris removal based upon regional construction costs or other data.

g.     The City Engineer may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon application therefor by the property owner; provided, however, that no such release shall be for an amount more than 25% of the total security given for faithful performance of the act or work and that the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than 50% of the total security given for faithful performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount less than that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this chapter or the agreement to remove the debris; nor shall the City Engineer be obligated to make a partial release of security.

h.     Upon the failure of the property owner to complete the removal of the debris on the public beaches within the time specified, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than 10 days served upon the person responsible for the performance thereof, or upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of such person, determine that the property owner is in default and may cause the improvement security, or such portion thereof as is necessary to complete the work or act and any other obligations of the property owner secured thereby, to be forfeited to the City.

i.      Upon completion of all obligations of the property owner under the provisions of this subsection E, the City shall, upon request of property owner, cause to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder the release of any covenants recorded against such property required by this section. (Ord. 91-19; Ord. 92-31; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 95-21; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.34.030 Hillside/Inland Bluff Overlay Zone.
A.     Applicability. The Hillside/Inland Bluff Overlay Zone regulations shall apply to all areas within the Special Study Overlay Zone where site-specific analysis indicates that 10% or more of the area of a parcel of land exceeds 25% slope. The Planning Commission shall be the authorized agency for reviewing and granting discretionary approvals for proposed development within the Hillside/Inland Bluff Overlay Zone.

B.     Development Standards.

1.     For proposed projects within the Hillside/Inland Bluff Overlay Zone, a slope analysis shall be submitted by the applicant based upon a topographic map with contour intervals not exceeding two feet. This analysis will describe the following slope categories in acres and will also graphically depict the location of each category on the topographic map:

a.     Less than 25% slope.

b.     25 to 40% slope.

c.     Greater than 40% slope.

2.     Where development is proposed on slopes of greater than 25% grade, the following standards shall apply:

a.     Slopes of greater than 25% grade shall be preserved in their natural state. Encroachment into slope areas, as specified below, shall be allowed when it is found that there is no feasible alternative siting or design which eliminates or substantially reduces the need for such construction or grading, and it has been found that the bulk and scale of the proposed structure has been minimized to the greatest extent feasible commensurate with preserving the physical slope characteristics of the site. An application proposing encroachment into slopes greater than 25% shall include, at a minimum, details as to the location of existing and future improvements, as well as the proposed building envelope for any future improvements, in order to enable the Planning Commission to assess bulk and scale. Complete architectural drawings are preferred. (Within the Coastal Zone and for purposes of this section, encroachment shall be defined as any area of greater than 25% slope in which the natural landform is altered by grading, construction, placement of structures or materials, removal of native vegetation, including clear-cutting for brush management purposes, or other operations which would render the area incapable of supporting native vegetation or being used as wildlife habitat due to the displacement required for the proposed building, accessory structures, paving or native vegetation clearance. Any encroachment shall be approved by the authorized agency and shall be a discretionary action based on the application.)

 

Percentage of Parcel in Slopes of Greater or Equal to 25% Grade

Maximum Encroachment in Areas of Slope Greater or Equal to 25% Grade

75% or less

10%

76 - 80%

12%

81 - 85%

14%

86 - 90%

16%

91 - 95%

18%

96 - 100%

20%

 

b.     The following uses and/or development features shall be exempt from the encroachment limitations described above:

i.      Public roadways identified in the Circulation Element of the City’s General Plan.

ii.     Public utility systems and system components.

iii.     Where it is determined during the design review process that no less environmentally damaging alternative exists, local public or private streets and driveways which are necessary for access to the more developable portions of a site on slopes of less than 25% grade.

c.     Where necessary to maintain a minimum development right (total disturbed area) on existing legal parcels, a deviation in the encroachment allowance of up to 20% of the entire parcel may be granted through the design review process.

3.     Where structures and improvements are proposed within any areas of greater than 25% slope, a geological reconnaissance report shall also be submitted.

4.     Where unstable conditions are indicated, but in the opinion of the City Engineer are not sufficiently defined in the geological reconnaissance report, a preliminary engineering geology report shall also be required. The preliminary engineering geology report shall include the results of subsurface investigations sufficient to identify the nature and magnitude of such unstable conditions; and shall identify alternative mitigation measures that may be needed.

5.     No principal structure or improvement or portion thereof shall be placed or erected, and no grading shall be undertaken, within 25 feet of any point along an inland bluff edge. Minor accessory structures and improvements located at grade, including landscaping, shall be allowed to within five feet of the top edge of any hillside/inland bluff subject to these regulations. For purposes of these regulations, “minor accessory structures and improvements” are defined as those requiring no City approval or permit including a building or grading permit, and not attached to any principal or accessory structure which would require a permit. Precautions must be taken when placing structures close to the bluff edge to ensure that the integrity of the bluff is not threatened. Grading for reasonable access in and around a principal or accessory structure may be permitted by the City Engineer following review of a site specific soils report.

6.     All slopes over 25% grade which remain undisturbed or which are restored or enhanced as a result of a development approval, shall be conserved as a condition of that approval through a deed restriction, open space easement, or other suitable device that will preclude any future development or grading of such slopes.

7.     A second story cantilevered portion of a structure which is demonstrated through standard engineering practices not to create an unnecessary surcharge load upon the bluff area may be permitted 20% beyond the top edge of bluff setback if a finding can be made by the authorized agency that no private or public views would be significantly impacted by the construction of the cantilevered portion of the structure. (Ord. 91-19; Ord. 92-31; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.34.040 Floodplain Overlay Zone.
A.     Applicability. The Floodplain Overlay Zone regulations shall apply to all areas within the Special Study Overlay Zone where site-specific analysis of the characteristics of a parcel of land indicate the presence of a flood channel, floodplain, or wetland; and to all areas identified as flood channels and floodplains on maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the current City and County maps designating the floodway/floodplain areas.

B.     Development Standards.

1.     Floodway.

a.     All floodway encroachments for transportation and utility crossings shall be offset by improvements or modifications to enable the passage of a 100-year frequency flood.

b.     Channelization or other substantial alteration of rivers or streams shall be limited to the following:

i.      Necessary water supply projects;

ii.     Flood control projects where no feasible method of protecting existing public or private structures exists and where such protection is necessary for public safety or to protect existing development;

iii.     Other development which has a primary element the improvement of fish and wildlife habitat.

c.     Any development which involves the channelization or other substantial alteration of rivers or streams shall comply with all of the following:

i.      Incorporate into the project design and mitigation measures, all relevant findings of hydrological studies for the watershed of the affected stream. Such findings include but are not limited to erosional characteristics, flow velocities, and sediment transport.

ii.     Incorporate mitigation measures designed to assure that there will be no increase in the peak runoff rate from the developed site as compared to the greatest discharge that would occur from the existing undeveloped site as a result of the intensity of rainfall expected during a six-hour period once every 10 years.

iii.     Minimize stream scour, avoid increases in and reduce, where feasible, the transport of stream sediment to downstream wetlands and other environmentally sensitive habitat areas. Acceptable techniques to control stream sediment include but are not limited to the planting of riparian vegetation in and near the stream.

iv.    If channelization is determined to be necessary, the floodway of the stream shall accommodate 100-year floods. To the extent feasible, all artificial channels shall consist of natural bottoms and sides and be designed and sized to accommodate existing riparian vegetation. Such vegetation shall be maintained at specified levels compatible with the design capacity of the channel.

2.     Floodplain. Within the 100-year floodplain, permanent structures, roads and other public improvements consistent with the Land Use Element will only be allowed if the applicant can demonstrate the following:

a.     The development is capable of withstanding periodic flooding, and does not require the construction of flood protective works, including, but not limited to, artificial flood channels, revetments, and levees. Flood protection works may be permitted to protect new or existing roads which are identified in the Circulation Element.

b.     Existing environmentally sensitive habitat areas will not be significantly adversely affected.

c.     The development will not result in a net reduction of existing riparian habitat areas within the floodplain.

d.     The design of the development incorporates the findings and recommendations of both a site specific area watershed hydrologic study in order that the development assures that there will be no increase in the peak runoff rate from the fully developed site as compared to the discharge that would be expected from the existing undeveloped site as a result of the most intense rainfall expected once every 10 years during a six-hour period; and neither significantly increases nor contributes to downstream bank erosion and sedimentation of wetlands, lagoons and other environmentally sensitive habitat areas.

e.     There will be no significant adverse water quality impacts to downstream wetlands, lagoons and other environmentally sensitive habitat areas.

3.     Wetlands.

a.     Within the Coastal Zone, the diking, filling, or dredging of open coastal waters, estuaries, and lakes shall be permitted where there is no feasible less environmentally-damaging alternative, and where feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize adverse environmental effects and shall be limited to the following newly permitted uses and activities:

i.      Incidental public service projects.

ii.     Mineral extraction, including sand for restoring beaches, except in environmentally sensitive areas.

iii.     Restoration purposes.

iv.    Nature study, aquaculture, or other similar resources dependent activities.

b.     In all areas, a buffer of 100 feet in width shall be maintained around all identified coastal lagoon wetland areas. A buffer of 100 feet in width shall be maintained around all other wetland areas, except riparian wetland areas which shall require a minimum 50-foot-wide buffer, unless the applicant demonstrates that a buffer of lesser width will protect the resources of the wetland, based on site-specific information. Such information shall include, but is not limited to, the type and size of the development and/or proposed mitigations (such as planting of vegetation or construction of fencing) which will also achieve the purposes of the buffer. The buffer shall be measured landward from the wetland. Maps and supplemental information submitted as part of the application shall be used to determine the specific boundaries of the wetland and buffer. The California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Army Corps of Engineers shall be consulted in such buffer determinations.

c.     All buildings or other improvements proposed to be placed or erected, and all grading activities proposed to be undertaken adjacent to a wetland shall be located so as not to contribute to increased sediment loading of the wetland, cause disturbance to its habitat values, or otherwise impair the functional capacity of the wetland. (Ord. 95-04; Ord. 97-17)

 

30.34.050 Cultural/Natural Resources Overlay Zone.
A.     Applicability. The Cultural/Natural Resources Overlay Zone regulations shall apply to all areas within the Special Study Overlay Zone where site-specific analysis of a parcel of land indicates the presence of important man-made cultural and historic resources, and ecologically sensitive plant and animal habitats.

B.     Cultural Resources.

1.     For proposed projects which involve parcels containing an archaeological site(s), a survey by a qualified professional archaeologist shall be submitted by the project applicant to determine the site’s significance and the need for project impact mitigation by preservation (open space easement), further study (excavation/salvage), or other methods.

2.     For proposed projects which involve parcels containing historical sites and/or structures, a survey by a qualified professional historian shall be submitted by the project applicant to determine the site/structure’s significance and the need for project impact mitigation by preservation, relocation, or other methods.

C.    Biotic Resources. For proposed projects within the C/NRO zone which involve parcels containing ecologically sensitive plant and animal habitats, a survey by a qualified professional biologist shall be submitted by the project applicant to determine the significance of the habitats and the need for project impact mitigation by reservation, re-establishment, or other methods.

 

30.34.060 Agricultural Overlay Zone.
A.     Applicability.

1.     The Agricultural Overlay Zone regulations shall apply to all properties presently under a Williamson Act contract and described on the City map delineating the AGO zone.

2.     The Agricultural Overlay Zone shall be removed from the properties subject to a Williamson Act contract by the City upon the expiration of that contract.

B.     Development Standards.

1.     No development other than that associated with the agricultural operation subject to the Williamson Act contract may occur within the AGO zone. This may include buildings and structures necessary to conduct the agricultural operation and dwelling units necessary to accommodate the owners and employees associated with that operation.

2.     Where buildings, structures, and dwelling units are constructed, they shall conform to the setback and height requirements of the rural residential zones.

3.     An open or landscaped buffer of at least 75 feet shall be provided along the boundary between all property subject to the AGO zone and properties not subject to the AGO zone.

 

30.34.070 Public Facilities Overlay Zone.
A.     The Public Facilities Overlay Zone is intended to identify the general areas where public uses and facilities such as schools, fire and police stations, and others will need to be located in the future.

B.     The precise location of future public uses and facilities may not be known during initial planning stages; therefore, the PFO zone is not property-specific and the general future locations of these uses and facilities within the City will be identified with a “P” symbol on the City Zoning Map.

C.    When the precise location for a particular public use/facility is determined the City will rezone the parcel(s) to public/semi-public and the associated “P” symbol will be removed from the Zoning Map.

 

30.34.080 Scenic/Visual Corridor Overlay Zone.
A.     Applicability. The Scenic/Visual Corridor Overlay Zone regulations shall apply to all properties within the scenic view corridor along scenic highways and adjacent to significant viewsheds and vista points as described in the visual resource sensitivity map of the Resource Management Element of the General Plan.

B.     Development Standards. When development is proposed on any properties within the Scenic View Corridor Overlay Zone, consideration will be given to the overall visual impact of the proposed project and conditions or limitations on project bulk, mass, height, architectural design, grading, and other visual factors may be applied to design review approval and shall be applied to coastal development permit approval.

C.    Historic Viewsheds. Potential historic viewsheds are defined on a case-by-case basis to ensure the preservation of resources which have been found to be of cultural or historic significance to the community. The Planning Commission shall be the authorized agency for reviewing and designing historic viewsheds via resolution, based on written descriptions, survey information, photos, maps or illustrations in accordance with General Plan Resource Management Element Policy 4.9. (Ord. 2011-01)

 

30.34.090 Southern El Camino Real Museum Overlay Zone.
A.     Intent. The intent of the Southern El Camino Real Museum Overlay Zone is:

1.     To allow museums subject to a major use permit, in a very limited portion of the RR-1 and R-3 zones that is characterized by a growing presence of institutional uses on a Circulation Element road.

2.     To supplement the zone regulations applied to museums with additional standards and procedures that will both promote a satisfactory living environment on surrounding residential properties and facilitate museum activities.

3.     To permit expanded artistic, scientific, cultural and historical activities for residents and visitors of both the City and region.

4.     To provide limited opportunities for on-site ancillary housing for a caretaker or guest professional, and his or her family, in order to facilitate the goals of the museum.

B.     Applicability. The Southern El Camino Real Museum Overlay Zone regulations shall apply to all properties identified accordingly on the City’s Zoning Map.

C.    Major Use Permit Required. A museum may be authorized in the Southern El Camino Real Museum Overlay Zone upon issuance of a major use permit as provided by the use permit procedures contained in Chapter 30.74.

D.    Development Standards (Applicable on Issuance of a Major Use Permit). In addition to a development and design standards which otherwise apply, the following development standards shall apply to all properties within the Southern El Camino Real Museum Special Purpose Overlay. In case of conflict between the following standards and other standards, regulations and guidelines applicable to a given property, the more restrictive shall regulate.

1.     Maximum Lot Coverage. 35% for buildings. Parking and other impervious surfaces exclusive of buildings shall not exceed 15%.

2.     Maximum Building Height. Building heights up to 30 feet may be considered if it can be found that the portion of the building outside of the standard 22-foot envelope maintains some of the significant views enjoyed by residents of nearby properties, and that the building is compatible in bulk and mass with buildings on neighboring properties.

3.     Residential Uses and Density. If the museum posses a residential component, not more than any one dwelling unit shall be constructed on the project site. Occupancy of the dwelling unit shall be limited to (i) a caretaker, and his or her family; or (ii) a professional of the arts or sciences, and his or her family, whose primary responsibility is to create or participate in the institution’s exhibits and programs, and facilitate achievement of the museum’s goals.

4.     Accessory Commercial Uses. Accessory commercial retail sales shall only be permitted when such sales are related to the museum’s exhibits and programs. The area devoted to commercial uses shall not exceed 10% of the museum’s total floor area or 1,500 square feet, whichever is more restrictive. The authorized agency may reduce the percentage of floor area dedicated to commercial uses, limit the type of commercial use or entirely prohibit any commercial, depending on the characteristics of the project site and surrounding area.

5.     Setbacks. Where the museum property is adjacent to a nonresidential use, museum structures shall generally conform to the applicable setbacks for the RR-1 and R-3 zones. Where the museum property is adjacent to a residential use, the setback shall be 50 feet from the property line. However, the authorized agency may decrease the setback standards adjacent to residential uses if it finds that a lesser setback is appropriate, based on the site-specific design.

6.     On-Site Parking. One parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area unless it is determined during the review of the project proposal that greater or fewer spaces are warranted. Modifications to the parking standard must be based on a parking study completed by a qualified traffic engineer. In addition to the parking spaces required for automobiles, suitable space shall be designated for bus loading and parking.

7.     Off-Site Parking Management Plan. Where the parking demand would exceed the on-site parking supply, an off-site parking program shall be provided that accommodates guests/visitors during special events. The major use permit may limit the number of special events per year. The off-site parking management plan shall include both parking management and transportation program.

8.     Other Standards. All other standards not established in this section will be determined through the major use permit.

E.     Special Regulations. In addition to development and design regulations which otherwise apply, the following development regulations shall apply to all properties within the Southern El Camino Real Museum Special Purpose Overlay. In case of conflict between the following regulations and other standards, regulations and guidelines applicable to a given property, the more restrictive shall regulate.

1.     Architectural Style, Building Materials, Signs and Landscape Design. The appearance of the developed site in terms of the arrangement, height, scale and architectural style of the buildings, location and design of parking areas, landscaping and other features shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding area. Architectural styles, building materials, signs and landscape designs that detract from the prevailing development character shall be avoided. Signs shall be constructed of natural materials such as wood and stone. Approval of any and all signs for the museum site must be a part of the major use permit.

2.     Off-Site Directional Signage. One off-site directional sign shall be permitted subject to the following:

a.     The placement of the directional sign shall be on private property and located at the nearest intersection of the local road that the museum fronts and the Circulation Element road.

b.     The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet.

3.     Traffic Study. A traffic study shall be submitted with the application. A professional transportation engineer must prepare the study according to City guidelines and standards. The following subjects must be evaluated in the study to the satisfaction of the City:

a.     Impacts to intersection operations, including changes in levels of service.

b.     Project-related and cumulative impacts to traffic load and capacity on affected streets, including changes in levels of service.

c.     Potential for increasing street or intersection hazards.

d.     Mitigation to reduce any identified traffic impacts to less than significant.

e.     Any additional traffic issues identified by the City.

4.     Noise. Amplification of music, human voices and other sources of sound are not permitted outside of the museum buildings. Sound from inside the building must otherwise be in compliance with the performance standards contained in Municipal Code Section 30.40.010.

5.     Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be limited to security lighting, parking lot lighting, and lighting required for use of outside courtyards, decks, walkways and stairs. Outside courtyards, decks, walkways and stairs shall only be illuminated during evening events except for minimal lighting required for the safety and security. All lighting sources shall be shielded in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets and adjoining properties. Illuminators should be integrated within the architecture of the building to the extent possible. Freestanding lampposts in the parking lot shall be no taller than 18 feet. A lighting plan with performance standards, prepared to the satisfaction of the City, shall be submitted with the use permit application. Use of motion detection lighting is preferred to lights activated manually or by a timer. The performance standards and other relevant criteria identified in the lighting plan shall be incorporated into the major use permit.

6.     Landscaping. Buildings, parking areas and outdoor areas shall be integrated with landscaping consistent with residential development. Landscaping, including plants, patios and decorative walls with plants, may be natural or designed for the site.

7.     Grounds Rentals. Rental of the museum grounds for special private and public events is permitted in accordance with the Municipal Code standards for special events and the conditions of the major use permit.

 

(Ord. 2001-08)

Chapter 30.36 EMERGENCY SHELTERS
30.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and guidelines for Emergency Shelters as defined by Encinitas Municipal Code Section 30.04.010 and as required by state law and to ensure that emergency shelters are developed in a manner that protects the health, safety, and welfare of those staying in the shelters and nearby residents and businesses. (Ord. 2019-01)

 

30.36.020 Standards for Emergency Shelters.
Emergency shelters are permitted in the Light Industrial (LI) and Business Park (BP) zones without discretionary review (including such discretionary approvals as design review and use permit approval) and are exempt from the provisions of Chapter 23.06 (Citizen Participation Plans) and the California Environmental Quality Act if in compliance with each of the standards listed in this section. However, emergency shelters are subject to the California Coastal Act. Each emergency shelter shall comply with the following standards:

A.     The emergency shelter must comply with all objective development standards within Encinitas Municipal Code Chapter 30.24 Light Industrial Zones, as applicable to its respective zone. However, if a conflict exists between the standards of Chapter 30.24 and the standards in this section, the standards of this section shall prevail.

B.     The emergency shelter shall be located a minimum distance of 299 feet from another emergency shelter, with said measurement being defined as the shortest distance between the outside walls of the structures housing such facilities.

C.    The number of beds permitted for each emergency shelter facility shall not exceed 45.

D.    The maximum length of stay by an individual in an emergency shelter shall not exceed six months in any consecutive 12-month period. No individual shall be denied emergency shelter because of inability to pay.

E.     Signage must meet standards set forth in Encinitas Municipal Code Chapter 30.60 Signs.

F.     If the site on which an emergency shelter is proposed to be located contains hazardous materials, remediation must be completed to a residential use standard before the site can be used for an emergency shelter.

G.    Off-street parking requirements shall comply with Encinitas Municipal Code Chapter 30.54 Off-Street Parking for industrial uses, unless the applicant provides substantial evidence demonstrating that the actual parking need is lower, subject to the approval of the Development Services Director.

H.    Bicycle parking shall be provided at a rate of one per five beds.

I.      The shelter shall be fully accessible to persons with a mobility impairment and those with a hearing or visual impairment.

J.     Each emergency shelter facility shall include an on-site interior client intake and waiting area of 10 square feet per bed. If an exterior waiting area is also provided, it shall be enclosed or screened from public view and adequate to prevent obstruction of the public right-of-way and required parking and access. No use permit shall be required for any outdoor use, including, without limitation, exterior waiting areas and exterior refuse areas, that are in conformance with the standards of this Chapter 30.36,

K.     The emergency shelter shall include an exterior refuse area screened from view.

L.     Lighting must meet standards for Light Industrial Zones set forth in Encinitas Municipal Code Section 30.24.010(H).

M.    Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or commencement of use of an emergency shelter, a written plan for operation of the facility shall be submitted for the review and written approval of the Development Services Director. The required plan shall include measures to address all of the following:

1.     At least one facility manager shall be on-site at all hours the facility is open and one hour prior to and after shelter operating hours. At least one full-time equivalent employee (who may include the facility manager) shall be required to be on-site during shelter operating hours for every 20 beds in the shelter.

2.     A set of facility rules and procedures for maintaining a safe environment within and outside the emergency shelter.

3.     The posting of signage regarding rules of the emergency shelter.

4.     Secure storage areas for personal possessions.

5.     Description and hours of any organized outdoor activities, to be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

6.     The procedures for admittance and discharge of clients.

7.     Staff training programs.

8.     Referral services and distribution of resources available to clients for obtaining permanent shelter, mental and physical health care, career development, and educational, legal, and other supportive services.

9.     Neighborhood outreach and communication strategies.

10.   The manner in which the cleaning of client’s clothing will be accommodated. On-site laundry facilities for clients are encouraged.

11.   The following services may be provided for the exclusive use or benefit of the shelter residents. If any are provided, the operation plan shall include a description of those services:

(a)    Childcare services, and evidence that any required state license has been secured;

(b)    Substance abuse counseling and evidence that any required state license has been secured;

(c)    Standards, rules, and operational arrangements covering on-site meal preparation and/or other means of providing food; and

(d)    The manner in which clients’ pets will be accommodated. (Ord. 2019-01; Ord. 2019-23)

Chapter 30.40 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
30.40.010 Purpose.
In order to minimize the adverse impacts of certain nuisance factors and to provide methods of determining compatibility between uses of land and buildings, the following performance standards are established.

A.     Noise.

1.     Every use shall be so operated that the noise generated does not exceed the following levels at or beyond the lot line and does not exceed the limits of any adjacent zone.

 

 

One Hour Average Sound Level

Adjacent Zone

7 a.m.—10 p.m.

10 p.m.—7 a.m.

RR, RR-1, RR-2, R-3, R-5, R-8

50 dB

45 dB

R-11, RS-11, R-15, R-20, R-25, MHP

55 dB

50 dB

OP, LLC, LC, GC, L-VSC, VSC

60 dB

55 dB

L-I, BP

60 dB

55 dB

 

2.     ER/OS/PK will be governed by the limits applicable to the source of the complaint.

3.     The interior noise level as required by the State of California Noise Insulation Standards must not exceed an LDN of 45 dB in multifamily dwellings. This interior standard shall also be applied to single-family dwellings and offices in the City of Encinitas.

4.     It shall be unlawful for any person on any property within the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on any other property to exceed the following:

a.     The noise standard for cumulative period of more than 30 minutes in any hour; or

b.     The noise standard plus five dB for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour; or

c.     The noise standard plus up to 15 dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

d.     The noise standard plus 20 dB for any period of time.

5.     For the purpose of this chapter, the peak decibel reading for a noise with a fluctuating noise level (such as live or recorded music) shall be considered as the noise level for the entire cumulative period of the noise. Likewise, the time between repetitive intermittent noises (such as banging, pounding, or hammering) shall be included in the cumulative of the noise.

B.     Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration generated at any time and measured at any point along the lot line of the lot on which the use is located shall not be perceptible and shall not exceed the following:

 

 

Vibration in Inches per Second

Adjacent Zone

Impact

Steady-State

Residential

.006

.003

Commercial

.010

.005

Light Industrial

.040

.020

Public/Semi-Public

.010

.005

 

C.    Radioactivity and Electrical Disturbances.

1.     Except with the prior approval of the City as to specific uses, the use of radioactive materials within any zone shall be limited to measuring, gauging, and calibration devices, as tracer elements in X-ray and like apparatus, and in connection with the processing and preservation of foods. In no event shall radioactivity, when measured at each lot line, be in excess of two and seven-tenths by 10 to the 11th power microcuries per milliliter of air at any moment of time. Transportation of radioactive materials shall be only along routes approved by City Council.

2.     All electrical and electronic devices and equipment shall be suitably wired, shielded, and controlled, so that in operation they shall not emit any electrical impulse or wave behind the lot lines, which will adversely affect the operation and control of any other suitably wired, shielded, and controlled electrical or electronic devices and equipment.

D.    Toxic Materials, Fire, and Explosion Hazards. All storage, use, transportation and disposal of toxic, flammable, or explosive materials shall be performed in compliance with the California Hazardous Substance Act and in accordance with guidelines issued by the County of San Diego Department of Health Services, Hazardous Materials Division on Hazardous Waste Requirements. All activities involving toxic, flammable, or explosive materials shall be provided and conducted with adequate safety and fire suppression devices as specified by the Fire District and per the City’s adopted fire code.

E.     Drainage, Grading and Erosion Control.

1.     All drainage shall be handled in a manner consistent with the Resource Management, Public Safety, and Land Use Elements of the General Plan.

2.     All surface drainage from any lot in the commercial and light industrial zones shall be collected and carried to the storm sewer in accordance with the City’s master drainage plan and in a manner acceptable to the City Engineer. In no case in these zones shall any surface drainage stream cross over the public sidewalk.

3.     Any necessary grading shall be accomplished in a manner consistent with procedures detailed in the City of Encinitas Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, Chapter 23.24 of the Municipal Code.

4.     All drainage courses should be maintained in natural or semi-natural vegetation utilizing existing topography as opposed to concrete ditches or pipes. Where possible, bridges should be used in lieu of pipes, box culverts or underground channels to preserve the integrity of the natural stream courses.

5.     In any land use and development, grading and vegetation removal shall be limited to the minimum necessary in order to reduce erosion and sedimentation to the maximum extent possible.

F.     Heat and Humidity. Heat, humidity, or other climatic influence from any source shall not be produced beyond the lot lines of the use.

G.    Odors, Toxic Gases, and Other Airborne Pollutants.

1.     Odors from gases or other odorous matter shall not be in such quantities as to create unreasonable odors at or beyond the lot line of the use.

2.     Toxic gases or matter shall not be emitted which can cause any damage to human health, animals, vegetation, or other forms of property or which cause soiling beyond the lot lines of any use.

3.     Applications for development proposals and/or use permits shall be evaluated for their potential to create odors that are offensive or inconsistent with the surrounding land use.

4.     Applications for development proposals and/or use permits shall be evaluated for their potential to increase the level of air pollution and/or particulates and shall be reviewed by Air Pollution Control District (APCD) when warranted.

H.    Outdoor Lighting Regulations. For what is known as the Olivenhain Community Area, the following standards shall apply:

1.     The purpose of these regulations is to preserve the quality of the night sky by minimizing light and glare nuisances to adjacent properties.

2.     The provision of this section shall apply to what is known as the Olivenhain Community Area.

3.     “Outdoor recreational facility” shall mean any public or private facility providing recreational opportunities, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, equestrian uses, public and private parks where lighting is necessary for night time use of the facility.

4.     The Illumination of outdoor recreational facilities shall be prohibited.

I.      Performance Standards—Residential Lighting Standards. The following standards shall apply to all residential and commercial zones:

1.     All light sources shall be shielded in such a manner that the light is directed away from streets or adjoining properties.

2.     All residential zones and commercial uses adjoining residential zones shall not have a measured sustained light standard in excess of one-half foot-candle at the property line. Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded so as to cause all emitted sustained light to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the luminary, lamp or light source used in the fixture. The luminary, lamp, or light source shall not be directly visible from any adjoining residential property. The shielding requirement shall not apply to decorative landscape lighting fixtures of 50 watts or less, holiday lighting, fossil fuel lighting, or lighting within front yard areas intended to illuminate pedestrian and vehicular entries, landscaping/architectural accents, and the like. Skylights, greenhouses, and agricultural production activities are exempt. Public recreational facilities are not subject to the performance standards, but shall be reviewed through the use permit process for minimizing lighting impacts to surrounding properties, and may be subject to restrictions on operating hours and/or the number and type of lighting fixtures.

3.     All interior commercial lots shall not have a measured sustained light standard in excess of one foot-candle at the property line. Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded so as to cause all emitted sustained light to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the luminary, lamp or light source used in the fixture. Skylights, greenhouses, and agricultural production activities are exempt. Permitted lighting structures and fixtures in place as of December 31, 2004 associated with commercial uses shall be considered legal nonconforming pursuant to Chapter 30.76 of the Municipal Code, and as such may remain in place as long as they are not altered in any manner increasing light trespass onto adjoining properties.

4.     Street lighting is not subject to the performance standards, but shall be evaluated through proposed subdivision/projects and street design projects consistent with the modification process to street standards in order to preserve dark sky character of the community, while still maintaining the necessary lighting for safety purposes.

J.     Height Regulations for Walls and Fences That Are Part of a Public Right-of-Way Design and Construction Project.

1.     The height of walls/fences that are part of a public right-of-way design and construction project shall be limited to the wall/fence height permitted by the underlying zone. When the wall/fence is located within a public right-of-way, the wall/fence height shall be limited to the wall/fence height permitted by the underlying zone of property located immediately adjacent to the section of public right-of-way where the wall/fence is to be constructed.

2.     The City Council may approve walls/fences up to a maximum of eight feet (measured from the highest grade adjacent to the wall) when a wall/fence is part of the right-of-way design, is an integral part of a road construction project, and is agreed to by the adjacent property owner(s). This regulation does not apply to N. & S. Coast Highway 101, La Costa Avenue and Manchester Avenue. (Ord. 90-04; Ord. 90-07; Ord. 2000-14; Ord. 2003-10)

Chapter 30.41 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
30.41.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the public welfare by establishing policies which require the development of housing affordable to households of very low, low, and moderate incomes, meet the City’s regional share of housing needs, and implement the goals and objectives of the general plan and housing element.

B.     The adoption of a citywide affordable housing program will also assist in alleviating the use of available residential land solely for the benefit of households that are able to afford market-rate housing because such market-rate development will be required to contribute to the provision of affordable housing for the entire Encinitas community, and will assist in alleviating the impacts of the service needs of households in new market-rate residential development by making additional affordable housing available.

C.    The City Council also desires to provide and maintain affordable housing opportunities in the community through an affordable housing program for both ownership and rental housing, and, in furtherance of that goal, includes rental affordable housing requirements in this chapter consistent with Government Code Sections 65850(g) and 65850.01.

D.    The City Council also desires to provide the residential development community with alternatives to construction of the affordable units on the same site as the market-rate residential development. Therefore, this chapter includes a menu of options from which a developer may select an alternative to the construction of affordable units on the same site as the market-rate residential development. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.020 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and interpretation of this chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this section shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Affordable housing agreement” means an agreement in conformance with Section 30.41.090B of this chapter between the City and an applicant, governing how the applicant shall comply with this chapter.

“Affordable housing fund” means a fund or account designated by the City to maintain and account for all monies received pursuant to this chapter.

“Affordable housing guidelines” means any requirements for implementation and administration of this chapter adopted by the City Council in accordance with Section 30.41.090D of this chapter.

“Affordable housing plan” means a plan containing all of the information specified in and submitted in conformance with Section 30.41.090A of this chapter, specifying the manner in which affordable units will be provided in conformance with this chapter and any adopted affordable housing guidelines.

“Affordable rent” means the maximum monthly rent, including an allowance for tenant paid utilities calculated at the specified income level in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 50053.

“Affordable sales price” means the maximum purchase price that will be affordable to the specified household at the specified income level, calculated in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5. The affordable sales price shall include a reasonable down payment, and monthly housing payments (including interest, principal, mortgage insurance, property taxes, homeowner’s insurance, homeowner’s association dues, and a reasonable allowance for property maintenance, repairs, and utilities), all as determined by the City.

“Affordable unit” means a dwelling unit required by this chapter to be affordable to very low or low-income households.

“Applicant” or “developer” means a person, persons, or entity that applies for a residential development and also includes the owner or owners of the property if the applicant does not own the property on which development is proposed.

“Approval body” means the body with the authority to approve the proposed residential development.

“Area median income” or “AMI” means the annual median income for San Diego County, adjusted for household size, as published periodically in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or its successor provision, or as established by the City of Encinitas in the event that such median income figures are no longer published periodically in the California Code of Regulations.

“Building permit” includes full structural building permits as well as partial permits such as foundation-only permits.

“Common ownership or control” refers to property owned or controlled by the same person, persons, or entity, or by separate entities in which any shareholder, partner, member, or family member of an investor of the entity owns 10% or more of the interest in the property.

“Construction phase” means either:

1.     The area included within one approved tentative subdivision map for residential development where a single final map implements the entire approved tentative map;

2.     The area included within each separate final map for residential development where multiple final maps implement the entire approved tentative map; or

3.     An area designated as a construction phase in an approved affordable housing plan.

“Contiguous property” means any parcel of land that is:

1.     Touching another parcel at any point;

2.     Separated from another parcel at any point only by a public right-of-way, private street or way, or public or private utility, service, or access easement; or

3.     Separated from another parcel only by other real property of the applicant which is not subject to the requirements of this chapter at the time of the planning permit application by the applicant.

“Density bonus units” means dwelling units approved in a residential development pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915 and Encinitas Municipal Code Section 30.16.020C that are in excess of the maximum allowable residential density otherwise permitted by the City of Encinitas.

“First approval” means the first of the following approvals to occur with respect to a residential development after the effective date of this chapter: planning permit or building permit.

“Low-income households” are those households whose income does not exceed the low-income limits applicable to San Diego County as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5 and published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and Community Development.

“Market-rate unit” means a new dwelling unit in a residential development that is not an affordable unit.

“Ownership residential development” means any residential development that includes the creation of one or more additional dwelling units that may be sold individually. A residential ownership development also includes the conversion of a residential rental development to a residential ownership development.

“Planning area” means one of the five Encinitas communities (Cardiff, New Encinitas, Leucadia, Old Encinitas, and Olivenhain).

“Planning permit” means any discretionary approval of a residential development, including, but not limited to, a general or specific plan adoption or amendment, rezoning, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variances, design review, or coastal development permit.

“Rental residential development” means any residential development that creates one or more additional dwelling units that cannot be lawfully sold individually in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act.

“Residential development” means any development for which a planning permit or building permit is required that includes the creation of one or more additional dwelling units, conversion of nonresidential uses to dwelling units, or the conversion of a use from a residential rental development to a residential ownership development.

“Surplus affordable unit” means any affordable unit constructed in connection with residential development and without any public subsidy, which exceeds the numerical requirement for affordable units for that residential development under this chapter.

“Very low-income households” are those households whose income does not exceed the very low-income limits applicable to San Diego County as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50105 and published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and Community Development. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.030 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:

A.     All residential development except for any residential development exempt under Section 30.41.040; and

B.     All residential development and contiguous properties that are under common ownership or control. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.040 Exemptions.
A.     The following residential developments shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

1.     Residential developments with fewer than seven dwelling units or lots.

2.     Residential developments which are developed in accordance with the terms of a development agreement adopted by ordinance pursuant to the authority and provisions of California Government Code Section 65864 et seq., and that is executed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that such residential developments shall comply with any affordable housing requirements included in the development agreement or any predecessor ordinance in effect on the date the development agreement was executed.

3.     Residential developments exempted by California Government Code Section 66474.2 or 66498.1, provided that such residential developments shall comply with any predecessor ordinance, resolution, or policy in effect on the date the application for the development was deemed substantially complete.

4.     Residential developments for which an application for a planning permit has been deemed complete no later than the effective date of this chapter, provided that such residential developments shall comply with any predecessor ordinance, resolution, or policy in effect on the date the application for the development was deemed complete.

B.     Planning Permit Expiration. Upon the expiration of any planning permit, and unless otherwise exempted, the residential development shall be subject to the affordable housing requirements of this chapter, and shall not proceed until such time as an affordable housing plan is approved in conjunction with any other required planning permit or amendment thereto. The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any residential development which is granted a discretionary extension of a planning permit beyond its initial term, to the extent consistent with state law. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.050 Affordable Housing Requirement.
All new residential developments, unless exempt under Section 30.41.040, and contiguous property under common ownership and control shall include affordable units. Calculations of the number of affordable units required by this section shall be based on the number of dwelling units in the residential development, excluding any density bonus units.

A.     On-Site Affordable Requirement. Unless exempted from this chapter, or unless an alternative is approved as described in Section 30.41.080, residential developments shall include affordable units upon the same site as the residential development as follows:

1.     Ownership residential development: the applicant shall provide either:

a.     Fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units in the residential development made available at affordable sales price to low-income households; or

b.     Ten percent (10%) of the dwelling units in the residential development made available at affordable sales price to very low-income households.

2.     Rental residential development: the applicant shall provide either:

a.     Fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units in the residential development made available at affordable rent to low-income households; or

b.     Ten percent (10%) of the dwelling units in the residential development made available at affordable rent to very low-income households.

B.     If the affordable housing requirements described in subsection A above result in a fractional unit, the applicant may either pay an in-lieu fee as specified in Section 30.41.080E or may construct one additional affordable unit, at the applicant’s option.

C.    When a residential development includes both ownership and rental dwelling units, the provisions of this chapter that apply to ownership residential development shall apply to that portion of the development that consists of ownership dwelling units, while the provisions of this chapter that apply to rental residential development shall apply to that portion of the development that consists of rental dwelling units.

D.    An applicant for a planning permit shall not avoid the requirements of this chapter by submitting piecemeal planning permit applications. At the time of the application for first approval for the residential development, the applicant shall identify all contiguous property under common ownership and control. The applicant shall not be required to construct dwelling units upon the contiguous property at the time of the application for first approval; however, the applicant shall be required to include the contiguous property under common ownership or control in its affordable housing plan. The affordable housing agreement shall be recorded against the residential development and all contiguous property under common ownership or control and shall require compliance with this chapter upon development of each contiguous property at such time as there are planning permit applications that would authorize a total of seven or more residential units for the residential development and the contiguous property under common ownership or control. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.060 Affordable Housing Standards and Incentives.
A.     Affordable units shall be comparable in exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to market-rate units in the same housing development. Interior finishes and amenities may differ from those provided in the market-rate units, but neither the workmanship nor the products may be of substandard or inferior quality as determined by the City.

B.     The affordable units shall have the same amenities as the market-rate units, including the same access to and enjoyment of common open space, parking, storage, and other facilities in the residential development.

C.    The developer of a residential development providing all required affordable units upon the same site as the market-rate units may, at the developer’s sole option and concurrently with the submittal of the affordable housing plan, submit a written request for one or more of the following on-site affordable housing development incentives:

1.     Density bonus and other regulatory incentives pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 and the provisions of Section 30.16.020C, if the residential development contains sufficient affordable units to qualify for a density bonus. If the applicant requests a density bonus, the other incentives listed in subsection D of this section may be provided only if each is individually requested as a regulatory incentive under Section 30.16.020C.

2.     City Assistance. The developer may request City staff to assist in the sale or rental of the affordable units to qualified households at an affordable housing cost.

3.     Financial Subsidies. The developer may apply for financial subsidies for the affordable units from any available federal and state funding sources. The developer may also apply for financial subsidy from City-administered funds for the difference in costs that results if the developer provides more affordable units or provides affordable units to households in income classifications that are lower than required.

D.    Affordable Housing Plan. The incentives requested by the developer shall be included in the proposed affordable housing plan submitted at the time of application for the first approval, and any incentives authorized by the City shall be included in the affordable housing plan, if approved by the City, for the residential development. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.070 Timing of Construction of Affordable Units.
All required affordable units shall be made available for occupancy concurrently with the market-rate units. For the purposes of this section, “concurrently” means one of the following:

A.     The City may not issue building permits for more than 50% of the market-rate units until it has issued building permits for all of the affordable units, and the City may not approve any final inspections or certificates of occupancy for more than 75% of the market-rate units until it has issued final inspections or certificates of occupancy for all of the affordable units.

B.     In-lieu fees, as appropriate, have been paid in accordance with Section 30.41.080E1.

C.    The applicant has met, or made arrangements satisfactory to the City to meet, an alternative requirement as permitted by Section 30.41.080. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.080 Developers’ Alternative Compliance Options.
A.     Accessory Dwelling Units. As an alternative to providing single-family dwelling units as affordable units, an applicant may instead provide an affordable accessory dwelling unit for each required affordable unit, subject to the standards for accessory dwelling units contained in Section 30.48.040T. The term and affordability of the accessory dwelling units and the affordable housing agreement and rent regulatory agreement shall conform with the provisions of this chapter, applicable to rental affordable units. In no event shall a developer be allowed to construct more than a total of five accessory dwelling units in any given residential development to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Rental Units in an Ownership Residential Development. The affordable housing requirement in Section 30.41.050A1 may be satisfied by providing 15% of the dwelling units in the residential development at affordable rent to low-income households or 10% of the dwelling units in the residential development at affordable rent to very low-income households.

Any rent regulatory agreement shall include provisions to allow for the sale of the affordable units and relocation benefits for tenants of the affordable units if the owner of the ownership residential development later determines to offer any affordable units in the residential development for sale. At sale, appropriate documents shall be recorded to ensure affordability in perpetuity of the affordable units to very low and low-income households.

C.    Off-Site Construction of Affordable Units. The applicant may propose to construct the affordable units required by Section 30.41.050A on another site. The City may grant a credit for the off-site construction if the City Council makes all of the following findings, at the City’s sole discretion:

1.     The developer has demonstrated that the goals of this chapter and the City’s Housing Element would be better served by allowing some or all of the affordable units required by Section 30.41.050A to be produced and operated at an alternative site or sites.

2.     The off-site construction project represents a more effective and feasible means of implementing this chapter and the goals of the City’s Housing Element. Factors to be weighed in this determination include: the feasibility of the on-site option considering project size, site constraints, competition from other projects, difficulty in integrating due to significant price and product type disparity, lack of capacity of the on-site developer to produce or operate affordable housing. Also to be considered are whether the off-site option offers greater feasibility and cost effectiveness, particularly regarding potential local public assistance and any adopted affordable housing guidelines, location advantages such as proximity to jobs, schools, transportation, and services, diminished impact on other existing developments, capacity of the proposed affordable housing developer to deliver and operate the project, and satisfaction of multiple developer obligations that would be difficult to satisfy on multiple projects.

3.     Financing or a viable financing plan, which may include public funding, shall be in place for the off-site affordable units.

4.     The off-site location must be suitable for the proposed affordable housing, consistent with any adopted affordable housing guidelines and the Housing Element, will not tend to cause residential segregation, and be located within the same planning (community) area with appropriate infrastructure and services. Any off-site alternative must comply with the density, intensity and development standards that are permitted under the zone for the site.

5.     All agreements between parties regarding off-site construction of affordable housing shall be made a part of the affordable housing agreement required for the site(s) and shall be subject to review and approval by the City Manager.

D.    Preservation or Conversion of Existing Units. The affordable housing requirement in Section 30.41.050 may be satisfied by the preservation of existing affordable units at risk of loss or by conversion of market-rate units to affordable units, if the preservation or conversion of these units is consistent with Government Code Section 65583.1 and allows the City to substitute the preservation or conversion of these units for the obligation to identify adequate sites.

E.     In-Lieu Fees. The affordable housing requirement in Section 30.41.050 may be satisfied by the payment of a fee to the City in-lieu of constructing the affordable units within the residential development. In-lieu fees may be established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council or may be determined for a specific residential development through the preparation of an affordability gap analysis that will determine the difference between the affordable sales price or rent and the fair market-rate price for the unit.

1.     No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the City for any market-rate unit in the residential development until all in-lieu fees for the residential development have been paid to the City.

2.     Prior to recordation of any final or parcel map for the development, notice of this requirement shall be recorded against each lot in the subdivision. The developer shall provide specific written notice to any purchaser of any dwelling unit prior to the acceptance of any offer to purchase, and shall obtain executed acknowledgment of the receipt of such notice, that purchaser shall not have any right to occupy the dwelling unit until such time as all in-lieu fees owing for the residential development are paid to the City.

3.     All in-lieu fees shall be deposited in the affordable housing fund described in Section 30.41.110.

F.     Dedication of Land. The applicant may propose to meet the requirements of Section 30.41.050A by dedicating property to the City in-lieu of constructing affordable units within the residential development. The City may approve property dedication under this subsection only if the proposal meets all of the following conditions:

1.     The number of affordable units to be constructed on the dedicated property shall be the number of affordable units required under Section 30.41.050A, or the affordable units to be constructed on the dedicated property shall provide units affordable to households in a lesser income category than required under Section 30.41.050A (for example, very low income units exclusively); and

2.     Financing or a viable financing plan, which may include public funding, shall be in place for construction of the affordable units on the dedicated property; and

3.     The off-site location is suitable for the proposed affordable housing, consistent with the affordable housing guidelines and the Housing Element, and will not tend to cause residential segregation and is located within the same planning area with appropriate infrastructure and services.

The property shall be dedicated to the City prior to issuance of any building permit for the residential development.

G.    Affordable Housing Credits. The applicant may propose to meet the requirements of Section 30.41.050A by obtaining credits for affordable units from a developer of surplus affordable units. The City may approve the use of credits under this subsection only if the proposal meets all of the following conditions:

1.     A developer who constructs a surplus affordable unit may utilize that surplus affordable unit to satisfy the affordable housing requirement for future residential development for a period of no more than 10 years after issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the surplus affordable unit.

2.     A developer who constructs a surplus affordable unit may sell or otherwise transfer the surplus affordable credit to another developer in order to satisfy, or partially satisfy, the transferee developer’s affordable housing requirement.

3.     The transferee developer who utilizes any surplus affordable housing credit shall comply with the timing requirements for affordable units to be made available for occupancy concurrently with the market-rate units in the residential development as required by Section 30.41.070.

4.     No residential development that has received federal, state, or local financial assistance shall be deemed to have surplus affordable units.

H.    Other Alternative Compliance Methods. A developer may propose an alternative compliance method to provide affordable units through other means. The decision-making body may approve or conditionally approve such an alternative only if the decision-making body determines, based on substantial evidence, that such alternative compliance will provide as many or more affordable units at the same or lower income levels and will otherwise provide greater public benefit than would provision of the affordable units on site. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.090 Application and Review Procedures.
A.     Affordable Housing Plan.

1.     An application for the first approval of a residential development shall include an affordable housing plan describing how the development will comply with the provisions of this chapter. As an alternative to compliance with the basic provisions included in Section 30.41.050, an applicant may propose one of the alternatives listed in Section 30.41.080 as part of the affordable housing plan. If in-lieu fees are requested, the applicant shall submit an affordability gap analysis.

2.     Any adopted affordable housing guidelines may specify the contents of the affordable housing plan. No application for a first approval for a residential development may be deemed complete unless an affordable housing plan is submitted in conformance with this chapter. The cost of reviewing any affordability gap analysis or other proposed alternative, including, but not limited to, the cost to the City of hiring a consultant to review the application, shall be borne by the applicant.

3.     The affordable housing plan shall be processed concurrently with all other permits required for the residential development. Before approving the affordable housing plan, the approval body shall find that the affordable housing plan conforms to this chapter. A condition shall be attached to the first approval of any residential development to require recordation of the affordable housing agreement described in subsection B of this section prior to the approval of any final or parcel map or building permit for the residential development.

4.     The approved affordable housing plan for a residential development, or for a building phase in a residential development, where phasing has been approved as part of planning permit approvals, may be amended prior to issuance of any building permit for the residential development or building phase, if applicable. A request for a minor modification of an approved affordable housing plan may be granted by the Development Services Director if the modification is substantially in compliance with the original affordable housing plan and conditions of approval. Other modifications to the affordable housing plan shall be processed in the same manner as the original plan.

B.     Affordable Housing Agreement.

1.     The applicant shall enter into an affordable housing agreement with the City, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to be executed by the City Manager, to ensure that all the requirements of this chapter are satisfied. The affordable housing agreement shall be recorded against the residential development prior to approval of any final or parcel map, or issuance of any building permit, whichever occurs first.

2.     The affordable housing agreement shall specify the number, type, location, size, and phasing of all affordable units, provisions for income certification and screening of potential purchasers or renters of units, and resale control mechanisms, including the financing of ongoing administrative and monitoring costs, consistent with the approved affordable housing plan and any adopted affordable housing guidelines, as determined by the City Manager or designee.

C.    The City Council, by resolution, may establish fees for the ongoing administration and monitoring of the affordable units, which fees may be updated periodically, as required.

D.    The City Council, by resolution, may adopt affordable housing guidelines to implement this chapter. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.100 Continued Affordability.
A.     Any adopted affordable housing guidelines may include standard documents for execution by the City Manager, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to ensure the continued affordability of the affordable units approved for each residential development. The documents shall be recorded against the residential development, all affordable units, and any site subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     All affordable units shall remain affordable to the targeted income group in perpetuity.

C.    Any eligible household that occupies an affordable unit must occupy that unit as its principal residence, unless otherwise approved in writing for rental to a third party eligible household for a limited period of time due to household hardship, as may be specified in any adopted affordable housing guidelines.

D.    No household may begin occupancy of an affordable unit until the household has been determined to be eligible to occupy that unit by the Development Services Director or designee. Any adopted affordable housing guidelines may establish standards for determining household income, affordable housing cost, provisions for continued monitoring of tenant eligibility, and other eligibility criteria.

E.     Officials, employees, or consultants of the City and members of city boards and commissions shall comply with all applicable laws, regulations, and policies relating to conflicts of interest as to their eligibility to develop, construct, sell, rent, lease, occupy, or purchase an affordable unit. Any adopted affordable housing guidelines shall include conflict of interest provisions relating to the administration of this chapter and the eligibility of persons to occupy affordable units. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.110 Affordable Housing Fund.
A.     All in-lieu fees, promissory note repayments, or other funds collected under this chapter shall be deposited into the City’s Affordable Housing Fund.

B.     The moneys in the Affordable Housing Fund and all earnings from investment of the moneys in the Fund shall be expended exclusively to provide housing affordable to extremely low-income, very low-income, lower-income, moderate-income households and any special needs populations in the City, consistent with the goals and policies contained in the City’s Housing Element, and for administration and compliance monitoring of the affordable housing program, as approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.120 Waiver.
A.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the requirements of this chapter may be waived, adjusted, or reduced based upon a showing that applying the requirements of this chapter would result in an unconstitutional taking of property or would result in any other unconstitutional result.

B.     Any request for a waiver, adjustment, or reduction under this section shall be submitted to the City concurrently with the affordable housing plan. The request for a waiver, adjustment, or reduction shall set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the claim.

C.    The request for a waiver, adjustment, or reduction shall be reviewed and considered in the same manner and at the same time as the affordable housing plan.

D.    In making a determination on an application for waiver, adjustment, or reduction, the applicant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support the claim. The City may assume each of the following when applicable:

1.     That the applicant will provide the most economical affordable units feasible, meeting the requirements of this chapter and any adopted affordable housing guidelines; and

2.     That the applicant will benefit from the incentives for the residential development as described in this chapter and elsewhere in the municipal code.

E.     The waiver, adjustment or reduction may be approved only to the extent necessary to avoid an unconstitutional result, after adoption of written findings, based on substantial evidence, supporting the determinations required by this section. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in the residential development shall invalidate the reduction, adjustment, or waiver, and a new application shall be required for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver pursuant to this section. (Ord. 2018-03)

 

30.41.130 Enforcement.
A.     The City Attorney shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all affordable housing agreements, regulatory agreements, and all other covenants or restrictions placed on affordable units, by civil action and any other proceeding or method permitted by law.

B.     Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any applicant or owner from the requirements of this chapter. No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a residential development shall be issued, including, without limitation, a final inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

C.    The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the City from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 2018-03)

Chapter 30.46 TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS
30.46.010 Title and Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter, inclusive, shall be known as the “Temporary Use Regulations.” The purpose of these regulations is to establish permitted temporary uses and standards and conditions for regulating same. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.015 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions apply:

“Exclusive use” means a use that precludes use in the area of the event for public recreation, beach access or access to coastal waters other than for or through the event itself.

“Limited duration” means a period of time which does not exceed a two week period on a continual basis, or does not exceed a consecutive four month period on an intermittent basis.

“Nonpermanent structures” include, but are not limited to, bleachers, perimeter fencing, vendor tents/canopies, judging stands, trailers, portable toilets, sound/video equipment, stages, platforms, etc., which do not involve grading or landform alteration for installation.

“Sandy beach area” includes publicly owned and privately owned sandy areas fronting on coastal waters, regardless of the existence of potential prescriptive rights or a public trust interest.

“Temporary event(s)/use(s)” means an activity or use that constitutes development; and is an activity or function of limited duration; and involves the placement of non-permanent structures; and/or involves exclusive use of a sandy beach, parkland, filled tidelands, water, streets or parking area which is not otherwise open and available for general public use. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.020 Identification of Permitted Temporary Uses.
The following temporary uses shall be permitted as specified by these regulations:

A.     Circus, Carnival, or Other Outdoor Entertainment Event. The temporary gathering of people for a circus, carnival, or other outdoor entertainment event.

B.     Antique or Art Show on Public Property. The temporary use of public property for antique or art shows.

C.    Religious Assembly. The temporary gathering of people for religious purposes.

D.    Construction Support. Temporary building and structures supporting residential development and major construction.

E.     Reversible Uses of Future Highway Rights-of-Way. Temporary uses on land required for a future county or state highway.

F.     Travel Trailer Park. The temporary operation of a travel trailer park.

G.    Uses in New Subdivisions. Temporary uses in new subdivisions and other residential developments which support the sale of dwellings and lots within the same subdivision or residential development.

H.    Use of Trailer Coach. Temporary use of a trailer coach for certain purposes. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.030 Temporary Uses Subject to Controls.
Temporary uses shall be subject to all regulations as would be applied to a permanent principal or accessory use located in the same zone, except as otherwise provided by these regulations. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.035 Temporary Uses Exempt from Coastal Development Permit Requirements.
A.     The Director shall exempt from the coastal development permit requirements of this title all temporary uses which satisfy the definition of “temporary event(s)/use(s)” under this chapter, except those which meet all of the following requirements:

1.     Are held between Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day;

2.     Occupy all or portion of sandy beach area; and

3.     Involve a charge for general public admission or seating where no fee is currently charged for use of the same area (not including booth or entry fees).

B.     The Director may also exempt from coastal development permit requirements, temporary events meeting all of the criteria of subsection A of this section when:

1.     The fee is for preferred seating only and more than 75% of the provided seating capacity is available free of charge for general public use; or

2.     The use is located on sandy beach in a remote location with minimal demand for public use, and there is no potential for adverse effect on sensitive coastal resources; or

3.     The use is less than one day in duration; or

4.     The use has previously received a coastal development permit and will be held in the same location, at a similar season, and for the same duration, with operating and environmental conditions substantially the same as those associated with the previously approved uses.

C.    The Director may determine that a temporary use shall be subject to coastal development permit issuance, even if the criteria for exemption under subsection A or B of this section are met, if the Director determines that unique or changing circumstances exist relative to a particular temporary use that have the potential for significant adverse impacts on coastal resources. Such circumstances may include the following:

1.     The event, either individually or together with temporary uses scheduled before or after the particular use, precludes the general public from use of a public recreational area for a significant period of time;

2.     The event and its associated activities or access requirements will either directly or indirectly impact environmentally sensitive habitat areas, rare or endangered species, significant scenic resources, or other coastal resources;

3.     The event is scheduled between Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day and would restrict public use of roadways or parking areas or otherwise significantly impact public use or access to coastal waters;

4.     The event has historically required a coastal development permit to address and monitor associated impacts to coastal resources. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.040 Circus, Carnival, or Other Outdoor Entertainment Event.
Temporary gathering of people for a circus, carnival, or other outdoor entertainment event, including the temporary use of a trailer coach as a business office incidental to and located on the same site as the event, may be permitted pursuant to the Municipal Code.

A.     Location. A circus, carnival or other outdoor entertainment event may be permitted in any zone except residential zones.

B.     Duration. The period of operation of the circus, carnival or other outdoor entertainment event shall not exceed five days.

C.    Coastal Development Permit. A circus, carnival or other outdoor entertainment event is exempt from coastal development permit requirements unless it meets any of the criteria in Section 30.46.035 of this chapter requiring such permit. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.46.050 Antique or Art Show on Public Property.
The temporary gathering of people for an antique or art show and sales event may be permitted in compliance with the following provisions:

A.     Location. An antique or art show and sales event may be permitted in any zone provided such event is held on property owned by or under the control of a public agency and which is held pursuant to the Municipal Code. As used in this section, “public agency” includes counties, cities, municipal corporations, political subdivisions, public districts and other public agencies of the State of California.

B.     Duration. The period of operation of the antique or art show and sales event shall not exceed three days.

C.    Coastal Development Permit. The temporary gathering of people for an antique or art show and sales event is exempt from coastal development permit requirements unless it meets any of the criteria in Section 30.46.035 of this chapter requiring such permit. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.060 Religious Assembly.
The temporary gathering of people for religious purposes may be permitted in compliance with the following provisions:

A.     Location. A religious assembly may be permitted in any zone except zones subject to the residential zones use regulations.

B.     Duration. The period of operation of the religious assembly shall not exceed eight days.

C.    Coastal Development Permit. The temporary gathering of people for religious purpose is exempt from coastal development permit requirements unless it meets any of the criteria in Section 30.46.035 of this chapter requiring such permit. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.070 Construction Support.
Temporary buildings for commerce or industry incidental to residential development, and temporary structures for the housing of tools, equipment, building assembly operations and supervisory offices in connection with major construction projects shall be permitted in any zone; provided such temporary buildings or structures are located within or adjacent to the development or construction site to which they are incidental.

The coastal development permit requirements of this title for temporary buildings or structures shall be satisfied by the coastal permits issued in conjunction with the approval of residential development or major construction project. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.46.080 Reversible Uses on Future Highway Rights-of-Way.
Any temporary use, not involving any significant investment in buildings or structures, may be permitted through the issuance of a major use permit on a lot or parcel of land provided the Director of Public Works or the District Director of the California Department of Transportation has determined that the lot or parcel will be required in its entirety at some future date for a City street or a state highway.

Any such use is exempt from the coastal development permit requirements of this title if it meets the definition of a “temporary event/use” under this chapter, unless it meets the criteria in Section 30.46.035 of this chapter requiring such permit. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.46.090 Travel Trailer Park.
The temporary operation of a travel trailer park may be permitted by the Director through the issuance of a minor use permit in compliance with the following provisions:

A.     Location. A travel trailer park may be permitted in any nonresidential zone.

B.     Duration. The period of operation of the travel trailer park shall not exceed 10 days.

C.    Noticed Hearing Not Required. The Director may issue a permit pursuant to this section with notice as provided by the design review regulations.

D.    Coastal Development Permit. The temporary operation of a travel trailer is exempt from coastal development permit requirements unless it meets any of the criteria in Section 30.46.035 of this chapter requiring such permit. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.100 Uses in New Subdivisions.
Upon the review and approval of a site plan by the Director in accordance with design review procedures of this Code and the provisions of this section, certain temporary uses as specified herein may be established within a subdivision for which a final map has been recorded, or in a proposed subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved by the authorized approval authority or on appeal (see Chapter 1.12) to the City Council and a final map thereof filed for approval by the Director of Public Works; or in conjunction with an individual multiple dwelling or multiple dwelling complex; solely for the marketing of dwellings, and/or lots, in the same residential development.

A.     Permitted Uses. The following temporary uses may be permitted in conformance with the following standards:

1.     Model homes in a number not to exceed that necessary to provide on example of each dwelling type being offered in the residential development. Reversed floor plans and exterior facade variations will not be considered as separate dwelling types. Each model home shall be erected on an individual site which conforms to a lot shown on the recorded final map or on the final map filed for approval with Director of Public Works; meet all setback requirements of the applicable zone or, in the case of provisional reclassification, of the zone to which the property has been provisionally reclassified; and qualify in all respects for sale and residential occupancy upon termination of its use as a model home.

2.     Real estate sales office facilities for the purpose of promoting the sale or rental of dwellings and/or lots, which are located only within the same residential development or proposed subdivision. The foregoing provisions of this section notwithstanding, a temporary real estate sales office facility may be located adjacent to the residential development to which it is incidental in compliance with all other provisions of this section.

3.     Off-street parking facilities.

4.     Children’s play areas, landscaping and landscape features such as walkways, pools, benches, walls, fencing, and similar appurtenant features of a noncommercial nature.

B.     Site Plan Review Criteria. No use authorized by this section will be located, installed or operated in a manner that will have an unnecessarily adverse effect on the use and enjoyment of any property on which an occupied dwelling is located, or may be located during the duration of such authorized use.

C.    Site Plan Content. The site plan shall contain such maps and drawings as are necessary to show the location of the above temporary uses and their relation to off-street parking, vehicular and pedestrian access, and the surrounding area.

D.    Building Permits. Prior to the issuance of building permits for the temporary uses in subsection A of this section, the following conditions shall be met:

1.     When the residential development for which such temporary uses are to be constructed would constitute a subdivision, a tentative subdivision map must be approved by the authorized agency, and the final map thereof recorded; or if a final map has not been recorded, a final map must be filed with the Director of Public Works for approval and approved by the Director as to conformance to the tentative subdivision map and mathematical accuracy.

2.     Appropriate zoning must be in effect for the property encompassed by the subdivision or proposed subdivision or other residential development, to accommodate the lot sizes shown on the final map and the proposed uses thereof; provided, however, that where subject property has been provisionally reclassified, lot sizes and proposed uses may conform to the zone to which such property has been provisionally reclassified.

3.     The site plan must be submitted to and approved by the Director.

4.     Necessary sanitary facilities must be provided as required by the County of San Diego’s Director of Public Health.

5.     The property owners shall execute and file with the City an acknowledged agreement (notarized) assuming all risks inherent in construction prior to recordation of a final map and agreeing to abide by all conditions set forth in this section prior to the sale of any model home; further agreeing that all temporary uses permitted by this section shall be terminated not later than 30 months after issuance of building permits therefor, unless a written request for extension of time has been submitted to and approved by the Director prior to the expiration of the 30 months, and within 30 days of the expiration of the 30 months or extension thereof, all temporary uses and related improvements other than model homes, shall be completely removed from the premises and all model homes shall be restored to a condition suitable for sale for residential occupancy, including reconversion of any garage to a condition suitable for the storage of private vehicles or the provision by other means of required off-street parking spaces.

In the case where the final subdivision map has not been recorded, the property owner shall further agree that in the event of a final map which includes the property whereon uses authorized by this section are located is not recorded prior to expiration of the tentative map, all uses and related improvements, including model homes, shall be completely removed from the premises and the site restored to a clean and safe condition within 90 days from the date of expiration of the tentative map. Each agreement shall also contain a statement signed by the property owner agreeing that if all uses and related improvements are not removed as herein required, they may be removed or demolished, and the site restored by the City. Prior to the erection of any model home, the property owner shall post with the Director security in an amount satisfactory to the Director sufficient to defray any expense incurred by the City in either the restoration or conversion of the model homes to a condition suitable for sale for residential occupancy, or in the complete removal or demolition of the uses and improvements and site restoration. The security shall be released to the property owner or person legally entitled thereto upon satisfactory removal or conversion of the concerned facilities.

E.     Coastal Development Permit. Temporary uses in a new subdivision as provided in this section are not exempt from the coastal development permit requirements of this title. Coastal permit requirements shall be satisfied, either in conjunction with the issuance of a coastal development permit for the subdivision, or subsequently in a separate coastal permit processed pursuant to this title. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2014-12; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.46.110 Use of a Trailer Coach.
The temporary use of a trailer coach for the following purposes may be permitted in compliance with the following conditions:

A.     Business Uses.

1.     Business office for a financial institution or public utility which is required, as a condition of a franchise granted by the United States, the state or a public agency, to maintain a place of business at a location at which no permanent structure suitable for the purpose is available.

2.     Business office incidental to and located on a site on which a temporary Christmas tree sales or similar temporary or seasonal business is being lawfully conducted.

3.     Business office or sales facility on or adjacent to a site on which construction of a permanent business office or sales facility for use of the permittee is being diligently prosecuted.

4.     Construction office on or adjacent to any site on which a building or construction project is being diligently prosecuted; or for temporary offices on a site used for a borrow pit, quarry, asphalt paving plant, concrete batch plant, or mining operation for which a major use permit has been granted.

5.     Mobilehome financial business office, self-propelled and self-contained upon issuance of a minor use permit by the Director. Such minor use permit may be issued for a period not to exceed five years when authorized by a regulatory agency of the United States or the State of California. The office shall not operate more than three days in any one week, shall not be stored on the subject property when not in use, and, when in use, may operate from an enclosed structure meeting the requirements of the City Building Code. A minor use permit may be issued for this use only in a zone in which a bank or other financial institution is a permitted use. A use permit granted pursuant to this section or its predecessor shall be deemed to be a minor use permit and may be modified or revoked pursuant to the administrative design review permit procedure.

6.     Political campaign office located on private property for a period not to exceed one year provided, however, such trailer shall be removed within 15 days following the next general election held after such trailer is sited.

7.     Real estate sales office when the trailer coach is located on a lot or parcel of land adjacent to or within a proposed subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved and a final map thereof submitted to the Department of Public Works for checking to which such real estate office is incidental. Such permit may be issued to expire six months after completion of all sales but not exceed a period of three years.

8.     Business office associated with the production and distribution of agricultural or horticultural products grown on the premises in all zones upon issuance of a minor use permit for a period of not to exceed five years.

9.     Government service uses in accordance with this chapter.

B.     Residential Uses.

1.     Dwelling to accommodate visiting relatives for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days in any calendar year on land owned or leased by the host and on which there is located a permanent dwelling occupied by the host.

2.     When there is no other habitable dwelling on the property on which the applicant is diligently pursuing construction of a permanent dwelling pursuant to procedures and timing for a building permit.

3.     A dwelling for temporary health care on a lot where there is a permanent single-family dwelling is permitted upon approval of a minor use permit. This trailer is exclusively for temporary occupancy by (a) providers of health services which are required by an occupant of the main dwelling; or (b) by a relative of an occupant of the main dwelling who requires physical care.

Health care trailers are only intended as temporary housing until a permanent housing arrangement can be provided such as a room addition or accessory apartment addition to the primary residence. The following are requirements for health care trailer approval:

a.     The health care unit shall be a single-wide trailer or mobilehome not exceeding 600 square feet.

b.     The lot area shall be a minimum of one-half acre (net).

c.     The trailer shall meet main building setbacks and shall be located no further than 50 feet from the primary residence onsite. The Director may approve a greater setback from the primary residence because of topography or other natural features, or existing leach lines.

d.     The trailer shall be connected to existing sanitation and electrical systems onsite.

e.     Prior to approval of a minor use permit a certificate of need signed by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of California shall be submitted to and approved by the Director. The certificate shall be renewed annually at the request of the Director upon presentation of doctor’s signed certificate.

f.      Notice of health care trailer applications shall be given as provided in this Code.

g.     In order to insure removal of a health care trailer when the need no longer exists the applicant shall furnish security in the form and amount determined by the Director.

4.     Dwelling for security personnel on or adjacent to any site on which construction of a major residential, commercial, industrial or public works project is being diligently prosecuted and for which security personnel are employed.

5.     Dwelling for security personnel on any site on which construction of a residential, commercial, industrial or public works project has been completed and for which security personnel are employed pending construction of permanent dwelling facilities for such security personnel.

6.     Dwelling for security personnel on a site used for a borrow pit, quarry, asphalt paving plant, rock rushing plant, concrete batch plant, or mining operation for which a major use permit has been granted.

7.     Dwelling for displaced residents or security personnel on a site where the principal dwelling has been rendered unoccupiable by reason of disaster or accident such as fire, wind, flood, earthquake or other similar circumstance. Permits for such temporary dwellings shall expire at such time as the principal dwelling has been repaired or replaced, or upon expiration of the building permit. Permits for such temporary dwelling shall expire one year after the event causing the damage or destruction of the principal dwelling if no building permit has been issued for the repair or replacement of such principal dwelling.

C.    Termination of Use.

1.     When use of a trailer coach is related to a use authorized by a minor use permit, occupancy or use of the trailer coach shall terminate with the expiration, abandonment or revocation of the related use permit and thereafter the trailer coach shall be removed from subject property.

2.     When use of a trailer coach is related to the construction of a related permanent facility, occupancy or use of the trailer coach shall terminate upon completion of construction of the permanent facility and thereafter the trailer coach shall be removed from subject property.

D.    Compliance with Code. The use and occupancy of any trailer coach shall comply with the provisions of this Code.

E.     Coastal Development Permit. The temporary use of a trailer coach, for the purposes described in this section, is not exempt from the coastal development permit requirements of this title. The requirements shall be satisfied, either in conjunction with the issuance of a coastal development permit for the use which the temporary use of the trailer coach is proposed, or subsequently through a separate coastal permit processed pursuant to this title. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.46.120 Government Service Uses.
The temporary use of buildings on private land to provide government service uses classified as major impact services and utilities may be permitted through the issuance of a minor use permit in compliance with the following provisions:

A.     Occupancy. The temporary occupancy of buildings for government service uses shall be by the United States, the state or other governmental agency which is otherwise exempt from regulation by the Zoning Ordinance when utilizing their own property.

B.     Location. Government service uses may be permitted in zones subject to the GC, LI or BP commercial use regulations.

C.    Duration. The period of operation of government service uses shall not exceed five years.

D.    Noticed Hearing and Findings Required. No minor use permit for temporary government service uses may be issued unless notice has been given in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

E.     Coastal Development Permit. The temporary use of buildings on private land to provide government service uses classified as major impact services and utilities are not exempt from the coastal development permit requirements of this title. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.46.130 Seasonal Sales Lot.
The temporary sales of holiday season products, such as holiday trees, pumpkins, and closely related agricultural and floricultural products may be permitted in compliance with the following provisions:

A.     Location. A seasonal sales lot may be located on any property in a commercial or residential zone which abuts a street, other than a “local street,” identified on the Circulation Element Map of the City of Encinitas pursuant to a site plan approved by the Planning and Building Director and a seasonal sales solicitation permit issued by the City Clerk.

B.     Duration. The period of operation of a seasonal sales lot shall not exceed 45 days prior to the holiday. The property shall be cleared and restored to its condition prior to the sales lot within three days after the holiday.

C.    Coastal Development Permit. The temporary sales of holiday products is exempt from coastal development permit requirements if it meets the definition of a “temporary event/use” under this chapter, unless it meets any of the criteria in Section 30.46.035 of this chapter requiring such permit.

D.    Seasonal sales lots shall be maintained and operated in a manner consistent with other sections of this Code, the City’s adopted building code, the City’s adopted fire code, the City’s adopted electric code, and the regulations of the Department of Health Services for the County of San Diego.

E.     Seasonal sales lots shall comply with Chapter 30.60 regarding any on-site signage.

F.     A temporary trailer or recreational vehicle may be allowed, for the duration of the seasonal use, on the lot as an on-site security or sales office with the appropriate building, fire and health permits. (Ord. 98-11; Ord. 2003-08)

Chapter 30.48 ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-10. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


30.48.010 Title and Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Accessory Use Regulations.” The purpose of these provisions is to establish the relationship among the principal and accessory uses and the criteria for regulating accessory uses.

 

30.48.020 Accessory Uses Encompassed by Principal Use.
In addition to the principal uses expressly included in the use regulations, each zone subject to such use regulations shall be deemed to include such accessory uses which are specifically identified by these accessory use regulations; and such other accessory uses which are necessarily and customarily associated with, and are appropriate, incidental and subordinate to, such principal uses. When provided by these regulations, it shall be the responsibility of the Director to determine if a proposed accessory use is necessarily and customarily associated with, and is appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal use, based on the Director’s evaluation of the resemblance of the proposed accessory use to those uses specifically identified as accessory to the principal uses and the relationship between the proposed accessory use and the principal use. Such determinations which are made by the Director shall be subject to the appeal procedure* of this Code. (*See Chapter 1.12.)

 

30.48.030 Accessory Uses Subject to Controls.
Accessory uses shall be controlled in the same manner as the principal uses within each zone, except as otherwise provided by these regulations.

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 30.48.040 Residential and Agricultural Zones.
Subject to the restrictions and limitations specified, the following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted in zones where residential and agricultural use types are permitted:

A.     Private Garages, Attached.

1.     Total area not to exceed 1,000 square feet or 50% of living area of the principal residence, whichever is less. A garage area of 480 square feet is permitted regardless of the living area of the principal residence.

2.     May be two stories if second floor is an integral part of principal residence or approved accessory apartment, guest house, accessory living quarters, or farm employee housing.

3.     Additional area may be permitted by issuance of a minor use permit.

B.     Private Garages, Detached.

1.     The total area of a detached garage shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or 50% of the living area of the principal residence, whichever is less. A detached garage area of 480 square feet is permitted regardless of the living area of the principal residence.

2.     When located within the side yard or rear yard setback in accordance with Section 30.16.010E of this title, detached garages shall be limited to one story and shall not exceed 12 feet maximum height, except that roofs pitched not less than 3:12 may extend an additional two feet to a maximum 14 feet to peak of roof. Detached garages that comply with the main building setbacks shall be limited to two stories and shall not exceed 24 feet maximum height.

3.     Additional area, height and story, not to exceed the height and story limits outlined for residential structures (see Section 30.16.010B6 of this title) may be permitted by issuance of a minor use permit.

C.    Children’s Playhouses, Patios, Porches, Gazebos, etc. See Section 30.16.010E for regulations.

D.    Radio and Television Receiving Antennas, Dish Antennas, Flag Poles.

1.     Radio antennas shall have a maximum height of 100 feet and shall not be subject to design review. Height increases above 100 feet may be approved subject to a minor use permit.

2.     Television receiving antennas and flag poles shall be limited to a maximum height of 30 feet for nonresidential zones and subject to the height standards for residential zones (Section 30.16.010B6).

3.     Satellite antennas shall meet the standards of design review regulations identified in Section 23.08.090.

E.     Greenhouses. In all residential use zones, greenhouses are limited to 450 square feet unless a minor use permit is approved to increase the size.

F.     Silos, Windmills and Tank Houses. Maximum height of 26 feet.

G.    Detached Storage Buildings, Workshops, Hobby Shops, Recreation Rooms and Other Similar Uses (Nonbusiness or Nonagricultural Purposes).

1.     Area for any one detached building is not to exceed 450 square feet. When on the same lot as a detached private garage all uses, together, shall not exceed 1,200 square feet or 50% of the living area of the principal residence, whichever is less.

2.     When located within a required interior side or rear yard setback area in accordance with Section 30.16.010E of this title, detached structures shall be limited to one story and shall not exceed 12 feet maximum height. Roofs pitched not less than 3:12 may extend an additional two feet to a maximum 14 feet, to peak of roof.

 

3.     Detached accessory structures, other than those structures otherwise regulated within this chapter, that meet all of the required main building setbacks and that do not project into any required setback area may have building height and story as outlined for residential structures. (See Section 30.16.010B6.)

4.     Additional area may be permitted by issuance of a minor use permit. When located within or projecting into a required interior side or rear yard setback area, additional height and story, to a maximum of the building height and story allowed for residential structures (see Section 30.16.010B6), may be permitted with the issuance of a minor use permit.

H.    Barns and agricultural storage buildings shall be limited as follows:

1.     In residential (except zones requiring one acre minimum), a maximum floor area of 450 square feet and one story not to exceed 12 feet in height. When on same lot as a detached private garage, workshop and/or storage building, all uses, together, shall not exceed 1,200 square feet or 25% of the living area of the principal residence, whichever is greater. In residential zones (requiring one-acre minimum), a maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet where the lot is less than two acres, 2,000 square feet where the lot is two to five acres, an additional 200 square feet is permitted for each acre over five acres to a maximum of 5,000 square feet. Two stories are permitted if the structure meets the main building setbacks, provided the height does not exceed 24 feet.

2.     Additional area, height and story may be permitted by issuance of a minor use permit, not to exceed the limits specified by the applicable regulations.

I.      Offices. Offices in conjunction with agricultural, institutional or other nonresidential use. Limited to one story and 12 feet maximum unless greater height is permitted by a minor use permit.

J.     Coops.

K.     Guest House. A guest house is permitted only as follows:

1.     In any residential zone, one detached guest house is permitted on a lot or building site which has an area of not less than 10,000 square feet. Guest houses are not permitted in other zones.

2.     The guest house shall have a maximum floor area of 640 square feet, and shall meet the main building setbacks for the residential zone in which the site is located. Guest houses exceeding 640 square feet are permitted upon issuance of a minor use permit. A guest house maintaining building setbacks for detached accessory structures, in conformance with Section 30.16.010E of the Municipal Code, is permitted upon issuance of a minor use permit. A guest house which does not meet setbacks for either main buildings or detached accessory structures is prohibited unless findings for a variance pursuant to Chapter 30.78 are made and a setback reduction variance is granted.

3.     No kitchen facilities or laundry facilities are allowed within the guest house.

4.     The guest house shall only be occupied on a temporary basis (no more than 30 consecutive days) and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.

5.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for a guest house the owner shall submit a notarized recorded copy of an agreement between the owner and the City of Encinitas on a form supplied by the Department of Community Development. Said agreement shall state that the owner understands and declares that the guest house is only to be occupied on a temporary basis (no more than 30 consecutive days) and will not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. The agreement shall also include provisions stating that the owner consents to inspection of the premises by the code enforcement officer in order to verify the terms of the agreement.

L.     Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be permitted in compliance with the following conditions:

1.     There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation out of character with the normally appropriate appearance of the dwelling.

2.     A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling, or a garage.

3.     Electrical or mechanical equipment which creates visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit shall be prohibited.

4.     Only the residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home occupation except by a temporary minor use permit, exception being cottage food operation.

5.     There shall be no on-premises sale of goods not produced on the premises.

6.     The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not change the principal character or use of the dwelling unit involved.

7.     There shall be no signs other than those permitted by this chapter.

8.     The required residential off-street parking shall be maintained.

9.     A home occupation shall not create vehicular or pedestrian traffic in excess of that which is normal for the zone in which it is located.

10.   A cottage food operation, as defined in the California Homemade Food Act, shall comply with California Health and Safety Code Section 113758.

M.    Dog and Cat Keeping. The keeping of dogs and cats, but not including kennels.

N.    Roadside Sales of Agricultural Products. Operation of a stand, not to exceed an area of 200 square feet, for the display and sale, by the occupant of the premises, of agricultural products produced on the premises. Agricultural products produced off-site may be displayed and sold from the stand. The stand shall not be closer than 15 feet to any street or highway and shall be permitted subject to an agriculture permit.

O.    Wild Animal Keeping. The keeping of not more than one wild animal for which a wild animal permit is required and has been issued pursuant to this Code.

P.     Earthworms. The raising of earthworms provided that:

1.     No sales are advertised or made on the premises unless permitted by the use regulations.

 

2.     Odors and/or fly-breeding are not greater than customarily found at a well-maintained residence.

Q.    Retail Sales of Stable Gear. The retail sale of stable gear, provided that such sales are incidental and subordinate to the use of conforming public stables or equestrian facilities on the premises, and there is no exterior advertising of the accessory use. No such accessory use shall occupy more than 10% or not to exceed 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, of the total floor area of enclosed building permitted by right and devoted to such public stable or equestrian facility. Where such public stables or equestrian facilities are permitted by use permit, the total floor area of the accessory use shall be regulated by such permit.

R.    Qualified Employee Housing. The Employee Housing Act allows for flexibility in housing types for employee housing, including conventional and nonconventional structures, such as: living quarters, boardinghouse, tent, bunkhouse, mobilehome, manufactured home, recreational vehicle and travel trailers. The laws and regulations governing these structures depends on the housing type; however, all qualified employee housing must comply with: the Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code Section 17000 et seq.) and the Employee Housing Regulations (Title 25—Housing and Community Development), which outline specific requirements for the construction of housing, maintenance of grounds, buildings, sleeping space and facilities, sanitation and heating; and the provisions of this section.

Qualified employee housing for seven or more employees is a permitted accessory use in conjunction with an approved permitted agricultural use provided that:

1.     The number of living units or beds is reasonably related to the number of agricultural employees required for agricultural operations on the parcel on which the qualified employee housing is located, however, should not consist of more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household.

2.     Qualified employee housing– seven or more employees shall be occupied only by agricultural employees (and the members of the employee’s household as permitted by HCD) engaged in agricultural labor and shall not be otherwise occupied or rented.

3.     All temporary or permanent structures that contain qualified employee housing shall meet the setback, lot coverage, height, and other development standards applicable to the zone in which it is located.

4.     Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 30.54.030, unless the applicant provides substantial evidence demonstrating that the actual parking need is lower, subject to the approval of the Development Services Director.

5.     Qualified employee housing shall comply, as applicable, with the following: (1) Employee Housing Act (California Health and Safety Code Sections 17000—17062); (2) Mobilehome Parks Act (California Health and Safety Code Sections 18200—18700); and Special Occupancy Parks Act (California Health and Safety Code Sections 18860—18874), as may be amended from time to time.

6.     Qualified employee housing shall be reviewed and approved subject to the same requirements as other permitted agricultural uses within the same zone.

7.     If an existing agriculture use does not have a required permit, a permit for both the agricultural use and qualified employee housing must be obtained.

8.     Within 30 days after approval from the City of Encinitas for qualified employee housing, the applicant shall record in the office of the County Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk a covenant running with the land for the benefit of the City of Encinitas, declaring that the qualified employee housing will continuously be maintained as such in accordance with Title 30 of the Encinitas Municipal Code and also that:

a.     The applicant shall obtain and maintain, for as long as the qualified employee housing is operated, the appropriate permit(s) from State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) pursuant to the Employee Housing Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder;

b.     The improvements required by the City of Encinitas related to the qualified employee housing shall be constructed and/or installed, and continuously maintained by the applicant;

c.     The applicant shall submit the annual verification form to the Development Services Director as required by this section; and

d.     Any violation of the covenant and agreement required by this section shall be subject to the enforcement procedures of Chapter 1.08 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

9.     The property owner shall: (1) complete and submit to the Development Services Director a verification form no later than 30 days after receiving a permit to operate from HCD; (2) a verification form shall be submitted to the Development Services Director annually to ensure compliance with Title 30 of the Encinitas Municipal Code; and (3) the verification form shall include: information regarding the agricultural use, housing type, number of dwelling units or beds, number of occupants, occupants’ employment information, and proof that a permit to operate from HCD has been obtained and maintained.

10.   Qualified employee housing – seven or more employees shall be removed or converted to another permitted use at such time as the agricultural activity to which it relates ceases operation for more than 12 consecutive months.

Qualified employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5(b), shall be deemed a single-family dwelling and is allowed in residential zones. Qualified employee housing for six or fewer employees is subject to all municipal codes, regulations and other standards generally applicable to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

S.     Horticultural Sales. In all residential and agricultural zones, the retail sale of horticultural and floricultural products and their related gardening items in conjunction with and upon the premises of a growing nursery is permitted upon issuance of a minor use permit.

T.     Accessory Dwelling Units, Attached and Detached.

1.     One attached or one detached accessory dwelling unit may be permitted in conjunction with an existing single-family residence or the construction of a new single-family residence on a lot zoned for single-family or multifamily use.

2.     An accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on a lot where a junior accessory dwelling unit exists.

 

3.     An accessory dwelling unit shall be incidental, appropriate, and clearly subordinate to the primary single-family residence.

4.     Attached and detached accessory units must maintain the general character of a single-family residential neighborhood, and maintain the character as a single-family dwelling as determined by the Development Services Director. Architectural design, building materials, and exterior colors shall be compatible with the principal residence.

5.     An accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary residence.

6.     An accessory unit may be rented, but only with a rental agreement with terms greater than 30 days.

7.     Except as provided herein, attached and detached accessory dwelling units shall comply with all local building and fire code requirements, as appropriate.

8.     Prior to approval of an accessory dwelling unit on properties with a private sewage system, approval by the County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health, or any successor agency, shall be required.

9.     Accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence.

10.   An attached accessory dwelling unit shall have a separate exterior entry with no interior access to the primary dwelling unit.

11.   Maximum living area of an attached or detached accessory unit shall not exceed 1,200 square feet or the total living area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is less.

12.   Setbacks for accessory units:

a.     Except as provided herein, attached and detached accessory dwelling units shall comply with the setbacks required for the primary dwelling unit as established by the underlying zoning designation.

b.     Attached and detached accessory dwelling units shall comply with the setbacks established in Chapter 30.34 (Special Purpose Overlay Zones) of the Municipal Code.

c.     Attached and detached accessory dwelling units shall have a setback of not less than five feet from side and rear property lines, except:

i.      An accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above (may be cantilevered, or supported by posts, but not solid walls) an existing attached or detached garage shall have a setback of five feet from the side and rear property lines. However, an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage shall comply with the setbacks established in Chapter 30.34 (Special Purpose Overlay Zones) of the Municipal Code.

ii.     No setback shall be required for the conversion of existing space wholly within an existing primary residence or wholly within an existing accessory building to an accessory dwelling unit. However, an existing accessory building (including an existing garage) that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the setbacks established in Chapter 30.34 (Special Purpose Overlay Zones) of the Municipal Code.

 

iii.     Roof eaves and other architectural projections for accessory dwelling units shall comply with Section 30.16.010E8.

iv.    Accessory dwelling units constructed on properties directly adjacent to a coastal bluff shall be consistent with the setbacks required for the primary dwelling unit as established by the underlying zoning designation.

13.   Any accessory dwelling unit that is permitted or constructed in reliance on the setback relief provisions established for accessory dwelling units in Subsection 30.48.040T12 shall be:

a.     Maintained as an accessory dwelling unit and shall not be converted to or used for any other purpose.

b.     Limited to a height of one story for (1) any portion of an attached ADU relying on the setback reliefs, or (2) an entire detached ADU structure if any portion of the structure relies on the setback reliefs.

14.   An additional 5% of lot coverage and 10% (0.1) of floor area ratio above that established for the underlying zoning designation shall be allowed for accessory dwelling units only for lots of 10,000 square feet or less and where there is an existing single-family residence.

15.   Parking.

a.     Except as otherwise provided herein, parking spaces for accessory dwelling units shall comply with Chapter 30.54 (Off-Street Parking) of the Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, the design requirements of the Off-Street Parking Design Manual.

b.     One parking space shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit, which may be provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway or within setback areas, provided that the parking area is properly surfaced in accordance with applicable regulations.

c.     Any required parking spaces removed in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall be replaced on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit.

i.      The replacement parking spaces may be located in any configuration on the lot, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts.

ii.     Uncovered replacement parking spaces may be located within building setback areas.

iii.     Structures for covered parking spaces shall be required to comply with applicable setbacks.

d.     Notwithstanding the above or any other law, no parking standards shall be imposed for an accessory dwelling unit in any of the following instances:

i.      The accessory dwelling unit is located within a radius of one-half mile of public transit.

 

ii.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

iii.     The accessory dwelling unit is contained wholly within the existing space of an existing primary residence or an existing accessory building, with no additional area added. If an accessory dwelling unit constructed under this provision is expanded, parking shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit in accordance with this section.

iv.    When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.

v.     When there is a car share facility located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.

16.   Utilities.

a.     Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered new residential uses for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service.

b.     For an accessory dwelling unit that is contained within the existing space of a single-family residence or accessory building, has independent exterior access from the existing residence and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety, no new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility shall be required and no related connection fee or capacity charge shall be imposed. For accessory units that do not meet these criteria, new or separate utility connections may be required and related connection fees or capacity charges may be imposed.

c.     Accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from the requirements of undergrounding overhead utilities and public right-of-way dedication and improvements.

17.   Applications for accessory dwelling units conforming to the requirements of this section shall be considered ministerially without discretionary review or a hearing, and the City shall approve or deny such applications within 120 calendar days after receiving the completed application.

18.   Development Service Department fees for accessory dwelling units may be waived.

19.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, a covenant shall be recorded between the owner and the City of Encinitas agreeing to the terms stipulated in this chapter. The covenant shall specifically mention that:

a.     The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling unit.

b.     The accessory unit may be rented, but only with rental agreements with terms greater than 30 days.

c.     The accessory unit is limited to the size and attributes set forth by this section.

d.     The covenant shall be binding upon any successors in interest or ownership of the property and lack of compliance with the provisions thereof may result in legal action against the property owner, including revocation of the right to maintain an accessory dwelling unit on the property.

20.   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

a.     “Accessory dwelling unit” shall be as defined in Chapter 30.04 of this title.

b.     “Car share facility” shall mean a city permitted designated area where a car share vehicle can be parked for extended periods of time.

c.     “Existing space” shall mean an area within the existing exterior walls and existing roofline of an existing structure that can be made safely habitable under applicable building and fire codes at the determination of the building official, notwithstanding any noncompliance with zoning regulations that was in existence on the date the ordinance codified in this section became effective.

d.     “Living area” shall mean the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit including basements and attics but does not include a garage or any accessory building.

e.     “Major public transit center” shall mean a multimodal transportation hub.

f.      “Public transit” shall mean any major public transit center, or any bus stop.

U.    Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.

1.     One junior accessory dwelling unit may be permitted in conjunction with an existing, previously constructed single-family residence on lots zoned for single-family or multifamily use.

2.     A junior accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on a lot where an accessory dwelling unit exists.

3.     A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary residence.

4.     A junior accessory dwelling unit may be rented, but only with a rental agreement with terms greater than 30 days.

5.     The owner of a lot with a junior accessory dwelling unit shall occupy as a principal residence either the primary dwelling or the junior accessory dwelling unit, except where the primary dwelling and junior accessory dwelling are held by an agency such as a land trust or housing organization in an effort to create affordable housing.

6.     Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit Development Standards.

a.     A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 500 square feet in total floor area.

b.     A junior accessory dwelling unit shall be contained entirely within an existing single-family residence.

c.     Creation of a junior accessory dwelling unit must include the conversion of an existing bedroom.

d.     A junior accessory dwelling unit shall be provided with a separate exterior entry.

e.     An interior connection to the main living area of the primary residence shall be maintained. A second door may be added for sound attenuation.

f.      A junior accessory dwelling unit shall include an efficiency kitchen, requiring and limited to the following components:

 

i.      A sink with a maximum waste line of one and one-half inches.

ii.     A cooking facility with appliances that do not require electrical service greater than 120 volts or natural or propane gas.

iii.     A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are reasonable to the size of the unit.

g.     No additional parking shall be required for a junior accessory dwelling unit other than that required when the existing primary residence was constructed.

h.     The junior accessory dwelling unit may share a bath/sanitation facility with the primary residence or have its own.

7.     Except as provided herein, a junior accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all local building and fire code requirements, as appropriate.

8.     Junior accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers or fire attenuation specifications if they are not required for the primary residence. An inspection to confirm that the junior accessory dwelling unit complies with development standards may be assessed.

9.     No sewer or water connection fees shall be required for the development of a junior accessory dwelling unit. An inspection to confirm that the junior accessory dwelling unit complies with development standards may be assessed.

10.   Prior to issuance of a building permit for a junior accessory dwelling unit, a covenant shall be recorded between the owner and the City of Encinitas agreeing to the terms stipulated in this chapter. The covenant shall specifically mention that:

a.     The junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling unit.

b.     The junior accessory unit may be rented, but only with a rental agreement with terms greater than 30 days.

c.     The junior accessory unit is limited to the size and attributes set forth by this section.

d.     The owner of record of the property shall occupy the primary dwelling unit or the junior accessory dwelling unit, except where the primary dwelling and junior accessory dwelling are held by an agency such as a land trust or housing organization in an effort to create affordable housing.

e.     The covenant shall be binding upon any successors in interest or ownership of the property and lack of compliance with the provisions thereof may result in legal action against the property owner, including revocation of the right to maintain a junior accessory dwelling unit on the property.

11.   Applications for junior accessory dwelling units conforming to the requirements of this section shall be considered ministerially without discretionary review or a hearing, and the City shall approve or deny such applications within 120 calendar days after receiving the completed application.

12.   Junior accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from the requirements of undergrounding overhead utilities and public right-of-way dedication and improvements.

V.     Family Day Care Homes, Small and Large. Small and large family day care homes are permitted by right as accessory uses in all residential zones.

W.    Wind Turbine Systems, Small. A wind turbine system, small shall be permitted on a building site in compliance with the following conditions:

1.     Setback. The system shall be set back from property lines and roads at least two times the height of the wind system (to the top of the blade in vertical position).

2.     Fencing. Public access to the wind turbines shall be restricted through the use of a fence with locked gates, non-climbable towers or other suitable methods.

3.     Signs. Suitable warning signs containing a telephone number for emergency calls shall face all approaches to the system. Individual signs shall be between five and 16 square feet.

4.     Noise. The wind turbine shall be operated in such manner that it does not exceed the sound level limits of the Municipal Code.

X.     Bed and Breakfast Home. A bed and breakfast home is a permitted accessory use upon issuance of a minor use permit provided the following conditions are complied with:

1.     Located in a residential zone or in a designated Historic building, or conducted within a structure which was constructed prior to 1936.

2.     A maximum of five bedrooms shall be made available for rent. A bed and breakfast home having more than five bedrooms available for rent may be approved if the home is designated a Historic Landmark in accordance with the Historic Landmark Designation.

3.     No bed and breakfast home shall be located on a lot closer than 200 feet from any other lot containing a bed and breakfast home. The 200-foot distance shall be measured in a straight line connecting the closest points on the lot lines and without regard for intervening structures.

4.     The owner or lessee of the property shall operate the facility and reside in the home.

5.     One off-street parking space for each room rented and each employee shall be provided in addition to the parking required for single-family occupancy.

6.     Service shall be limited to the rental of rooms and the provision of breakfast for overnight guests. No food preparation or cooking guests shall be conducted within any bedroom made available for rent.

7.     Signs shall be limited to one on-premises sign not to exceed two square feet.

Y.     Accessory uses shall be permitted for horticultural uses provided the buildings to house said use do not exceed 10% of the net area (or 8,000 square feet whichever is less) of the lot that the primary horticulture use is located. Such accessory uses include: offices, storage (subject to subsection H), packing, assemblage, distribution, maintenance, related grading (soil mixtures), and the like.

Z.     Other Necessary and Customary Uses. Accessory uses and structures, in addition to those identified above, which are necessarily and customarily associated with, and are appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to principal use, as determined by the Director.

AA.  Temporary Food Stand. Temporary food stands for sale of agricultural products or cottage foods as defined by state law by the resident(s) are permitted as an activity of limited duration (12 hours a week during daylight hours) and may involve the placement of non-permanent structures (e.g., portable furniture) not exceeding a maximum of 120 square feet in sale/display area. Structures shall not create a nuisance, obstruction or hazard and shall not displace required parking for other uses on the site. (Ord. 88-06; Ord. 89-41; Ord. 90-08; Ord. 92-28; Ord. 92-30; Ord. 93-07; Ord. 94-11; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2018-01; Ord. 2018-02; Ord. 2018-11; Ord. 2019-14)

 

30.48.050 Commercial Use Types.
Subject to the restrictions and limitations specified, the following accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted in commercial zones:

A.     Sidewalk Cafés/Outdoor Cafés. Sidewalk cafés/outdoor cafés shall be a permitted accessory use provided the following conditions are complied with:

1.     The sidewalk/outdoor café shall be conducted accessory to a legally established food and beverage retail sales or eating and drinking establishment use type and clearly shown on a plot plan prepared to the satisfaction of the Planning and Building Director.

2.     An encroachment permit for a sidewalk café is issued by the Department of Public Works when the sidewalk is within public rights-of-way.

3.     The operation of a sidewalk/outdoor café shall meet applicable requirements of the Department of Health Services.

4.     Contiguous property owners shall be notified in accordance with Chapter 30.01 if the sidewalk/outdoor café is within public rights-of-way or in a commercial complex of five or fewer tenants. If the sidewalk/outdoor café is in a commercial complex of six or more tenants, then the remaining tenants in the commercial complex shall be notified in accordance with Chapter 30.01, provided that the notification shall only include the tenants in the commercial complex where the proposed sidewalk/outdoor café is to be located.

5.     The hours of operation of the sidewalk/outdoor café shall be limited to the hours of operation of the associated eating or drinking establishment.

6.     No sound amplification device, musical instrument or sound reproduction device shall be operated or used with a sidewalk/outdoor café and any outdoor lighting shall comply with performance standards.

7.     A finding shall be made that the sidewalk/outdoor café will not adversely affect the neighborhood nor be detrimental to persons residing, visiting or working in the area.

8.     The area of the sidewalk/outdoor café and the area of the restaurant shall be used in determining the parking requirements of the primary restaurant use. A sidewalk/outdoor café added to an existing restaurant shall adhere to the parking standards for restaurants contained within Chapter 30.54 of the Municipal Code or applicable specific plan. The area of the sidewalk/outdoor café shall not remove any required parking areas and the café area shall not block access to the property or surrounding areas. The area for pedestrian access must remain at least 42 inches in width. Café equipment is not to extend beyond the width of the building where the business is located, nor more than five feet from the face of the building unless a finding is made by the Director of Planning and Building that additional area is available for the café.

9.     The sidewalk/outdoor café must be reviewed by and found to meet the standards of the Encinitas Fire Marshal relative to access and flammability.

10.   All other appropriate provisions of the Municipal Code, including sign regulations, must be met.

B.     Outdoor Displays of Merchandise. The outdoor display of merchandise as accessory to a legally established retail or wholesale business is permitted subject to the following limitations:

1.     An encroachment permit for outdoor displays of merchandise is issued by the Department of Public Works when the display area is within the public rights-of-way.

 

2.     Contiguous property owners shall be notified in accordance with Chapter 30.01 if the outdoor display of merchandise is within the public rights-of-way or in a commercial complex of five or fewer tenants. If the outdoor display area is in a commercial complex of six or more tenants, then the remaining tenants in the commercial complex shall be notified in accordance with Chapter 30.01, provided that the notification shall only include the tenants in the commercial complex where the proposed outdoor display of merchandise is to be located.

3.     The outdoor display of merchandise shall be limited to the hours of operation of the associated retail or wholesale establishment.

4.     No sound amplification device, musical instrument or sound reproduction device shall be operated or used with the outdoor display of merchandise and any outdoor lighting shall comply with performance standards.

5.     A finding shall be made that the outdoor display of merchandise will not adversely affect the neighborhood nor be detrimental to persons residing, visiting or working in the area.

6.     The area of the outdoor display of merchandise shall not remove any required parking areas and the display area shall not block access to the property or surrounding areas. The area for pedestrian access must remain at least 42 inches in width. Merchandise is not to extend beyond the width of the building where the business is located, nor more than five feet from the face of the building unless a finding is made by the Director of Planning and Building that additional area is available for the display of merchandise.

7.     The outdoor display area and types of merchandise must be reviewed by and found to meet the standards of the Encinitas Fire Marshal relative to access and flammability.

8.     All other appropriate provisions of the Municipal Code, including sign regulations, must be met.

C.    Caretaker’s Dwelling Unit. Pursuant to Chapter 30.09, one dwelling unit is permitted, accessory to the principal use(s) on site, to serve as the residence of a caretaker or superintendent (and family) for the establishment(s) on the property. A caretaker’s dwelling unit is limited to 750 square feet or 30% of the floor area of the principal structure(s) on the property, whichever is less, with a minimum of 400 square feet allowed by right. Additional floor area over 750 square feet or 30% of the floor area of the principal structure may be allowed with the approval of a minor use permit. A covenant, in form and content acceptable to the Planning and Building Director, shall be recorded to assure that the caretaker’s unit is not otherwise rented or expanded beyond the limitations set forth in this section. (Ord. 94-11; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2014-12)

 

30.48.060 Light Industrial.
Single-family dwellings or a single mobilehome limited to 750 square feet or 30% of the floor area of the principal structure(s) on the property, whichever is less, with a minimum of 400 square feet allowed by right (additional floor area over 750 square feet or 30% of the floor area of the principal structure may be allowed with the approval of a minor use permit) shall be permitted as follows in the Light Industrial Zone subject to the following:

 

A.     Caretaker or Superintendent. On a lot or building site with a permitted industrial use, and occupied exclusively by a caretaker or superintendent (and family) of such industrial use; or

B.     Farm Owner or Operator. On a lot or building site having a net area of at least five acres which is being farmed, and occupied exclusively by the owner or operator thereof; or

C.    Kennel Owner or Operator. On a lot or building site with a kennel, and occupied exclusively by the owner or operator thereof and family. (Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.48.070 Retail Sales in the Light Industrial Zone.
Retail sales as an accessory use is permitted in the light industrial zone when the product sold is produced on the site. (Ord. 2015-01)

Chapter 30.54 OFF-STREET PARKING
30.54.010 Purpose.
A.     All regulations set forth in this chapter are for the purpose of providing convenient off-street parking space for vehicles. The parking requirements of this chapter are to be considered the minimum necessary for the uses permitted within the respective zones. In addition to parking regulations set forth in this chapter, each specific plan, identified in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, may have additional or separate parking standards for its plan area. Refer to individual specific plans, listed in Chapter 30.84, for parking regulations within each specific plan area.

B.     The intent of these regulations is to provide adequately designed parking areas with sufficient capacity and adequate circulation to minimize traffic congestion and promote public safety. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, owner, or operator of the specific use to provide and maintain adequate off-street parking. (Ord. 94-02)

 

30.54.020 General Provisions.
A.     Off-street parking facilities, for both motor vehicles and bicycles, shall be provided on a development site as required in this chapter in terms of both the number of spaces required and their development and landscaping requirements as follows:

1.     All new structures on a development site requires all parking facilities on the site to meet the current standards.

2.     Addition of new building square footage (attached or detached) to existing building(s) on a development site requires that parking be provided at current ratios for the additional square footage without any reduction to existing parking.

3.     Any change of use of an existing building where the new use requires a greater number of off-street parking stalls than the previous use, as established by the current schedule of required off-street parking, shall provide parking for that portion of the building(s) on the development site where such change of use is established. Existing parking shall not be reduced below current standards.

B.     The required parking facilities needed for any development shall be located on the same site or, if an irrevocable access and/or parking easement is obtained, the parking may be on an adjacent site. Property within the ultimate right-of-way of a street or highway shall not be used to provide required parking, or loading or unloading facilities.

C.    The requirements of this chapter shall apply to temporary as well as permanent uses.

D.    No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking facilities prescribed in this chapter; however, the facilities being used for off-street parking on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum standards prescribed in this chapter.

E.     Projects with unexpired design reviews or conditional use permits approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall meet the requirements of the parking ordinance in effect on the date the design review or conditional use permits were approved.

F.     All required off-street parking spaces shall be designated, located, constructed, and maintained so as to be fully usable during workday periods or as needed by the use of the premises, and shall be permanently available without charge to all uses as intended under this title. Valet parking service, with or without charge, may be permitted upon the issuance of a minor use permit.

G.    Where the application of these schedules results in a fractional space, then the fraction shall be rounded to the next higher whole number.

H.    The parking requirement for uses not specifically listed in the matrix shall be determined by the Director of Planning and Building. Parking studies may be required.

I.      In the calculation of parking requirements for centers, off-peak-hour uses from the normal operating hours of the center shall not be counted toward the parking requirement.

J.     In situations where a combination of uses are developed on a site, parking shall be provided for each of the uses on the site according to the schedule given in this chapter. (See Section 30.54.050.)

K.     The required number of parking spaces identified herein are considered minimum standards for the majority of cases. However, the required number of parking spaces may be adjusted based on the results of a site-specific parking study with the issuance of a minor use permit. Any permitted deviations in the required number of parking spaces shall be recorded in a covenant and shall be subject to on-going review and monitoring. Critical consideration and documentation must be provided before any reduction in the number of required parking spaces would be authorized for development along or west of Vulcan Avenue.

L.     Where a limited percentage of a land use is permitted at a reduced ratio in an office complex or commercial center any portion of that land use that exceeds the percentage limitation shall provide parking at a higher ratio for that portion of the land use that exceeds the allowable percentage only.

M.    In campgrounds where trailers or motor homes are permitted, the campsite spaces designed to accommodate them may be counted as the required parking spaces.

N.    In single-family residences and duplexes, access drives that fall within the required setback may be counted towards any parking required in excess of the first two spaces.

O.    Surface treatment for parking areas required for agricultural roadside stands may use a #2 base, crushed rock or grass crete in lieu of asphalt or concrete pavement. Access and egress shall not require backing into traffic.

P.     In calculating the amount of parking required for restaurants located in commercial centers and office parks, please refer to the parking requirements for retail/commercial centers and office parks. (Ord. 94-02; Ord. 94-11; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2010-10)

 

30.54.030 Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking.
A.     The number of off-street parking spaces required for automobiles shall be no less than that set forth in the following table:

 

USE

PARKING SPACES REQUIRED

Residential

 

Single room occupancy housing facility

1 space for every 2 living units; unless the applicant provides substantial evidence demonstrating that the actual parking need is lower, subject to the approval of the Development Services Director.

Dwelling, single-family or two-family (attached or detached)

2 enclosed parking spaces for each unit up to 2,500 square feet of floor area. 3 spaces for dwelling units in excess of 2,500 square feet. Any parking space over 2 spaces may be enclosed or unenclosed.

Dwellings, multiple (includes mobilehome parks)

0.25 spaces per unit for guest parking plus resident parking based on following:

Studio apartments

1.5 spaces per unit

One & two bedroom units

2 spaces per unit

Three or more bedrooms

2.5 spaces per unit

Accessory apartments

1 space

Convents and monasteries

1 space per resident plus 5 guest spaces

Fraternities & sororities

1 space per bed

Qualified employee housing – seven or more employees

1 space per unit or 1 space for every 3 beds plus 1 space for an on-site manager (if applicable); unless the applicant provides substantial evidence demonstrating that the actual parking need is lower, subject to the approval of the Development Services Director.

Visitor Service

 

Campgrounds

2 spaces for each campsite plus 5 spaces at registration site

Hotels and motels

1.25 spaces for each bedroom, other principal, ancillary and/or accessory uses shall meet parking standards that restaurants in conjunction with hotels/motels may provide parking at the ratio of 1 space per 100 square feet of the area of the restaurant

Hotel complex

Parking study required

Recreation

 

Amusement arcades

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Billiard/pool parlors

2 spaces for each table

Bowling alleys

4 spaces for each lane

Dance halls, skating rinks, etc.

1 space for each 5 fixed seats, plus 1 for each 35 sq. ft. of dance floor rink area, or general assembly/seating area

Golf courses

10 spaces for each hole plus 1 for each 20 sq. ft. of general assembly area

Racquetball/tennis/health clubs

1 space for each 100 sq. ft. gross floor area. Swimming pool shall be counted as floor area.

Commercial stables

1 space for every 5 horses boarded at site

Youth center

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area (Swimming pool shall not be counted as floor area.)

Parks

Parking study required

Office

 

Ambulance services

1 space per 500 sq. ft. gross floor area plus 2 storage spaces

General offices

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor space

Professional services including financial institutions, attorneys, accountants, realtors, etc.

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Medical, dental and veterinary offices/clinics

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Government offices

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Government, medical, dental and/or veterinary offices and/or clinics may equal up to a combined total of 15% of the gross floor area of an office park or center

1 space per 250 sq. ft. of the gross floor area

Restaurants* may comprise up to a combined total of 10% of the gross floor area of an office park or centers

1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area of the restaurant

Commercial

 

Furniture, major appliances

1 space for each 450 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Restaurants

1 space for each 100 sq. ft. area. In an area with an adopted specific plan, the regulations of the specific plan shall apply.

Motor vehicle sales, machinery sales, wholesale stores, mobilehome sales, or equipment sales and rental yards

1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Petroleum product service station and/or car wash

3 spaces plus 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of retail floor area; plus 3 spaces for each service bay; plus queue space for 5 vehicles per wash bay; plus 2 spaces per wash bay for parking

Individual retail uses and other individual commercial services except as otherwise specified herein

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Retail and Commercial Centers

 

Less than 100,000 sq. ft.

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area. May contain up to 15% medical, dental offices. May also include up to 8% restaurants.

More than 100,000 sq. ft.

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area. May contain up to 20% restaurants.

Time share projects

1.25 spaces per bedroom for 1 bedroom units; and 1.00 space per bedroom for 2 or more bedroom units; accessory uses, including restaurants in conjunction with the project, shall provide additional parking at a ratio established through the use permit process

Industrial

 

Industrial uses, except as otherwise specified herein

1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of floor area

Laboratories, biochemical X-ray, dental, research and testing

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area under 5,000 sq. ft. plus 1 space for every 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area over 5,000 sq. ft.

Manufacturing uses, such as bottling establishments, bakeries, canneries, printing and engraving shops and others

1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Public utilities facilities not having business offices on the premises

1 space for each employee on the maximum shift; plus 1 space for each vehicle operated or kept in connection with the use. In no event shall less than 2 parking spaces be provided for each use regardless of the number of employees or vehicles operated.

Self-storage

1 space for each 25 storage cubicles and distributed equally throughout the storage area within parking lanes service storage cubicles as follows: one-way driveways, one 18 ft. wide parking and travel lane; two-way driveways, one 26 ft. wide parking and travel lane

Studios: motion picture, recording, radio & T.V. broadcasting

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area under 5,000 sq. ft.; plus 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area over 5,000 sq. ft.

Warehouse and storage building

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area provided that any portion devoted to office or sales area shall provide 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of floor area so used

Institutional

 

Hospitals

2 spaces for each bed

Medical complex or campus

Parking study required

Institutional uses, except as otherwise specified herein

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Libraries

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Museums

1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Rest home, convalescent home, nursing homes

1 space for each 2 beds

Schools, elementary and intermediate

1.5 spaces for each classroom or lecture hall plus 1 for each 3 fixed seats in school auditorium, or if there are no fixed seats, then 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of auditorium floor area

High school

1.5 spaces for each classroom or lecture hall; plus 1 per 3 students in 11th and 12th grades as determined by design capacity; plus 15 spaces for visitor

Trade, business, professional or vocational schools, colleges, and universities

Parking study required

Child care centers and nurseries

1 space for each 10 children the facility is designed to accommodate; plus 1 space for each employee, and adequate room for vehicle drop-off

Assembly

 

Churches

1 space for every 3 persons based on total occupancy permitted by the City’s adopted building code

Lodges, theatres, stadiums and other places of public assembly

1 space for every 3 persons based on total occupancy permitted by the City’s adopted building code

Agricultural

 

Agricultural roadside stands

5 spaces

Community garden

No parking required if on-street parking is available within 400 feet

Greenhouses

3 spaces per acre plus parking for other uses in accord with this schedule

Horticulture

1 space per 2 acres plus parking for other uses on site based on use

Kennels/animal shelters (pet stores are considered to be commercial)

1 space per 400 sq. ft.

*      Parking requirements for outdoor dining and/or sidewalk dining areas shall include such areas in the gross floor area requiring parking spaces.

 

B.     Handicap accessible parking space requirements shall count toward fulfillment of all automobile parking requirements established by this chapter. Handicap accessible parking requirements are established by the State of California and shall be in accordance with California Title 24 Accessibility Guidelines.

C.    Bicycle Parking Requirements. The table below contains the minimum bicycle parking requirements. Only those uses identified in the table are required to install bicycle parking. Bicycle parking facilities shall be stationary storage racks or devices designed to secure the frame and wheel of the bicycle.

 

Use

Minimum Bicycle Parking Requirement

Administrative/professional, shopping centers and other commercial uses less than square footage identified below

3 spaces

Administrative/professional services over 20,000 sq. ft. of floor area

5 spaces

Shopping centers with over 50,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

1 space per 33 required automobile spaces

Restaurants

 

Less than 6,000 sq. ft. of floor area

2 spaces

More than 6,000 sq. ft. of floor area

5 spaces

Medical and dental offices or clinics, and veterinary offices

 

Recreation

1 space per 33 required automobile spaces

Hospitals

8 spaces

Churches

8 spaces

 

D.    Motorcycle Parking Requirements—All Uses Other Than Residential.

 

Number of Automobile Spaces Provided

Minimum Motorcycle Parking Requirement

25—100

4 spaces

More than 100

4 spaces per 100 required automobile spaces

 

E.     Loading Space Requirements. Loading spaces shall be provided at the following rate for all commercial, light industrial, and public/semi-public uses unless increased or decreased by the Director of Planning and Building.

1.     One loading space shall be provided for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.

2.     One additional loading space shall be provided for each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or its fraction greater than 10%.

3.     At least two passenger loading spaces shall be provided at all schools, hospitals, rest home/convalescent homes, youth centers, transit centers and nursery/day care centers. (Ord. 94-11; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2003-10; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2019-14; Ord. 2019-16)

 

30.54.040 Off-Street Parking Development Standards.
With recommendation by the Planning Commission, the City Council may by resolution adopt a City Off-Street Parking Design Manual to establish standards for the dimensions of parking spaces, configuration of spaces, surfacing, driveway design, and other parking area design criteria. Upon adoption by the City Council, the contents of the Manual shall be incorporated herein by reference and become requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-08)

 

30.54.050 Parking Requirements for Joint Use.
The Planning Commission may, upon application by the owner or lessee of any property, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities under the conditions specified below:

Up to 50% of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a use considered to be primarily a day-time use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a night-time use; and from zero to 50% of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a use considered to be primarily a night-time use may be provided by the parking facilities of use considered to be primarily a day-time use, provided that such a reciprocal parking arrangement shall be approved through a minor use permit and be subject to the following conditions:

A.     The building or use requesting to utilize the existing off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use, shall be located within a reasonable distance of such parking facility, which shall be determined on a case-by-case basis.

B.     The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the building or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.

C.    All parties involved in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall provide evidence of agreement for such joint use by a proper legal instrument approved by the City Attorney as to form and content. Such instrument, when approved as conforming to the provisions of this title, shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and copies shall be filed with the Planning and Building Department. (Ord. 96-07)

 

30.54.060 Parking Area Landscaping.
A.     This section will be superseded by the adoption of the City of Encinitas Landscape and Irrigation Manual.

B.     The purpose of parking lot landscaping is to mitigate the negative environmental impacts. These include, but are not limited to: temperature changes from the heat absorption qualities of the asphalt; grading and drainage impacts; air pollution from cooling vehicles; and visual impacts. Therefore, landscaping in parking areas shall be predominantly trees to provide shade but should also include shrubs and low ground cover for visual relief and mitigation of air pollution impacts.

C.    Parking area landscaping shall include one 15-gallon tree for every five parking spaces distributed throughout the parking area in such a way as to maximize the amount of shade provided. Smaller sized trees may be approved provided the trees reach a desired maturity height within three years after project occupancy.

D.    Parking area landscaping shall include a combination of trees, shrubbery, vines, and groundcover, all of which shall be drought tolerant or drought resistant varieties.

E.     All parking area landscaping shall be watered by an automatic irrigation system and regularly maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, free of weeds, trash and debris.

F.     In addition to the landscaping required for all front, side and rear yards, the landscaped portion of a parking area shall constitute at least 15% of the overall parking area. Only landscaping within the parking lot or within five feet of the exterior boundaries of the parking lot shall be considered “parking lot” landscaping. Landscaped areas that also serve as portions of parking stalls shall not be counted towards more than one fifth of the total minimum required parking lot landscaping.

G.    Planting beds shall be distributed throughout the parking lot as evenly as possible and each bed shall have a minimum interior dimension of not less than four feet.

H.    For parking lot islands, a minimum 12-inch wide walk shall be provided adjacent to parking stalls, and be separated from vehicular areas by a four-inch high by six-inch wide Portland concrete cement curbing.

I.      Any unused space resulting from the design of the parking area shall be used for landscaping purposes.

J.     Sidewalks to adjacent commercial properties shall be provided as necessary to allow and encourage pedestrian movement throughout the commercial zone. Internal pedestrian circulation systems shall be integrated with the surrounding system of City sidewalks.

K.     In addition to the above requirements, the following provisions shall also apply.

1.     Any aisle providing circulation through the lot shall be separated from parking rows by a minimum five-foot wide planting strip (exterior dimensions). Median strips and planting islands help to direct vehicular circulation routes. All planters shall have trees, low shrubs and/or groundcover and be irrigated.

2.     Planting islands shall be placed at the end of each row of parking.

3.     Within parking areas of greater than 20 parking spaces, an island with a minimum interior planting width of four feet and length equal to that of the adjacent parking stall or equivalent planting area shall be provided within rows for every 10 cars within the parking area.

4.     Specimen plants and shrubs shall be utilized near the entrance of the project. The landscaping shall complement the existing neighborhood and the site’s architectural theme. Planting along property boundaries can be arranged as informal groupings as an alternative to rigid, formal plantings. Annuals should be introduced only where proper maintenance is feasible. Screening should be done with flowering trees and shrubs to add accent and color. A fence or wall should be made of textured materials to add extra interest.

5.     Street trees shall be planted at minimum 40-foot intervals adjacent to any public right-of-way and shall be a minimum of 15 gallon container size.

6.     Plantings within 15 feet of intersections shall not exceed 24 inches to avoid interfering with visibility.

7.     To minimize the probability of damage to light standards and trees, they should be located between parking stalls.

8.     Pedestrian walkways should be visually separated from vehicular traffic by the use of plant material and a textured or colored paved surface. Vehicle overhang should not interfere with pedestrian movement on an adjacent sidewalk.

9.     Decorative paving for plazas or other special features used as substitute for a portion of the required interior planting may be approved by the Director of Planning and Building.

10.   Concrete wheel stops are required where walls and fences abut driveways and parking stalls.

11.   Where large expanses of asphalt occur, different paving materials such as patterned concrete or interlocking pavers should be used to reduce the visual impact of the asphalt.

12.   For sloped parking lots, terracing can reduce the visual impact and planting strips shall be used to accommodate grade changes.

13.   Where a landscaped filter strip is required for environmental reasons to reduce downslope run-off and surface soil erosion, plant material should be planted to a width of 50 to 70 feet of a 0% to 10% slope.

14.   All trash containers shall be screened with fencing and/or landscaping.

15.   The parking lot shall be designed to preserve existing trees on the site that are in good condition.

16.   Prior to the issuance of a final building occupancy certificate, all landscaping planting and irrigation shall be installed and be in acceptable condition. The plants shall be healthy and free of weeds, disease, or pests. The irrigation system shall be properly constructed and in good working order.

L.     Typical Perimeter Planting Plan.

1.     Planting Notes. Till soil amendments and fertilizer six inches into soil. Recommend fertilizer tablets for trees and shrubs.

2.     Finish Grading. All landscaped areas shall be finish graded to remove rocks and clods and to ensure adequate surface drainage.



 

M.    Typical Irrigation Plan for Perimeter Planting.

1.     Stake all shrubheads adjacent to curbs and paving.

2.     Anti-syphon valves shall be reinforced with metal or staked PVC riser (use two #4 rebars, 12 G.A. galvanized wire, and weatherproof taping with PVC riser).



N.    Typical Parking Lot Planters.

Planting Plan Requirements



 

O.    Typical Parking Lot Irrigation Plan.

Irrigation Plan Requirements



 

P.     Landscape Design Notes.

1.     Landscape Design. The purpose of parking lot landscape is to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the parking area. The landscaping shall reflect the existing street planting and complement the site’s architectural theme.

2.     Perimeter Plants. Whenever possible, planters shall be placed along the edge of the parking lot and driveway. Perimeter planting brings relief from continuous areas of paving and also screens parked cars from view of the surrounding properties.

Trees: Minimum of one five-gallon tree/five spaces.

Shrubs: Minimum one-gallon size.

Ground Cover: Flats of six- to eight-inch cuttings.

Planter strips with shrubs shall have an unpaved minimum width of two feet. Planter strips with trees shall have an unpaved minimum width of four feet.



High shrubs and/or trees may be used for perimeter screening except at driveway entrances or wherever plant material will obstruct the view of oncoming traffic.

3.     Parking Lot Perimeters. In larger parking lots, the planters shall be used to bring relief from excess stretches of paving and to aid the flow of both automotive and pedestrian traffic.

High canopy trees, low shrubs and ground cover shall be used at access and egress points for optimum traffic visibility.



(Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.54.070 Off-Street Parking Use/Maintenance.
All parking facilities required by this chapter shall be maintained in good operating condition for the duration of the use requiring such facilities. Such facilities shall be used exclusively for the parking of vehicles. The parking facilities shall not be used for the storage of merchandise, or for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment. Parking facilities shall not be used for the sale of merchandise, except on a temporary basis with proper City approval.

 

30.54.080 Parking Districts.
Areas may be exempted entirely or in part from the parking requirements as otherwise established in this chapter where parking districts are organized to meet the parking needs of an area. Specific parking requirements for the district will be determined at the time of its formation and shall require approval by the City Council.

Chapter 30.55 ANIMAL REGULATIONS
30.55.010 Purpose.
In order to protect residents from the potentially adverse affects of keeping animals within the City, the following regulations are established.

 

30.55.020 General Requirements.
A.     The keeping of dogs, cats and other small animals that does not constitute a kennel as defined by this Code are not subject to the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Wild or undomesticated animals require a wild animal permit as specified in the Encinitas Municipal Code.

C.    The requirements of this chapter do not apply to small animals, specialty animals, dogs, or cats which are kept for sale in zones where retail sales are permitted provided that all activities are conducted entirely within an enclosed building, the building is completely soundproof, there are no outside runs or cages, no boarding of animals, no outside trash containers, and no offensive odors.

D.    Within the listed residential zones (RR, RR-1, RR-2, R-3, R-5, R-8 and RS-11) the following animal-related activities are allowed subject to the limitations specified in this chapter:

 

ACTIVITY

ZONE

RR

RR-1

RR-2

R-3

R-5

R-8

RS-11

1. Stable, commercial (see definition and Section 30.55.060)

C

C

X

X

X

X

X

2. Stable, private (see definition and Section 30.55.070)

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

3. Large animal keeping—Horses and others (2 animals permitted for 1 acre lots; plus 1 permitted for each 1/2 acre over 1 acre)

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

4. Horses, in addition to other large animals (Olivenhain)—2 horses permitted per lot; plus 1 permitted per each additional 1/2 acre over 1 acre

P

P

P

X

X

X

X

5. Animal raising projects (see Section 30.55.050)

P

P

P

P

Cm

Cm

Cm

6. Small animal raising (includes poultry)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 maximum

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

11—25 maximum

P

P

P

A

A

A

A

26—100 maximum

A

A

A

A

A

X

X

Roosters (maximum 2)

P

P

P

P

P

P

X

7. Dogs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Up to 4

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

4 to 6 maximum

P

P

P

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

8. Specialty animal raising

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bees (See Section 4.04.020F)

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

Birds

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 or less

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

More than 10 (maximum 100)

P

P

P

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Over 100

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Cm

Others ( * indicates 10 or less)

P

P

P

P*

P*

P*

P

Key:

X:     Not Permitted

P:     Permitted

A:     Agriculture Permit

Cm: Minor Conditional Use Permit

C:    Major Conditional Use Permit

 

1     Tier A applies to all single-family residential zones. Tier B applies to RR and RR-1 Zones and requires an agriculture permit. Tier C applies to the RR Zone and requires an agriculture permit. See Section 4.04.020F for additional information regarding the tiered regulations for beekeeping.

 

(Ord. 89-41; Ord. 90-11; Ord. 95-20; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.55.030 Enclosure Requirements.
Enclosures containing the animal-related uses described in this chapter includes pens, coops, hutches, stables, barns, corrals, and similar structures and shall be subject to the following requirements:

A.     All enclosures must be at least 35 feet from any dwelling unit on an adjacent lot.

B.     All enclosures shall be required to maintain a 100-foot buffer from all wetland areas and a 50-foot buffer from riparian wetland areas per Section 30.34.040B3 of the Encinitas Municipal Code.

C.    The keeping of animals shall not be permitted in the required front or street sideyard setback areas for main buildings, unless the lot on which the animals are kept is larger than half an acre or located in RR zones.

D.    All enclosures shall be adequate to contain the animals intended to be enclosed and in all cases animals shall be contained within the boundaries of the property on which they are housed. Said animals shall not impact properties that contain environmentally sensitive areas.

E.     All excrement produced by the animals shall be disposed of on a regular basis so as to control flies and odor.

F.     Low-voltage electrical fencing is permitted for containment of large animals subject to the following regulations:

1.     Electrical fencing may be maintained on the property line at a maximum of six feet in height. When the electrical fence is adjacent to a public road or access easement, the electrical fence shall be located on the inside of a non-electrical fence.

2.     Permits shall be obtained from the Building Department unless exempt. UL (Underwriters Laboratory) approved and other recognized agencies approved electrical fencing is exempt from permits.

3.     Appropriate signage shall be posted to give notice of the electrical fencing. (Ord. 91-04; Ord. 2016-08; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.55.040 Kennel Requirements.
In addition to the requirements for enclosures contained in Section 30.55.030, all kennels shall be subject to the following regulations:

A.     The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner by the daily removal of waste and by the use of spray and disinfectants to prevent the accumulation of flies, the spread of disease or offensive odor.

B.     Kennels shall conform to the regulations regarding noise found in Chapter 30.40.

C.    Animal odors shall not be detectable beyond the lot lines of the property where the kennel is located.

D.    Dust and drainage from the kennel enclosure shall not create a nuisance or a hazard to adjoining property uses.

E.     The kennel enclosure shall be screened by a nontransparent fence at least six feet in height.

F.     Where a kennel is located on property abutting any residential property, no enclosure shall be located within 50 feet of any interior side lot line or within 25 feet of the rear lot line.

 

30.55.050 Animal Raising Project Regulations.
In addition to the regulations imposed by Section 30.55.020, animal raising projects shall be subject to the following regulations:

A.     Animal raising projects shall be limited to the keeping, raising and breeding of domesticated animals for 4-H, FFA or other similar youth projects.

 

B.     Where required, a temporary use permit for animal raising projects may be granted by the Director of Planning and Building for a period not to exceed two years.

C.    Other conditions pertaining to the type, number, and locations of animals may be imposed with approval of the temporary use permit that are reasonable and necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of both the animals and the public. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.55.060 Stable, Commercial.
In addition to the regulations imposed by Section 30.55.020, a commercial stable shall be subject to the following regulations:

A.     Minimum lot size of 10 acres is required, unless otherwise approved through the conditional use permit process.

B.     A major conditional use permit is required for this use to regulate, among other concerns, traffic, accessory uses, the number of animals allowed per site, the management of animal waste to prevent discharges of sediments, nutrients and contaminants to streams, wetlands, estuaries, lakes and groundwater, business hours and the number of events per year.

C.    Accessory uses such as tack shops, on-site sale of food for people and animals, or similar uses may be permitted. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.55.070 Stable, Private.
In addition to the regulations imposed by Section 30.55.020, a private stable shall be subject to the following regulation:

A.     A private stable exceeding the number of animals permitted pursuant to Municipal Code Chapter 30.55 will require a minor use permit to regulate, among other concerns, the management of animal waste to prevent discharges of sediments, nutrients and contaminants to streams, wetlands, estuaries, lakes and groundwater. (Ord. 2017-03)

Chapter 30.56 RECYCLING FACILITIES
30.56.010 Purpose.
To provide for the location of recycling facilities and to insure their compatibility with surrounding uses, the following regulations are established.

 

30.56.020 Applicability.
The requirements of this section apply to all recycling facilities, including collection and processing facilities and mobile recycling units with the exception of reverse vending machines located as freestanding units next to a building wall and within 50 feet of the main entrance to a retail or wholesale beverage vendor.

 

30.56.030 General Requirements.
A.     Recycling facilities may be approved in the GC, LI, and BP zones as a minor use permit through the process described in this title.

B.     Recycling collection facilities shall be contained within a structure that is compatible with surrounding structures in the area and with the architecture of the building or center in which it is located; and shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential uses.

C.    Recycling collection facilities should not significantly decrease required parking or disrupt parking lot circulation. Sufficient drop-off space shall be provided around the collection facility to accommodate the users.

D.    At permanent collection sites which are deficient in landscaping and/or paving quality relative to current standards, the application for a permit must include improvements which would meaningfully upgrade the overall landscape and/or paving quality of the site.

E.     A receptacle of sufficient size must be provided for containers in which recyclable materials are brought to the collection facility, which shall be emptied on regular basis so that it is not full or causing trash or litter in the area.

F.     Signing shall be restrained and shall be specifically approved as part of the minor conditional use permit.

G.    All public facilities should have recycling facilities including schools.

H.    Collection facilities shall generally not be adjacent to the public right-of-way, but rather located in the interior portion of the site, to function primarily as a convenience to users of the primary activity of the site.

I.      A notice must be posted on all collection facilities stating that no materials are to be left outside of collection containers. Any materials left outside of collection containers, including abandoned matter, must be removed promptly by the facility operator.

J.     All collection facilities shall have a 24-hour local or toll free number clearly posted where a responsible party can be reached in the event of malfunction, misuse, lack of capacity, or other problems related to the facility.

K.     Recycling collection facilities shall be approved initially for a one year time period to insure that review of the manner in which the operation is being conducted occurs on a regular basis.

L.     Recycling processing facilities shall be subject to all of the requirements for collection facilities, and the following requirements:

1.     Processing facilities shall not abut any existing or planned residential properties.

2.     Processing facilities shall be in a wholly enclosed building, except for incidental storage which must be enclosed by a solid wall at least eight feet in height and shall be landscaped as required for commercial and industrial uses on all street frontages and in parking areas.

3.     Processing facilities shall conform with all applicable performance standards specified in this title.

4.     One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing facility. Parking standards will otherwise be as mandated by Chapter 30.54 (Off-Street Parking) for all uses on the site on which the facility is located.

5.     Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park, and deposit recyclable materials. (Ord. 2015-01)

Chapter 30.57 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
30.57.010 Applicability.
Any conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility granted pursuant to Chapter 30.74 of the Zoning Code shall comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter, which are supplementary to and in the event of conflict shall supersede the regulations set forth in Chapter 30.74. Sections 30.57.050 through 30.57.100, and 30.57.120 of this chapter shall apply only to specified hazardous waste facility projects excluding household hazardous materials collection centers, as herein defined. (Ord. 92-23)

 

30.57.020 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions govern the construction of this section:

“Active fault” shall mean a fault which surface displacement has occurred during Holocene time (about the last 11,000 years) and is associated with one or more of the following:

1.     A recorded earthquake with surface rupture;

2.     Fault creep slippage;

3.     Displaced survey lines.

“Areas subject to tsunamis, seiches, and storm surges” shall mean areas bordering oceans, bays, rivers, lagoons, inlets, estuaries or similar bodies of water which may flood due to tsunamis, seiches and storm surges.

“Dam failure inundation areas” shall mean areas below a dam structure (i.e., reservoir dam, debris basin) which would be inundated by the flow of water from the impoundment created by the dam structure if it were to fail.

“Flood hazard areas” shall mean areas which are prone to inundation by floods having a 100-year return period, or by flash floods and debris flows resulting from major storm events.

“Hazardous waste” shall mean a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either:

1.     Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness.

2.     Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.

“Hazardous waste facility” shall mean any structure, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land, used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal, or recycling of hazardous waste.

“Hazardous waste facility project” shall mean a project undertaken for the purpose of siting and constructing a new hazardous waste facility or for the purposes of significantly expanding or modifying an existing hazardous waste facility that is being used or operated under a permit pursuant to Section 25200 of the California Health and Safety Code or a grant of interim status pursuant to Section 25200.5 of that code. Unless expressly provided otherwise, “hazardous waste facility project” includes a specified hazardous waste facility project.

“Hazardous waste land use decision” shall mean a discretionary decision of a local agency concerning a hazardous waste facility project, including the issuance of a land use permit or conditional use permit, the granting of a variance, the subdivision of property, and the modification of existing property lines pursuant to Title 7 (commencing with Section 65000) of the California Government Code.

“Household hazardous materials collection center” shall mean a project or facility publicly operated or under contract with the City of Encinitas to collect and transfer household hazardous materials.

“Immobile populations” shall mean facilities from which occupants should not or cannot be relocated. These include, but are not limited to, such uses as hospitals, nursing homes, child care facilities, K-12 schools, convalescent homes and jail facilities.

“Liquefaction” shall mean surface materials that develop liquid properties upon being disturbed.

“Potentially active fault” shall mean a fault showing evidence of surface displacement during Quaternary time (from the last 11,000 years to about the last two to three million years), and is characterized by the following:

1.     Considerable length;

2.     Association with an alignment of numerous earthquake epicenters;

3.     Continuity with faults having historic displacement;

4.     Association with youthful major mountain scarps or ranges;

5.     Correlation with strong geophysical anomalies.

“Proximity to populations” shall mean the distance from the active portion of the facility (where waste will be treated or stored) to dwellings used by one or more persons as a permanent place of residence, or to dwellings inhabited by persons temporarily for purposes of work (e.g., migrant workers, construction camps), or to dwellings used for temporary purposes (e.g., hotels or motels).

“Residuals repository” shall mean a specially sited, designed, constructed and operated facility for the purpose of storing waste residuals as a result of hazardous waste treatment.

“Significantly expand or modify” shall mean to expand or modify an existing hazardous waste facility, including a specified hazardous waste facility, in a manner so that a land use decision and environmental impact report are required.

“Slope stability” shall mean the relative degree to which the site will be vulnerable to the forces of gravity, such as landslide, soil creep, earth flow, or any other mass movement of earth material which might cause a breach, carry wastes away from the facility, or inundate the facility.

“Specified hazardous waste facility” shall mean an off-site facility which serves more than one producer of hazardous waste.

“Specified hazardous waste facility project” shall mean a project undertaken for the purpose of siting and constructing a new specified hazardous waste facility or for the purpose of significantly expanding or modifying an existing specified hazardous waste facility that is being used or operated under a permit issued pursuant to Section 25200 of the California Health and Safety Code or a grant of interim status pursuant to Section 25200.5 of that code.

“Subsidence” shall mean a sinking of the land surface following the removal of solid mineral matter or fluids (e.g., water or oil) from the subsurface.

 

30.57.030 Siting Criteria.
An application for any facility under this chapter shall demonstrate compliance with each of the siting criteria specified in the County of San Diego Hazardous Waste Management Plan (HWMP) as currently in effect, and with the following requirements. In the event of conflict between the following requirements and the criteria as stated in the Hazardous Waste Management Plan, the more stringent requirement shall apply. No approval body shall approve the facility unless finding it in compliance with the HWMP and this chapter.

A.     Proximity to Populations.

1.     The distance from the outside perimeter of a residuals repository shall be no less than 2,000 feet to one or more existing residences, as well as land designated in the General Plan for future residential development of more than one dwelling unit per acre.

2.     Facilities handling ignitable, volatile, or reactive waste shall be no less than 2,000 feet to one or more existing residences as well as land designated in the General Plan for future residential development, unless it is demonstrated in the risk assessment that the public is adequately protected in the event of an accident.

3.     Facilities not handling ignitable, volatile, or reactive waste shall be no less than 2,000 feet to one or more existing residences as well as land designated in the General Plan for future residential development, unless it is demonstrated in the project risk assessment that the public is adequately protected in the event of an accident.

4.     The required setbacks shall be precluded from future residential uses through property restrictions as recorded through easements and/or covenants.

 

B.     Immobile Populations. Facilities handling ignitable, reactive or volatile hazardous waste shall be located no less than one mile from any given immobile population unless it is demonstrated in the risk assessment that the public is adequately protected in the event of an accident.

C.    Emergency Services.

1.     Emergency services shall be available within demonstrated emergency response times which are the same or better than those recommended by the National Fire Protection Association.

2.     Facilities may, if approved by the City, provide their own emergency response capability or locate, construct, fund, and provide training for the necessary public facility.

3.     Upon determination of the project risk assessment, facilities may be required to provide additional facility design features or on-site emergency services.

D.    Flood Hazard Areas. No hazardous waste facility or project shall be allowed in flood hazard areas.

E.     Areas Subject to Tsunamis, Seiches, and Storm Surges. No hazardous waste facility or project shall be located in areas subject to tsunamis, seiches, and storm surges.

F.     Active Faults.

1.     All facilities are required to have a 200-foot setback from a known active fault.

2.     Geotechnical reports, subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer or outside consultant are required for all projects to determine whether or not active faults exist within or adjacent to the site. The risk assessment will include this information as well as the magnitude and distance to all known relevant active faults.

3.     All facilities are required to be constructed to Seismic Zone 4 building code standards.

G.    Potentially Active Faults.

1.     All facilities are required to have a 200-foot setback from a known potentially active fault.

2.     Geotechnical reports, subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer or outside consultant are required for all projects to determine whether or not potentially active faults exist within or adjacent to the site. The risk assessment will include this information as well as the magnitude and distance to all known relevant potentially active faults.

3.     All facilities are required to be constructed to Seismic Zone 4 building code standards.

H.    Slope Stability. Hazardous waste facilities and projects shall not be sited on lands where slope exceeds 25%.

I.      Subsidence/Liquefaction. All facilities are prohibited from locating in areas of potential subsidence/liquefaction.

J.     Dam Failure Inundation Areas. All hazardous waste facilities are required to locate outside dam failure inundation areas.

K.     Aqueducts and Reservoirs. All facilities shall not be located in areas where any possible contamination of drinking water contained in reservoirs and aqueducts may occur (directly or indirectly through emissions). The risk assessment and environmental review shall include an analysis of such hazards.

L.     Discharge of Treated Effluent. Facilities generating wastewater are required to be located in areas with adequate sewer capacity to accommodate facility discharge, or provide the capacity necessary as determined by the appropriate water utility district. The risk assessment and environmental review shall include an analysis of such hazards.

M.    Groundwater Protection.

1.     Residual repositories are required to conform to State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) as implemented by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, including:

a.     Immediately underlain by natural geologic materials with permeability of not more than 1x10-7 cm/sec (1.24 in./yr.).

b.     Natural material shall be of sufficient thickness to prevent vertical movement of fluid, including waste and leachate, to waters of the state for as long as such fluids pose a threat to water quality.

c.     Lateral movement prevented by natural or artificial barriers.

2.     In addition to the preceding siting criteria, the current SWRCB regulations also include the following construction standards:

a.     Compatibility of the wastes with construction materials.

b.     Clay liner at least two feet thick (in addition to natural material and synthetic liner).

c.     A leachate collection system adequate to collect and remove twice the maximum anticipated daily volume.

d.     A cover adequate to prevent percolation of precipitation through the wastes.

e.     Precipitation and drainage controls.

f.      Seismic design.

3.     All other facilities are required to meet State Department of Health Service regulations which require double containment for underground storage.

N.    Proximity to Supply Wells and Well Fields. Hazardous waste facilities are required to locate outside the cone of depression created by a pumping well or well field unless an effective hydrogeologic barrier to vertical flow exists.

O.    Depth to Groundwater. The foundation of all containment structures at the facility must be capable of withstanding hydraulic pressure gradients to prevent failure due to settlement, compression, or uplift as certified by a registered civil engineer or engineering geologist registered in California.

P.     Groundwater Monitoring Reliability.

1.     Facilities handling liquids are limited to sites where groundwater flow is in one direction with no vertical inter-formational transfer of water.

2.     Facilities other than residuals repository may provide above-ground storage if increased spill containment and monitoring measures are implemented.

Q.    Major Aquifer Recharge Areas. Facilities with subsurface storage/treatment located within one-half mile of a potential drinking water source are required to have a groundwater study conducted to determine appropriate buffer zone and mitigation measures.

R.    Existing Groundwater Quality. Facilities located in areas where existing groundwater quality is Class I or Class II (class levels established by the Environmental Protection Agency in reference to groundwater vulnerability to contamination) are required to provide increased spill containment and inspection measures.

S.     Wetlands. No facilities shall be located in wetlands such as saltwater, fresh water, and brackish marshes, swamps and bogs inundated by surface or groundwater with frequency to support, under normal circumstances, a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life which requires saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction, as defined in adopted general, regional, state or federal plans.

T.     Proximity to Habitats of Threatened and Endangered Species. No facility shall be located within critical habitat areas, as defined in adopted general, local, regional, state or federal plans.

U.    Natural, Recreational, Cultural, and Aesthetic Resources.

1.     Facilities are prohibited from locating on private or public lands having local, regional, state or national significance, value, or importance. These lands include national, state, regional, county, and local parks and recreation areas, historic resources, wild and scenic rivers, scenic highways, ecological preserves, public and private (e.g., Natural Conservancy Trust for public lands) preservation areas, and other lands of local, regional, state or national significance.

2.     Facilities are prohibited from locating within 2,000 feet of any public recreation area.

3.     Low volume transfer and storage facilities can be considered in these areas to handle any hazardous wastes generated by local workers, residents or visitors.

V.     Prime Agricultural Lands. Hazardous waste facilities may be considered in these areas only if overriding public service needs are sufficiently demonstrated in compliance with state law.

W.    Mineral Deposits. Facilities are prohibited from being sited so as to preclude extraction of minerals necessary to sustain the economy of the state.

X.     Public Facilities. Lands owned by federal, state, county, or local governments including but not limited to highway maintenance and storage areas, airports, city or county corporation yards, waste disposal facilities, sewage treatment facilities, and state school lands may be considered for low volume transfer uses providing they conform to all other siting and conditional use permit criteria.

Y.     Transportation.

1.     Travel Time Minimization. Hazardous waste facilities shall only be sited where transportation of hazardous waste within the City of Encinitas is minimized. The risk assessment and environmental review shall include an analysis of transportation routes, times, and alternatives.

2.     Location Near Major Traffic Routes. Transportation to and from hazardous waste facilities shall be limited to established truck routes to the greatest extent possible. Travel on all other roads shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible. The type of traffic, such as that generated for hospitals, schools or shopping centers shall be considered in establishing transit routes and locations. The time allowed for transportation shall be limited to non-peak hours. The traffic counts related to capacity of the route and the accident rates shall be taken into account when determining routes and locations. A facility developer may upgrade roads to provide additional capacity, within the classification for the road as established by the Circulation Element of the Encinitas General Plan and related City regulations. An assessment of the “population at risk” based on the Federal Highway Administration’s Guidelines for Applying Criteria to Designate Routes for Transporting Hazardous Materials is required as part of the risk assessment. The risk assessment and environmental review shall also include an analysis of transportation routes, times, and alternatives.

Z.     Consistency with the General Plan.

1.     The proposed facility shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan and implementing ordinances.

2.     Hazardous waste facility developers may apply for an amendment to the City’s General Plan and zoning, in order to secure appropriate site zoning as required by this title; however, no application shall be accepted as complete or granted approval prior to approval of the General Plan Amendment and zoning changes.

AA.  Direct Revenue to the City of Encinitas.

1.     The proposed facility’s potential for tax and revenue generation compared to both current site users and other reasonably prospective site users in terms of amount and stability of revenues, and cost to the City of the provision of municipal and associated district services, should not result in a net loss to the City for the provision of such services.

2.     A compensation program may be proposed by the developer to offset any projected losses. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.57.040 Risk Assessment.
Each proposal for a hazardous waste facility project shall be subject to a risk assessment, prior to any consideration of project approval. Except as otherwise provided herein, the risk assessment shall be done in conjunction with environmental review of the proposed project under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The risk assessment shall satisfy the analyses outlined for such assessments in the San Diego County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, and provide the analyses specified for risk assessments in this section.

A.     After the filing of a notice of intent pursuant to Section 30.57.050, and prior to the filing of a conditional use permit application, the City, in consultation with other local and state regulatory agencies, shall notify the project proponent of technical and other information expected to be required for purposes of a project risk assessment. The required information shall be provided by the project applicant as part of a complete application.

B.     The risk assessment shall be performed by consultant under contract to the City or other regulatory agency, at the applicant’s expense.

C.    The risk assessment may be provided in the form of an initial risk assessment and/or a full risk assessment, paralleling the CEQA process, as determined appropriate by the City in consultation with other local and state regulatory agencies.

D.    The initial risk assessment will cover potential worst case and chronic long-term impacts and may be used to determine the setback required from existing and future residential development. The study will also address the quantity and types of wastes that could be received or processed at the facility, and include consideration of the design features and planned operational practices at the facility. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.57.050 Notice of Intent to Apply.
A.     At least 90 days before filing an application for a conditional use permit, the applicant for a facility under this section shall file with the Planning and Building Department, and the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research a notice of intent to make the application.

B.     The notice of intent shall contain a complete description of the nature, function and scope of the project.

C.    The Planning and Building Department shall provide public notice of the applicant’s intent to apply for a conditional use permit, pursuant to the noticing procedure in Section 30.74.050 and by posting notices in the location where the project is located.

D.    The applicant may not file an application for a conditional use permit unless the applicant has first complied with subsection A of this section.

 

30.57.060 Public Meeting.
Within 90 days after a notice of intent to file an application for a conditional use permit is filed with the Planning and Building Department and with the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research, the Office of Permit Assistance is responsible to, in cooperation with the Planning and Building Department, convene a public meeting in the City of Encinitas to inform the public on the nature, function and scope of the proposed project and the procedures that are required for approving applications for the project.

 

30.57.070 Local Assessment Committee.
A.     Within 90 days after a notice of intent to file an application for a conditional use permit is filed with the Planning and Building Department and with the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research, the City Council shall appoint a seven-member local assessment committee.

B.     The membership of the local assessment committee shall be broadly constituted to reflect the makeup of the City, and shall include three representatives of the City at large, two representatives of environmental or public interest groups and two representatives of affected businesses and industries. Members of the committee shall have no direct financial interest, as defined in Section 87103 of the California Government Code, in the proposed project.

C.    The local assessment committee shall, within the time period prescribed by the City Council, do all of the following:

1.     Adopt rules and procedures which are necessary to perform its duties.

2.     Represent generally, in negotiations with the project applicant, the interest of the residents of the City of Encinitas and the interests of adjacent communities.

3.     Negotiate with the project applicant on the detailed terms, provisions, and conditions for project approval which would protect the public health, safety, and welfare and the environment of the City of Encinitas and adjacent communities, and would promote the fiscal welfare of the City of Encinitas through special benefits and compensation.

4.     Receive and expend, subject to the approval of the City Manager and authorization of the City Council, any technical assistance grants made available by the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research to enable the local assessment committee to hire an independent consultant to assist the committee in reviewing the project and negotiating terms, provisions, and conditions with the applicant.

5.     Advise the Planning and Building Department, Planning Commission, and City Council of the terms, provisions, and conditions for project approval which have been agreed upon by the committee and the applicant, and of any additional information which the committee deems appropriate. The Planning and Building Department, Planning Commission, and City Council may use this advice for their independent consideration of the project.

D.    The City shall provide staff resources to assist the local assessment committee in performing its duties.

E.     The local assessment committee shall cease to exist after final administrative action by state and local agencies have been taken on the permit applications for the project for which the committee was convened. (Ord. 96-07)

 

30.57.080 Notice of Permit Application.
A.     The Planning and Building Department shall notify the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research within 10 days after an application for a conditional use permit is accepted as complete by the Planning and Building Department.

B.     Within 60 days after receiving this notice, the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research is responsible to convene a meeting in the City of Encinitas of the lead agency and responsible agencies for the project, the applicant, the local assessment committee, and the interested public, for the purpose of determining the issues which concern the agencies that are required to approve the project and the issues which concern the public. The Planning and Building Department shall provide notice to the public of the date, time, and place of the meeting.

 

30.57.090 Negotiation Process.
A.     Following the meeting required by Section 30.57.080, the local assessment committee and the applicant shall meet and confer on the project proposal for the purpose of establishing the terms, provisions, and conditions under which the project would be acceptable to the community.

B.     If the local assessment committee and the applicant cannot resolve any differences through the meetings, the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research may assist pursuant to Section 25199.4 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

30.57.100 Consultant and Mediation Fees.
A.     Pursuant to Section 25199.7(g) of the California Health and Safety Code, the applicant shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any technical assistance grant provided the local assessment committee under paragraph one of that section. The City shall deposit the fee in an account, maintain records of all expenditures from the account, and return any unused funds and accrued interest to the project proponent upon completion of the review of the proposed hazardous waste facility project.

B.     If the local assessment committee and the proponent cannot resolve any differences through the meetings, the Office of Permit Assistance in the State Office of Planning and Research may assist in this resolution pursuant to Section 25199.4 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

30.57.110 Initial Consistency Determination.
A.     At the request of the applicant, the City Council shall, within 60 days after the Planning and Building Department has determined that an application for a conditional use permit is complete and after a noticed public hearing, issue an initial written determination on whether the proposed project is consistent with both of the following:

1.     The General Plan and applicable community plan and zoning ordinances in effect at the time the application was received.

2.     The County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, authorized by Article 3.5 (commencing with Section 25135) of the California Health and Safety Code, if such plan is in effect at the time of the application.

B.     The Planning and Building Department shall send to the applicant a copy of the written determination made pursuant to subsection A of this section.

C.    The determination required by subsection A of this section does not prohibit the approval authority for the conditional use permit from making a different determination when the final decision to approve or deny the conditional use permit is made, if the final determination is based on information that was not considered at the time the initial determination was made.

 

30.57.120 Appeal of City Council Decision.
The decision of the final City approval authority for a conditional use permit under this section regarding the approval, conditions of approval, or denial of a conditional use permit for a specified hazardous waste facility project shall be final unless appealed by the applicant or an interested person to the Governor of the State of California, or the Governor’s designee, pursuant to Article 8.7 (commencing with Section 25199) to Chapter 6.5 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code within 30 days after the date the final approval authority approves or denies the conditional use permit. (See Chapter 1.12.)

Chapter 30.60 SIGNS
30.60.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to reduce visual clutter, preserve the character and quality of the environment, achieve an aesthetically pleasing appearance for the City and provide adequate opportunity to erect signs. In so doing, this chapter intends to enhance the visual environment of the City, to eliminate traffic hazards caused by improper signs, and to ensure that information is presented safely and effectively.

B.     This chapter establishes a comprehensive system for the regulation of signs to promote the public safety, health, and welfare. The intent is to present a set of reasonable, non-arbitrary and non-discriminatory standards and procedures which will facilitate the improvement and protection of the environment by prohibiting the misuse of signs.

C.    It is the intent of this chapter to further the greater public interest in allowing a property owner to identify the owner’s property and the activities, services, and products available thereon rather than having the property owner use his or her allowable sign area to identify property, activities, services, and products located elsewhere.

D.    In addition to the sign regulations set forth in this chapter, each specific plan, identified in Chapter 30.84, Specific Plans, may have additional or separate regulations for signs for its plan area. Refer to individual specific plans, as referenced in Chapter 30.84, for sign regulations within each specific plan area. (Ord. 92-42; Ord. 94-02)

 

30.60.020 Definitions.
A.     “Sign” shall mean any and all devices, fixtures, structures, construction, cloth or backing which conveys a message in pictorial, symbolic, or worded form, placed for display to the outdoor public. “Sign” does not include windows in a building used by a religious organization or official notices posted by officers or issued by a court or public body.

B.     “Sign area” is the entire area within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign. The perimeter shall include all elements and ornamentation forming an integral part of the design of the sign.

C.    “Sign height” is the total distance between the lowest existing grade below the base of the sign measured to the top of the highest sign element, including all structural elements and appendages.

D.    “Sign structure” is a structure which supports or is capable of supporting a sign. A sign structure may be a single pole or multiple poles or may be designed as an integral part of the building, or any combination thereof.

E.     A “commercial sign” conveys a message which proposes a commercial transaction expressly related solely to the economic interests of the business person and the public; as may further be defined by judicial decision.

F.     An “ancillary commercial sign” conveys a message of a commercial nature that is related to a lawful, residential use; for example, without limitation, a message that announces the sale, rental, or lease of residential property, a garage/yard sale, a reward for a lost animal, or a civic fund raising event, or a message announcing an on-site security system.

G.    A “temporary sign” is one which is “in place or visible” for the duration of a temporary use or six months, whichever is less.

H.    An “off-site message” is a sign which is not related to a lawful use occurring on the site; for example, without limitation: identification of an activity not occurring at the site of the sign, identification of a product not available at the site of the sign, or identification of property located elsewhere.

I.      “Billboard” is a permanent structure sign which meets any one or more of the following criteria:

1.     It is used for the display of off-site commercial messages;

2.     It is used for general advertising or advertising for hire;

3.     Display space on the sign is routinely rented, leased or donated to advertisers other than the owner or operator of the sign.

J.     “Noncommercial sign” is a sign that does not identify, advertise or attract attention to a business, product or service, or propose an economic transaction. Typical examples include signs whose message addresses a topic of public concern or controversy such as, by way of example and not limitation, politics, religion, philosophy, science, art or social commentary. Any distinctions as to “on-site” or “off-site” do not apply to non-commercial signs. (Ord. 91-12; Ord. 2008-15; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.60.040 Authority.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a person may erect a sign in conformity with the provisions of this chapter:

A.     After obtaining a building permit, if required by this Code; or

B.     After obtaining a sign permit from the Director of Planning and Building; or

C.    After obtaining a design review permit from the appropriate, authorized agency. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.60.050 General Regulations.
A.     Except as allowed by the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, erect or maintain any sign within the City.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the City to allow the posting, erection or maintenance on such person’s property of any sign which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Unless authorized by other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, erect or maintain any sign within the public right-of-way or upon public property.

D.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to signs posted, erected or maintained by the City on public property for a proper, public purpose. Such signs include traffic/pedestrian control signage. All other City signs shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter.

E.     No sign shall be posted, erected or maintained:

1.     Within a setback imposed within this chapter on the real property on which the sign is to be located, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.

2.     So as to obstruct a clear view of the street from any intersecting street or access to public street such as driveways.

3.     That is illuminated if the sign faces residentially zoned property except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

4.     That moves, flashes, or is intermittently illuminated. Wind propellers and other noise creating devices shall not be permitted. Time and temperature signs shall be permitted subject to the standards and sign area requirements for the specific sign type.

5.     That interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures any public sign.

F.     Signs shall be maintained both visually and structurally to City standards; i.e., Uniform Building Code and design review requirements.

G.    No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any door or fire escape of any building or to obstruct free passage over any public right-of-way.

H.    No sign shall be erected that would unreasonably obscure from any public view existing, conforming signs on adjacent properties.

I.      No sign shall be erected so as to block significant scenic views or detract from the natural beauty of the City as identified in the General Plan.

J.     No inflatable attention getting devices or sign painted on or affixed to a balloon which in turn is attached to a structure or the ground shall be permitted.

K.     No vehicle or trailer shall be parked that is utilized as a portable sign for the purpose of providing directional signage, additional on-site signage, or an attention getting device.

L.     Billboards. New billboards are prohibited. This prohibition does not limit agreements to relocate presently existing legal billboards, as long as such billboards are relocated to locations outside of the Coastal Zone, as encouraged by state law including, but not limited to, Business and Professions Code Section 5412. This prohibition does not apply to presently existing billboards which complied with all legal requirements at the time of installation.

M.    Message Substitution. Subject to the property owner’s consent, any noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any legally existing commercial message or any legally existing noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. In addition, any unused allowance for signage may be used for temporary display of any non-commercial message; a permit for such signage is required only when a new sign qualifies as a structure within the meaning of the Building Code. Substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to exceed the total amount of permanent signage on a site or parcel; it does not create a right to substitute an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message, or in place of a non-commercial message; it does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; and it does not authorize changing the physical method of message display without a permit. Message substitution is a continuing right that may be exercised any number of times. (Ord. 2008-15; Ord. 2010-02)

 

30.60.060 Exempt Signs.
The following shall be exempt from obtaining permits. However, signs must still meet the standards of this chapter. The sign area identified below will not count toward the permitted sign area unless specified.

A.     Bulletin Boards. Bulletin boards for charitable or religious organizations, provided that such signs do not exceed an area of four square feet per face and are not illuminated.

B.     Commemorative Signs. Commemorative signs or plaques of not more than four square feet.

C.    Danger Signs. Danger signs, railroad crossing signs and signs of public utility companies indicating danger and aids to service or safety.

D.    Incidental Signs. Signs which are customarily accessory or subordinate to the principal signs for nonresidential uses. Such signs may include but are not limited to credit cards, trade affiliations and the like. A maximum of four square feet is permitted and may be attached to a freestanding sign or building.

E.     Informational Signs. Directional, warning or informational signs required or authorized by law which are erected by federal, state, county, municipal, or district officials.

F.     Notices. Official notices issued by a court or public body or office and posted in the performance of a public duty.

G.    Occupant Directory Sign. Occupant directory sign of not more than four square feet.

H.    Signs Blocked from Public View. Signs which are not intended to be viewed from public streets and/or beyond the premises and are not visible therefrom such as signs in interior areas of shopping centers, commercial buildings and structures, stadiums, and similar uses of a recreational or entertainment nature. Interior areas shall be areas visible and utilized by pedestrians. Signs visible from parking areas and other public areas shall be subject to these regulations.

I.      Sign Copy Change/Maintenance. Changing the copy of a sign and/or performing maintenance which does not involve structural changes.

J.     Tenant I.D. Signs. Tenant identification signs, provided that all of the following conditions hold:

1.     No more than two such signs having an area of not more than four square feet each may be placed on a building facing or fence per tenant.

2.     The sign copy shall be limited to name, occupation, street address, telephone number, date of establishment, trade organization associations, names of products produced under registered trade names, and other comparable sign copy of a non-advertising nature, which copy may relate to one or more separate establishments.

K.     Trespassing/Parking Signs. “No Trespassing,” and “No Parking” and similar warning signs.

L.     Use Permit Signs. For any use type allowed by the granting of a use permit, placement, number, and size of on-premises signs may be determined by the conditions of approval of the use permit.

M.    Vehicle Signs. Signs on licensed commercial vehicles, provided such vehicles are not used or intended for use as portable signs.

N.    Window Signs. Temporary window signs constructed of paper, cloth or similar expendable material, provided that the total area of such signs shall not exceed 25% of the window area as measured pursuant to Section 30.60.020B. Temporary window signage is limited to a maximum of 90 days. The square footage of the sign is determined by taking 25% of the windows located on the same side of the tenant space of the building where the sign is to be located. The window sign may be located on any of the windows that are located within the window area of where the square footage was determined. (Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.070 Residential Permanent Sign Standards.
On property zoned for residential use, the property owner may post, erect, and maintain signs subject to the general regulations of this chapter and the following standards:

A.     Message signs shall present only a noncommercial message or an ancillary commercial message.

B.     Area—Five Square Feet. Signs shall have an area that does not exceed five square feet. For parcels with a minimum of five acres and having dual access an additional five square feet of signage is permitted for posting at the additional vehicular access point.

C.    Quantity—One Per Dwelling. No more than one sign per dwelling unit (refers to multi-unit projects).

D.    Setback—Two Feet From Property Line. Signs may be placed within building setbacks, but shall not be placed within two feet of any public right-of-way nor within two feet of any property line.

E.     Height—Four Feet. Freestanding signs shall not exceed four feet in height. Signs attached to a building must be below the roof line.

F.     Structure. Signs shall either be attached to a building or affixed to rods, poles, or freestanding wall. Temporary signs may be placed in a window.

G.    Other. Signs shall not be illuminated except to identify the address and occupant of the property.

H.    Identification sign shall be permitted up to a maximum aggregate area for all signs of 32 square feet identifying a residential development of five or more units or nonresidential uses authorized in residential zones. The signs may be located on each entry affording primary vehicular access to the site and shall be integrated into an approved landscape plan and shall have a maximum height of six feet. Two signs may be permitted, one on each side of the road, at the project entrance as long as the aggregate total does not exceed the allowed maximum of 32 square feet. (Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.080 Residential Temporary Sign Standards.
The property owner may post, erect, and maintain signs on property zoned for residential use consistent with the general regulations of this chapter and the following standards:

A.     Area—Three Square Feet. Signs shall not exceed three square feet per side and may be double sided signs.

B.     Height—Five Feet. Signs shall not exceed five feet in height unless attached to the building below the roof line.

C.    Quantity. A maximum of two signs is permitted; however, the total area of both signs cannot exceed three square feet area.

D.    Other. Refer to setback, height, structure, message or “other” standards of the permanent sign standards for property zoned for residential use.

E.     All temporary signs in residential zones to be nonilluminated signs.

F.     Balloons, Flags and Pennants. Balloons, flags and pennants shall be permitted provided that they are securely tied down and are displayed for daylight hours only.

G.    Signs for Major Subdivision. Where property is subdivided into five or more lots, the initial sale of the resulting lots may be announced by a temporary on-site sign not to exceed 16 square feet and a maximum of six feet in height is permitted without review. This is in addition to temporary sign standards for property zoned for residential use. The signs shall be removed upon the completion of the initial sale of all of the resulting subdivided lots. The maximum permitted sign area and height may be increased to a maximum of 32 square feet and eight feet in height provided a design review permit is approved first.

H.    Vacant residentially zoned property that is unsubdivided property shall be permitted eight square feet in area of temporary signage. The temporary sign may be double-sided. The temporary sign shall not exceed eight feet in height. For purposes of this section, an unsubdivided parcel shall mean a parcel that could yield five or more units based on the maximum density of the land use category where the property is located. Additional square footage shall be permitted based on the following conditions:

1.     When the property is located on a Circulation Element road the temporary signage shall not exceed 32 square feet.

2.     When located on property having a 500-foot and above street frontage, the temporary signage shall not exceed 32 square feet.

3.     When located on property having 300-foot to 500-foot street frontage, the temporary signage shall not exceed 16 square feet. (Ord. 93-01; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.100 Nonresidential Permanent Sign Standards.
On property zoned for nonresidential use, after first obtaining a sign permit to insure that the proposed sign conforms to the provisions of this Code, the property owner may post, erect, and maintain signs consistent with the general regulations of this chapter and the following basic allowance:

A.     Message permanent commercial signs shall present only a message which is consistent with the commercial uses for which the property is zoned, except no off-site commercial messages shall be presented.

B.     General Provisions. On-premises signs may be erected, constructed, placed, created by painting, structurally altered, relocated or maintained provided that a building permit has been issued subject to the following standards and standards of this chapter:

1.     On-premises signs are permitted on sites subject to use permits in accordance with the terms and conditions of the use permit. Signs may be altered, relocated or added upon the issuance of a minor use permit provided that such change is not specifically prohibited by the use permit condition.

2.     Permitted Combinations of Sign Types.

a.     Projecting signs are permitted in combination only with wall signs.

b.     Two freestanding signs, where permitted, shall be allowed in combination with wall signs.

3.     Lighting. Signs may be illuminated unless otherwise specified in this chapter provided such signs are so constructed that no light bulb, tube, filament or similar source of illumination is visible beyond the property lines.

a.     Neon signs are permitted provided they do not flash. The use of neon tube lighting to accent a building, portions of a building, or a building’s windows, that does not constitute a sign, requires design review before the Planning Commission.

b.     Signs making use of lights to convey the effect of movement, or flashing, intermittent or variable intensity lighting, or become a distraction/hazard to drivers, shall not be permitted, unless otherwise approved by design review by the Planning Commission. This restriction shall not apply to signs which convey information such as time, temperature, or weather, however, said sign shall be included in permitted sign area.

4.     Sign Program for Multi-Tenant Buildings. Sign programs shall be required for all buildings with six or more tenants. Sign programs shall remain in force until a new program is submitted and approved. Signs within approved sign programs shall be required to obtain permits, submit applicable fees and shall be in conformance with the approved sign program. Appearance before the Planning Commission is not required unless so determined by the Director of Planning and Building. Sign programs shall integrate with the architecture of the building complex, including such elements as size, color, location, and construction material. The sign program is to encourage excellence in design allowing for creativity and art in signage. A sign program may be approved which varies from the specific limitations of the sign ordinance if the Planning Commission finds that unusual circumstances such as architecture and site design are present.

C.    Freestanding/Monument Signs.

1.     Number Permitted.

a.     Premises having a minimum of 75 feet of frontage along the same street may be permitted one freestanding monument sign for each street frontage.

b.     All freestanding/monument signs may include sign area for tenant directory for projects for a multiple occupancy building.

2.     Area. The area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage, provided the area does not exceed 175 square feet.

Eight-inch high numbers shall be provided on the freestanding sign that clearly identify the address of the subject site and is located on the freestanding sign that provides maximum visibility. The color of the numbers shall contrast with the background color of the sign. The sign area utilized for the project address shall be in addition to the sign area for the freestanding sign.

3.     Height. A freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of eight feet. Height increases of four feet to a maximum sign height of 12 feet may be permitted with a minor use permit for multi-tenant signs and freeway-oriented signs for freeway service facilities provided documentation, in the form of sight lines or other similar means, is submitted which indicates that the additional height is necessary to provide necessary site/business identification due to topographical or other site constraints and views are not blocked.

4.     Structure. Pole signs are prohibited. Signs must either be mounted on a wall or structure having a solid base on the ground, or mounted on two posts having a minimum width dimension of eight inches.

5.     Materials. Monument signs shall be constructed of high quality, durable material with cabinets and bases primarily constructed of natural materials such as wood, tile and stucco with a minimal amount of metal and/or plastic materials. Materials used for monument signs shall match and/or complement the materials used within the plaza or on the commercial building(s).

6.     Design. The design of the monument sign shall match and/or complement the architectural style of the building or plaza (i.e., no modern style monument signs with a mission style building).

7.     Colors. Colors of the monument sign(s) shall be consistent with the sign program of wall signs, directional signs, etc. within the commercial center or plaza.

8.     Maintenance. Monument signs shall be maintained in good condition, and whenever necessary, shall be replaced or repaired with new materials to ensure that such signs will not depreciate adjacent property values or otherwise adversely affect adjacent properties.

D.    Wall Signs.

1.     Area. The maximum area of wall signs, including permanent window signs, on a single building exterior shall be calculated as one square foot per linear foot of building on the side where the main entrance to the establishment is located, with a maximum of 100 square feet.

2.     Location. Wall signs may not project above the top of a parapet, the roof line at the wall, or roof line. Wall signs shall be permitted on a parapet wall when the wall is above the roof line. Wall signs shall be permitted on the lower half of roofs when it can be proven that other locations are not visible.

3.     Height. Wall signs shall not exceed the height of the ceiling of the second story of the building.

E.     Projecting Signs. Projecting signs including canopy signs may be erected or placed in accordance with the following provisions:

1.     Number. An establishment with frontage on a street may have one projecting sign along each street instead of a freestanding sign.

2.     Area. The area of a projecting sign shall not exceed six square feet. The area of an awning/canopy sign shall not exceed four square feet except as provided in paragraph 6 of this subsection E. A projecting or canopy sign may be allowed to project over a public sidewalk pursuant to approval of an encroachment permit.

3.     Height. Projecting signs may not extend above the roof line at the wall or above the top of a parapet wall.

4.     Installation. Support members shall be a part of the architectural design of the sign, and sign shall be free of unsightly supports or attachments.

5.     An establishment may have one projecting sign and one awning sign.

6.     Canopy signs in excess of four square feet may be utilized in lieu of a wall sign. Sign area shall be based on the sign area for a wall sign.

F.     Other Sign Types. In addition to the foregoing types of signs, the following signs shall be permitted in any location. The area of these signs shall be in addition to the above-mentioned maximum sign areas.

1.     Directional Signs. Signs to direct or control on-premises traffic or parking provided such signs do not exceed an area per face of eight square feet or a height of eight feet.

2.     Accessory Sign—Drive-In and Drive-Through Businesses. Such signs shall not be designed to be viewed from beyond the premises and each shall not exceed 25 square feet per frontage.

3.     Service Station Signs. One sign relating to grades and prices of gasoline and diesel fuel shall be permitted per street frontage. Maximum price signage shall be consistent with State Codes (13530 Business and Professions Codes).

4.     Mobilehome and Recreation Vehicle Park Signs. Signs located within mobilehome or recreational vehicle parks may be permitted subject to the following:

a.     One wall sign or freestanding sign identifying the mobilehome or recreational vehicle park is permitted adjacent to each street which provides primary access to the park. No freestanding sign shall exceed a height of six feet. No sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area.

b.     One directional sign without any advertising at each driveway. Each sign shall not exceed eight square feet or six feet in height. Directional signs may be lighted.

5.     Major Stores Not Having Street Frontage. Retail establishments which have a floor area in excess of 50,000 square feet and are so located within a shopping complex that they are not afforded street frontage shall be allowed signs as follows:

a.     One single-face sign per major or secondary street frontage, not to exceed 50 square feet in area per store affected. The signs shall be allowed for no more than two street frontages.

b.     The location of the signs shall be determined by the Planning Commission and shall be located in an area which is in accordance with the intent of the provisions of this chapter, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, in keeping with the architectural design of the shopping center.

6.     Shopping Complex Identification Signs. In addition to main identification signs allowed under this chapter for individual businesses, a separate sign identifying a building or complex of businesses may be allowed as part of an approved sign program. This sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.

7.     Pedestrian Oriented Signs. Pedestrian oriented signs, such as projecting, hanging or wall signs, are permitted at a maximum of six square feet and are not visible from streets or parking areas. Only one pedestrian oriented sign is permitted per tenant. The lower edge of a hanging or projecting sign must be a minimum of seven feet from the ground.

8.     Off-Site Directional Signage. One 16 square foot off-site directional signage shall be permitted subject to the following:

a.     The property is zoned general commercial (GC) and does not front on a Circulation Element road.

b.     The property is at least four acres in size.

c.     The placement of the directional sign shall be on private property and located at the nearest intersection of the local road that the commercial use fronts and the Circulation Element road.

d.     The sign shall be subject to administrative design review and shall be located in an area which is in accordance with the provisions and intent of this chapter.

e.     The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed eight feet. (Ord. 91-12; Ord. 93-01; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.110 Nonresidential Temporary Sign Standards.
In addition to the permanent sign standards, the property owner may post, erect and maintain temporary signs and banners with an approved temporary sign permit on property zoned for nonresidential use consistent with the general regulations of this chapter and the following standards:

A.     Temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet per side nor eight feet in height. Signs may be double-sided. The number of temporary signs is limited to two signs. The total area of all temporary signs cannot exceed 16 square feet in area.

B.     Banners. Banners for nonprofit special events may be displayed no more than 14 days prior to the start of the event and must be removed within three days after the end of the event. A maximum of one banner is permitted not to exceed 24 square feet. Banners can be attached to a building or two posts. The height of a banner when attached to the building shall not extend above the roof line. When attached to posts, the height shall not exceed eight feet. The banner may be double sided.

C.    Grand opening/closing banners for businesses may be displayed a maximum of 60 days after the initial opening of a business, or 60 days prior to the official close of the business. A maximum of one banner is permitted not to exceed 24 square feet. Banners may be attached to a building or two posts. The height of a banner when attached to the building shall not extend above the roof line. When attached to posts, the height shall not exceed eight feet. The banner may be double-sided.

D.    Banners over public rights-of-way shall be permitted subject to the standards established by the City and approved by the City Manager or designee. Banners are for civic and nonprofit City-wide recognized special events. The banner shall not exceed 45 square feet in area and shall be located only on City-approved structures. The banners may be displayed no more than 14 days prior to the start of the event and must be removed within three days of end of the event. Installation shall be to City specifications. Fees to recover City costs in reviewing the applications shall be established by the City Council.

E.     Commercial Banners. On-site banners for nonresidential uses may be displayed for a period of 60 days within a 12-month period. No more than one banner is allowed at a time, with a maximum of four banners within the 12-month period. Banners may bear a design, logo, motto and/or slogan, messages for sales and special promotions, except no off-site commercial message shall be permitted. The maximum area shall not exceed 24 square feet. The banner must be attached to the building or two posts on the site and may be double sided. Attachment to the roof or parapet wall is not permitted. The banner can not extend above the ridge line of a structure. The banner must be constructed of quality, durable material that is weather resistant.

F.     Seasonal Sales Lot. Banners or temporary signs may be allowed for seasonal sales lots that have received the appropriate solicitors permit and comply with all applicable health and safety codes. The sign or banner may be displayed a maximum of 45 days prior to the holiday and must be removed within three days thereafter. A maximum of one sign or banner per street frontage is permitted not to exceed 16 square feet each. The sign or banner may be attached to a fence or two posts and shall not exceed eight feet in height. Signs or banners attached to two posts may be double sided.

G.    Balloons, Flags and Pennants. Balloons, flags and pennants shall be permitted provided that they are securely tied down. (Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.120 Off-Site Temporary Sign Standards.
A.     Permission Required Before Erecting an Off-Site Sign on Property Not Owned by the Sponsor. The sponsor of an off-site sign may only locate the sign on properties that provide the minimum amount of directional signs necessary to the subject parcel. Permission of the owner of the real property where the sign is located must be obtained to use all or a portion of the property’s permanent or temporary sign allowance in accordance with the regulations applicable to signs on the property. A maximum of three signs per off-site parcel are permitted and may only be displayed during daylight hours. Off-site directional signs shall be a maximum of three square feet and shall not exceed five feet in height.

B.     Off-Site Signs for Subdivision.

1.     Where the property is subdivided into five or more lots, the initial sale of all the resulting lots may be announced by one off-site directional sign not to exceed 16 square feet and a maximum of six feet in height if a design review permit is first obtained. This is in addition to temporary sign standards for property. Signs shall be removed upon the completion of the initial sale of the subdivided lots.

2.     Any subdivision of land may provide an off-site direction sign of three square feet in size and may be displayed with no restriction to daylight hours. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.130 Procedure.
A.     An application to construct a sign shall be submitted to the Planning and Building Department together with the applicable processing fee. The Planning and Building Department shall consider the standards established in the City’s Design Guidelines when evaluating sign permit requests. The following signs shall require approval from the Planning and Building Director:

1.     All permanent nonresidential signs unless exempt under Section 30.60.060.

2.     All permanent residential signs greater than five square feet unless exempt under Section 30.60.060.

3.     All temporary signs exceeding four square feet.

B.     All nonexempt signs are subject to review by the Planning and Building Director with the exception of signs proposed as a part of a new project that is subject to design review. Signs included as a part of a design review application shall be reviewed by the agency authorized to issue the design review permit (Planning and Building Director, Planning Commission, or City Council).

C.    A temporary sign permit shall expire within six months of the date issued. Should the temporary use be longer than six months, the sign permit may be renewed.

D.    Processing sign permits shall be limited to the following time periods. Should the City not take action on a sign within these time periods, the sign shall be deemed approved, provided it meets the standards outlined in this section.

1.     Temporary signs including renewal permit: seven calendar days.

 

2.     New signs: 30 calendar days. (Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.140 Abatement/Removal of Off-Premises Nonresidential Signs.
The director shall remove off-premises advertising display signs, as defined by the Outdoor Advertising Act, Business and Professions Code, Section 5200 et seq. in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 5412 et seq., which regulate removal and the payment of compensation.

 

30.60.150 Nonconformity/Abatement/Removal of Illegal Signs, On Premises.
A.     Nonconforming Signs.

1.     Any on-premises sign which was lawful when erected and continues to comply with those prior regulations but which does not now conform to the regulations of this Code shall be deemed to be nonconforming.

2.     It shall be unlawful for any person to expand a nonconforming sign, contrary to the provisions of this Code. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the normal maintenance and repair of any nonconforming sign or sign structure during its effective life. Normal maintenance or repair shall be limited to only the following:

a.     Changes in message.

b.     Routine cleaning and painting.

c.     Replacing of nuts, bolts, screws or nails.

d.     Releveling or plumbing the structure without the addition of guys or struts for stabilization.

Any changes such as extensions, enlargements, replacements, or the rebuilding of a nonconforming sign is prohibited.

3.     When the designation as a nonconforming sign expires, the sign shall thereafter be illegal. The designation as a nonconforming sign shall expire in accordance with the following schedule:

 

 

Sign

Expiration

 

a. Display in residential area

In accordance with B&P 5412.1

 

b. Display in agricultural area

In accordance with B&P 5412.2

 

c. On-premises advertising display defined by B&P 5490

15 years from date of adoption of current regulation

 

d. Other signs five years from adoption of current regulation.

 

4.     For signs within paragraph 3 of this subsection A, if such sign has been allowed to be depreciated for tax purposes by the Internal Revenue Service and evidence is presented that the cost has not been fully recovered upon expiration of the five-year period, such sign may remain classified as a nonconforming sign until its cost has been recovered in accordance with the depreciation schedule on the date that the sign became nonconforming. Documentation necessary to establish the remaining or undepreciated value shall be presented to the Director, prior to the expiration of the initial five-year period. The Director shall determine the validity of the claim and establish a new expiration, as appropriate. Appeals from decisions of the Director shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this Code, Chapter 1.12.

5.     On-premises advertising display signs within the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 5499 may be deemed to be in conformance by the Director upon application of the sign owner. The decision of the Director may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this Code, Chapter 1.12.

6.     The sign is not a temporary sign.

B.     Abatement of Nonconforming, On-Premises Signs.

1.     Nonconforming signs shall either be removed or be brought into conformance with the regulations of this Code and the owner shall obtain all required permits for so doing upon the happening of any of the following:

a.     Expiration of the status as a nonconforming sign.

b.     The use of the nonconforming sign or the structure upon which it is displayed has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of 91 days or more.

c.     The sign has been more than 50% destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the sign cannot be repaired within 30 days of the date of its destruction.

d.     The owner of the sign, outside of a change of copy, requests permission to remodel and remodels the sign, or expands or enlarges the building or land use upon which the sign is located, and the sign affected by the construction, enlargement or remodeling, or the cost of construction, enlargement or remodeling of the sign exceeds 50% of the cost of reconstruction of the building.

e.     The owner of the sign relocates or applies for permission to relocate the sign.

f.      The owner of the sign agrees with the City for its removal as of a given date.

g.     The sign is or may become a danger to the public or is unsafe.

h.     The sign constitutes a traffic hazard not created by the relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the City.

2.     Removal by Purchase. The City may remove a nonconforming on-premises advertising display by paying fair and just compensation in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 5490 et seq. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.60.160 Illegal and Abandoned Signs.
A.     A sign is illegal if:

1.     It did not comply with the ordinances or regulations in existence at the time it was constructed, erected or initially used.

2.     It was a nonconforming sign but its designation has expired (Section 30.60.150A and B).

B.     The Director shall be responsible for creating and maintaining an effective program for eliminating illegal signs either by removal or reconstruction in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

C.    A sign shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed if:

1.     The use of the sign or the structure upon which it is displayed has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of 91 days or more.

2.     The sign has been more than 50% destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the sign cannot be repaired within 30 days of the date of its destruction.

3.     The use that the sign is identifying has been abandoned for 30 days.

Chapter 30.72 ZONING AMENDMENT
30.72.010 Purpose.
The zoning map or any zoning regulations may be amended by changing the zoning boundaries shown on the map, changing the zoning of property from one zone to another, or by changing the regulation in accordance with the procedure described in this chapter as authorized by the California Government Code.

 

30.72.020 Initiation/Authority to Grant Amendment.
A.     A change in the boundaries of any zone or a change of zoning on property from one zone to another may be initiated by the owner(s) or the authorized agent of the owner(s) of the property by filing an application for zoning amendment as described in this chapter. An application accepted by the City shall constitute an application for zoning amendment, and if applying all or in part to property or properties within the Coastal Zone, shall constitute an application for amendment to the implementing regulations of the Encinitas Local Coastal Plan (LCP).

B.     A change in boundaries of any zone, a change of zoning on property from one zone to another, or a change in the zoning regulations may be initiated by resolution approved by the majority of the City Council. This resolution shall constitute an application for zoning amendment and an amendment to the implementing regulations of the City’s LCP.

C.    The City Council is authorized to render a final determination on a zoning amendment application; provided, however, that a change in the regulations of this title, or a change in zoning boundaries or designation of a property or properties all or in part within the Coastal Zone, shall be subject to the provisions of subsection D of this section. The City Council’s determination shall be made upon receipt of advisory recommendations from the Planning Commission. The Council’s authority to render a determination on a zoning amendment application includes the authority to approve, approve in a modified form, or deny such application.

D.    Once approved by the City Council, a zoning amendment for a change in the regulations of this title, or a change in zoning boundaries or designation or property or properties all or in part within the Coastal Zone, constitutes a proposed amendment to the implementing regulations of the City’s LCP. A proposed LCP amendment shall comply in form and content with, and shall follow the procedures specified by, Chapter 30.82 of the Municipal Code. Such an amendment shall not become effective until certified by the Coastal Commission pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30514.

E.     There shall be no more than three LCP amendment submittals in any calendar year, subject to exceptions pursuant to paragraph (c) of Section 30514 of the California Public Resources Code. Each submittal may consist of one or more zoning changes. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2018-12)

 

30.72.030 Application for Amendment.
A.     Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application for a zoning amendment, a prospective applicant shall consult with the Planning and Building Department to obtain information and to inform the Department of the applicant’s intentions.

B.     A property owner or the owner’s authorized agent who wishes to propose a change in the boundaries of the zone in which a property is located, may file an application for amending boundaries with the Director of Planning and Building. The specific submittal requirements for the application will be prescribed in writing by the Director and will be provided to the applicant upon request. The Director may require any additional information that may be necessary to enable the decision-makers to determine whether the proposed change is consistent with the General Plan and the purposes of the Zoning Code and Local Coastal Program. The submittal requirements shall include all information necessary to complete environmental review of the proposed project in accordance with state and local guidelines for the implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.72.040 Application Fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of processing the application as prescribed in this chapter.

 

30.72.050 Investigation and Report.
The Director of Planning and Building shall investigate the application or proposal for zoning amendment and upon determining it to be complete shall prepare a written report of findings which shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and to the applicant and owner of the subject property or the owner’s agent prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.72.060 Public Hearing by Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on a zoning amendment request within 40 days after the Planning and Building Director has determined the application for zoning amendment to be complete. The hearing shall be scheduled and noticed as described in Chapters 30.01 and 30.80 of this Code. A written report for the hearing shall be prepared by the Planning and Building Director. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.72.070 Action by the Planning Commission.
A.     Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall render its decision in the form of written findings and a recommendation to the City Council.

B.     If the Commission finds that the amendment is consistent with the purposes of the Zoning Regulations, the General Plan, and when applicable the certified Local Coastal Program, the Commission shall recommend the introduction of an ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning regulations, whichever is appropriate.

C.    Should the Commission find that the amendment is inconsistent with the purposes of the Zoning Regulations, the General Plan, and when applicable, the certified Local Coastal Program, the Commission shall recommend denial or modification of the amendment, or continue it for changes necessary to become consistent. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.72.080 Public Hearing by City Council.
Following receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the zoning amendment. The hearing shall be set within 40 days of the Planning Commission’s decision and recommendation, and notice shall be given as described within this Code. A written report for the hearing which includes the commission recommendations shall be prepared by the Director of Planning and Building. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.72.090 Action by City Council.
A.     The City Council shall review the Planning Commission’s findings and recommendation on the zoning amendment in a public hearing.

B.     If the Council finds that the zoning amendment is consistent with the purposes of the Zoning Regulations, the City of Encinitas General Plan, and when applicable, the certified Local Coastal Program, the Council shall introduce an ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning regulations, whichever is appropriate. Once adopted by ordinance, an amendment subject to the jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission pursuant to subsections D and E of Section 30.72.020 of this chapter shall be submitted to the Coastal Commission for certification pursuant to Municipal Code Chapter 30.82.

C.    If the Council finds that the amendment is inconsistent with the purposes of the Zoning Regulations, the General Plan, and when applicable the certified Local Coastal Program, the Council shall deny or modify the amendment, or continue it for changes necessary to become consistent.

D.    Any modification of the amendment which was not previously considered by the Planning Commission shall first be referred to the Commission for report and recommendation; however, no public hearing shall be required in that case. If the Commission does not make its recommendation to the Council within 40 days after the referral or longer as may be designated by the Council, the recommendation of the Commission shall be considered to be approval of the modification. Within 40 days of the Planning Commission recommendation on the modification, a new public hearing before the City Council shall be set and noticed as described within this Code.

E.     The City Council’s action to deny the amendment is final. Council action to approve an amendment is final, provided that amendments subject to the jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission, pursuant to subsections C and D of Section 30.72.020 of this chapter, shall not become final until approved by action of the Coastal Commission. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.72.100 Accompanying Applications.
When other types of land use applications, described in the Zoning Code and related to the same project, accompany a zoning amendment proposal, all of those applications shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council as described in the preceding sections. The final decision on all of the project’s applications shall be rendered by the City Council; provided, however, that the zoning amendment component of a project which is subject to the jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission must be certified by the Coastal Commission as an amendment to the City’s LCP, pursuant to provisions of this title. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.72.110 General Plan Consistency and Alternate Classification.
Following the public hearing for a City Council initiated zoning amendment, both the Planning Commission and City Council may consider an alternate classification to the proposed classification according to the matrix of land use/zoning category consistency contained in the Land Use Element of the General Plan. To accommodate these alternate zoning classifications, the notice of public hearing shall indicate the alternate classifications which the Planning Commission and City Council may consider. An applicant other than the City Council may also request to have alternate zoning classifications considered which are consistent with the Land Use Element matrix.

 

30.72.120 New Application.
Following the denial of a zoning amendment, an application or request for the same or substantially the same amendment shall not be filed within one calendar year of the date of denial.

 

30.72.130 Change of Zoning Map.
If the amendment involves a change to the official Zoning Map, the Planning and Building Director shall cause the official Zoning Map to be modified immediately following the effective date of the ordinance or, when subject to the jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission, upon the effective date of Coastal Commission action pursuant to provisions of this title. Copies of the modified map shall be made available to the public on request upon payment of a fee covering the cost of map reproduction. (Ord. 2003-08)

Chapter 30.74 USE PERMITS
30.74.010 Purpose.
A.     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide procedures for the review and, where necessary, the imposition of special conditions of approval on the construction of proposed projects which involve special site or design requirements, operating characteristics or potential adverse effects on the surrounding area.

B.     “Director” shall mean the “Director of Planning and Building.”

C.    For the purpose of this chapter, “use permit” shall mean a conditional use permit (major) or a conditional use permit (minor). (Ord. 87-80; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.74.020 Prohibitions.
A.     Without first having obtained a use permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct a project when such project is required by the provisions of this Code to obtain a use permit.

B.     No building permit or other development permits shall be issued relating to a project for which a use permit is required by this Code until the use permit is obtained.

 

30.74.030 Scope of Chapter.
This chapter applies to all development projects which are required by the provisions of this Code to obtain a use permit.

 

30.74.040 Authority to Grant Permit.
A.     The Director is authorized to render a final determination on an application for a use permit for a project:

1.     That requires a minor use permit; and

2.     Does not contain any component which requires a final determination from the Planning Commission or City Council.

B.     The Planning Commission is authorized to render a final determination on an application for use permit for a project:

1.     That requires a major use permit; and

2.     That does not contain one or more components which requires a final determination by the City Council.

C.    Upon receipt of an advisory recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council is authorized to render a final determination on all applications for use permit.

D.    Upon receipt of advisory recommendations from the Planning Commission, the City Council is authorized to render a final determination on an application for a use permit for a project which contains one or more components that require a final determination by the City Council. (Ord. 96-07; Ord. 97-17; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.74.050 Notice.
When notice is required by the provisions of this chapter, notice shall be made in accordance with Chapter 30.01 as modified by the following:

A.     If the Director is authorized to render a final determination, the notice shall indicate the time prior to which written objections must be filed.

B.     An application for a use permit for a project which requires an application for a tentative map, zone change or any other discretionary planning permit, shall be noticed as part of the noticing procedures required by the Code for such other applications.

C.    If the date, time and place of a subsequent hearing or a continued hearing is announced at the noticed time and place, no additional notice is required for the second or continued hearing, unless required by law. If no such announcement is made at the noticed time and place, the second or continued hearing shall be noticed in accordance with Chapter 30.01 as modified by this section. (Ord. 92-15; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.74.060 Procedure.
A.     Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application for a use permit, a prospective applicant shall consult with the Planning and Building Department to obtain information and to inform the Department of the applicant’s intentions.

B.     The owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, of the real property on which the construction activity is proposed shall make application for a use permit to the Director on a form approved by the Director. To be received, the application must be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council, together with whatever additional plans and information the Director deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. The application shall include plans, maps and displays in sufficient detail to explain the proposed project’s compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter.

C.    The Director shall provide to the applicant the dates, times and places for consideration of the application and place the matter on the agenda of the authorized body.

D.    The Director is authorized to approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve an application for a minor use permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. When authorized to render a final determination, the Director shall hold a public hearing and make a decision; or refer the application to the Planning Commission.

E.     If the Planning Commission is required to make an advisory recommendation or render a final determination on the application for a use permit, the Director shall submit the matter to the Planning Commission at a noticed, public hearing.

F.     Following the close of public hearing, the Planning Commission may, by majority vote, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, approve, disapprove, conditionally approve, or continue the consideration of the application. If the Planning Commission has advisory jurisdiction, the Planning Commission will render an advisory recommendation to the City Council.

G.    Upon receipt of the advisory recommendation from the Planning Commission, the Director shall set the application for use permit as a noticed, public hearing for the next available meeting of the City Council. Following the close of public hearing, the City Council may, by majority vote, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve, or continue the consideration of the application. (Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.74.070 Final Determination.
A.     A final determination on the application for a use permit shall be made by written resolution if by the Planning Commission or by notice of determination if by the Director setting forth the facts which support the action.

B.     An application for use permit shall be approved unless findings of fact are made based upon the information presented in the application or during the hearings which support one or more of the following conclusions:

1.     The location, size, design or operating characteristics of the proposed project will be incompatible with or will adversely affect or will be materially detrimental to adjacent uses, residences, buildings, structures or natural resources, with consideration given to, but not limited to:

a.     The inadequacy of public facilities, services and utilities to serve the proposed project,

 

b.     The unsuitability of the site for the type and intensity of use or development which is proposed, and

c.     The harmful effect, if any, upon environmental quality and natural resources of the City; or

2.     The impacts of the proposed project will adversely affect the policies of the Encinitas General Plan or the provisions of this Code; or

3.     The project fails to comply with any other regulations, conditions or policies imposed by this Code.

C.    The final determination shall be posted on the City’s Website and shall become final 15 days after the date of the final determination unless an appeal* is filed (*see Chapter 1.12). (Ord. 92-15; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.74.080 Imposition of Conditions.
A.     The person or body authorized to render a final determination shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect and enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding area, and to insure that the proposed project for which use permit approval is sought, fully meets the criteria as set forth in this chapter.

B.     No use permit shall require a condition which is not reasonably related to the project for which the use permit is requested. (Ord. 97-17)

 

30.74.090 Posting of Security.
Whenever a use permit is granted upon any condition or limitation, the person seeking the use permit may be required to furnish security in a form satisfactory to the Director in an amount sufficient to insure compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which such use permit is granted. Every such bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the Director, shall be conditioned upon compliance with the conditions and limitations upon which the user permit is granted.

 

30.74.100 Covenant.
At the discretion of the Director, to accomplish the purposes of the chapter, the use permit may be issued in the form of a covenant to be signed by the permittee and recorded with the County Recorder.

 

30.74.105 Conformance with Use Permit.
A.     Prior to the issuance of a building permit or any other permit required for the construction of a project for which a use permit has been issued, the Director shall determine whether the plans submitted for such construction permit are in substantial conformance with the use permit.

B.     The Director shall find project plans in substantial conformance if:

1.     No project condition is changed or deleted;

2.     No feature, facility or amenity is deleted or substantially altered which had been considered essential to the project’s quality, safety or function by the decision-making body;

3.     No additional lots or dwelling units are added;

4.     No private or public open space is reduced in area or in its potential for use and enjoyment;

5.     The shape and bulk of structures, exterior building materials, landscaping, parking and access are substantially in conformance with the spirit and intent of the use permit decision;

6.     The grading plan will not increase or decrease the final grade on any part of the site by more than three feet over or under the plan approved by the use permit decision, unless the Director finds that the project is not substantially altered by the grading change; and

7.     No significant changes are made which, in the opinion of the Director, should be reviewed by the body which approved the original use permit application.

C.    For projects where the construction permit includes no or negligible changes to the approved project, the approval of the building permit shall constitute a final determination of substantial conformance.

D.    For projects with minor changes to the approved project, an application for a formal, written substantial conformance shall be made. The final determination made under this section shall be effective 15 days after the date of determination unless an appeal is filed. If the determination is that the proposed construction is in conformance, the proponent may proceed, at the proponent’s own risk, during the 15-day appeal period. The proponent or any aggrieved person may appeal, or may apply for a modification of the use permit. (Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.74.110 Modification of Use Permit.
A proponent may apply for a modification of a valid use permit. The application procedures, hearings and notifications for any modification shall be the same as for a new application. If the Director finds that the modification is minor, and is required due to circumstances beyond the proponent’s control, the application for modification shall be given priority in scheduling for public hearings.

 

30.74.120 Expiration and Extension of Permit.
A.     The use permit approval shall be valid for two years after the effective date of the permit. A building permit and any other permit required for the construction of the project shall be obtained within the two-year period. If construction has not started within the time period specified in the City’s adopted building code, and is not diligently pursued thereafter, the use permit shall be deemed null and void.

B.     The Director may, upon written request by the proponent, grant reasonable extensions of up to a total of two years for the use permit; provided no change in City policies has occurred which would be in conflict with the project. A request for such an extension shall be filed with the Director and at least 15 days prior to the expiration of the use permit, together with the required application fee. Upon proper filing of an application for extension, public notice shall be made according to the provisions of Chapter 30.01 as modified by this chapter. A public hearing is not required. (Ord. 92-15)

 

30.74.130 Suspension of Use Permit.
A.     The Director shall suspend any use permit and issue no certificate of occupancy if the project is not constructed in compliance with the use permit. The notice of suspension shall be mailed to the proponent by certified mail and posted on the project site.

B.     The suspension of the use permit and the suspension of all related permits shall be lifted by the Director if:

1.     The applicant has completed all necessary changes to bring the project into compliance with the original use permit, or with the use permit as amended by an appeal or modification; or

2.     The final appeals body has determined that no violation of the original use permit exists. (Ord. 06-96; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.74.140 Reapplications.
At least one year shall have elapsed since the effective date of a disapproval of an application before filing a new application seeking substantially the same use permit for any of the same property.

 

30.74.150 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a final determination made under the authority of this chapter may seek review by filing an appeal pursuant to the procedures within Chapter 1.12 of the Municipal Code.

A final determination by the Director or the Planning Commission shall be appealed only to the City Council. (Ord. 96-07)

Chapter 30.76 NONCONFORMITIES*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 2020-10. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


30.76.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities with special regulations for nonconforming dwelling units.

B.     This chapter is not intended to restrict the City’s ability to remove a public nuisance.

C.    This chapter is not intended to limit the City’s ability to condemn a use or structure and pay to the owner thereof reasonable compensation.

D.    Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from declaring a building, structure, improvement or use to constitute a danger to the safety, health or welfare of the public and to take lawful action to remedy that danger.

E.     This chapter does not preclude the City from requiring an owner of a structure which has been constructed, expanded or altered either without a required building permit or contrary to the provisions of an issued building permit to modify or remove such structure or to obtain a required building inspection and final approval. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.76.020 Nonconforming Use.
A “nonconforming use” is a use that:

A.     Is not within the scope, either expressly or implicitly, of the zoning restrictions set forth in this title that announce the purpose, intent, permissible uses, accessory uses and prohibited uses for the zone in which the particular use is located;

B.     Did comply with the zoning restrictions contained in the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the use was created and was lawfully created; and

C.    Has not been terminated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

 

30.76.030 Structural Nonconformity.
“Structural nonconformity” is a physical aspect of a building, structure or improvement that:

A.     Does not conform to the development standards announced in this title to include, without limitations, height, setbacks, lot area, parking, type of building, or coverage of lot by structure;

B.     Did comply with the development standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the building, structure or improvement was constructed or structurally altered and was lawfully constructed; and

C.    Has not been terminated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

 

30.76.040 Establishment of a Nonconformity.
In order to legally continue a use or structural aspect of a building, structure or improvement that is not consistent with the zoning regulations of this title, the person asserting a claim of nonconforming use or structural nonconformity has the burden of proof to establish that the use or structural feature qualifies in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

 

30.76.050 Limit on Utilizing Nonconformity—General.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to enlarge, extend, expand or in any other manner change a nonconforming use or a structural nonconformity so as to increase its inconsistency with the zoning regulations of this chapter.

B.     A nonconforming use may be replaced with the same or a similar use so long as the subsequent use does not enlarge, extend, expand or in any other manner increase the inconsistency with the regulations of this title.

C.    Repairs and maintenance may be performed on structural nonconformities so long as the nonconformity is not enlarged, relocated or increased in intensity, unless permitted by this chapter.

 

30.76.070 Remodeling or Reconstruction of Nonresidential Building with Structural Nonconformity.
A.     Any application for a project for the remodeling/additions of a building with one or more structural nonconformities at an estimated cost of more than 50% of the building’s value, as established by the Planning and Building Director at the time of application, shall be approved only if the project complies with all of the regulations of this Code.

B.     Any project for a building with one or more structural nonconformities that is damaged to less than 75% of its valuation or that is the subject of a remodeling and addition project less than 50% of the building’s value as determined by the Planning and Building Director at the time of the application, may be approved with the continuation of the nonconformities so long as the nonconformities are not enlarged, extended or expanded. However, the owner must covenant to complete the project within 18 months of the issuance of the required permits, or, in the alternative, to abandon the structural nonconformities and comply with the regulations contained in this Code. This shall not result in review of any existing use permits for the subject parcel unless the use is to be altered or expanded.

C.    In applying this section to remodeling and additions, the City shall include all remodeling and additions accomplished in the 12 months preceding the application in determining whether “more than 50% of the building’s value” is involved in the present application. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.76.080 Nonconforming Lots.
A single building may be constructed on a lot of less area than required by this title so long as the lot is a legal lot of record, was created prior to the imposition of the present zoning regulation which makes it nonconforming, has sufficient area to provide a building site, has not merged, and is not mergeable.

 

30.76.090 Termination of Nonconformity, General.
A.     If a nonconforming use is changed to a use that conforms to or is more consistent with the regulations of this title, then any entitlement to maintain the nonconforming use is modified in that same degree.

B.     Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a nonconforming use which remains inactive for 180 consecutive days, shall be deemed to have ceased, and shall not thereafter be renewed.

C.    If a nonconforming use or structural nonconformity is enlarged, extended, expanded or in any other manner changed to increase its inconsistency with the regulations of this title, then, in addition to any other consequences imposed by this Code, any entitlement to thereafter maintain the nonconformity is terminated.

 

30.76.100 Nonconforming Rental Dwelling Use.
A nonconforming rental dwelling use is inactive if the rental dwelling area is not occupied and is not subject to being occupied in accordance with an existing lease or rental agreement:

A.     Entered into for a fair market rent; and

B.     Entered into by the tenant with the intention of occupying the unit.

 

30.76.110 Nonconforming Guest Dwelling Use.
A.     A nonconforming guest dwelling use is inactive if the unit is not occupied by a guest during any 730-day period.

B.     A nonconforming guest dwelling use is terminated if the unit is the subject of a rental or lease agreement entered into by the tenant with the intention of occupying the unit.

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 30.76.120 Remodeling or Reconstruction of Residential Buildings with Structural/Use Nonconformity.
A.     Any residential project of four or fewer dwelling units with one or more structural or use nonconformities that is damaged up to 100% (by accident or voluntary) of its valuation can be reconstructed with the continuation of the nonconformities provided such nonconformities are not increased in density or intensity. Nonconforming residential buildings of four units or less may be reconstructed, added to, or structurally altered so long as neither the density nor the intensity of the nonconformity is increased, and the number and size of existing required parking spaces is not reduced.

1.     An increase to the “intensity” of a nonconforming structure/use would refer to:

a.     Expanding the structural nonconformity, e.g., not meeting development standards.

b.     Any additions to a nonconforming use (e.g., an existing duplex in a single-family zone) that would expand or intensify the nonconforming use. Expansions/additions to such nonconforming uses shall not be considered an intensification when the combined development of all units on the subject property does not exceed the cumulative limitations of the underlying zone. Where more than one dwelling unit exists on a legal lot, the development allowances of the underlying zone shall be applied on a pro-rata basis (for example, if two dwelling units exist on one lot, each would be allowed one half of the lot coverage and/or floor area ratio applicable to the zone). Where all of the units on the lot are under common ownership, or, in the case of multiple ownership, where all owners of units on the property are in agreement, a different combination of percentages may be established and recorded on the subject property by covenant.

c.     An addition for the enclosing of parking shall not be considered an increase in intensity of the nonconforming use.

d.     Conversion of a nonconforming detached accessory structure from a non-habitable use type (for example, storage building or garage) to a habitable structure type (for example, a portion of the primary dwelling unit or accessory unit) shall be considered an intensification or creation of a nonconformity. However, conversion of such nonhabitable structures to accessory structures permitted under Municipal Code Section 30.48.040W shall not be considered an intensification, provided the structure is not located closer than five feet to rear and interior side lot lines, and not located within front or exterior side yard setback areas, pursuant to Municipal Code Section 30.16.010E3.

2.     An increase to the “density” of a nonconforming structure/use would refer to:

a.     New construction or conversion of existing structures with the result of creating any dwelling units above the number allowed for the subject property in the applicable zone.

b.     A conforming addition to, or the conversion of a portion of a legal nonconforming single-family residential building in order to create an accessory unit in accordance with Sections 30.16.010 and 30.48.040W shall not be considered an increase in density or intensity for purposes of this section.

B.     For multifamily dwellings of five or more units, the building profile may be modified if the resulting profile does not result in a structure contrary to this section and the following findings are made by the authorized agency:

1.     There are no additional negative impacts to the character of the neighborhood beyond the assumed negative impacts of the nonconformity; and

2.     The resulting design will enhance the neighborhood and will not significantly increase the economic life of the nonconformity thereby expanding the nonconformity beyond that which would occur through normal maintenance practices; and either:

a.     The building profile modification is necessary for protection of health and safety; or

b.     A significant public benefit will accrue from the increase in building profile.

c.     Public benefit shall include, but not be limited to:

i.      Additional significant public improvements will be made to the adjacent infrastructure;

ii.     Drainage in the area will be significantly enhanced as a result of the change. (Ord. 88-02; Ord. 2006-06)

Chapter 30.78 VARIANCES
30.78.010 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures and standards for exercising the authority granted to the City by the State of California regarding variances.

B.     “Director” shall mean “Director of Planning and Building.” (Ord. 86-18; Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.78.020 Authority to Grant Variance.
A.     The Director is authorized to render a final determination on an application for a minor variance for a project:

1.     That is for a maximum 20% encroachment into any yard setback (hereinafter designated a “minor variance,” all other variances hereinafter designated “major variance”); and

2.     That does not contain another component which requires a final determination from the Planning Commission, or City Council.

B.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Planning Commission is authorized to render a final determination on an application for variance. (Ord. 92-15; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.78.024 Procedure.
A.     The owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, of the real property for which the variance is requested shall make application to the Director on a form approved by the Director. To be received, the application must be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council, together with whatever additional plans and information the Director deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

1.     The privilege lawfully enjoyed by a substantial number of other property owners in the vicinity and under an identical zoning classification;

2.     The factors which make the subject property special when compared to other property in the area;

3.     The way in which the special circumstances combine with the strict application of the zoning regulations to deprive the applicant of the privilege enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning classification;

4.     The way in which the grant of the variance will bring the applicant’s property development into parity with other property in the vicinity and will not amount to a grant of special privilege over and above those privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zoning classification;

5.     The code section from which the variation is granted, the degree of variation allowed and the conditions imposed on the variation.

B.     When the Director has determined that all required information has been submitted in proper form and the applicant has submitted to the City the required processing fee, the Director shall place the matter on the agenda of the authorized body for a public hearing.

C.    Notice for the public hearing shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 30.01. (Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.78.030 Resolution of Determination.
A.     A final determination granting a variance shall be by notice of determination when the Director is the granting authority, by resolution when the Planning Commission is the granting authority, and by resolution when the City Council grants a variance on appeal.

B.     Findings. No granting of a variance shall be approved or conditionally approved unless the decision-making authority finds:

1.     That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification;

2.     That the variance shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is located and is subject to any conditions necessary to assure compliance with this finding;

3.     That the variance does not authorize use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning regulation governing the subject property;

4.     That the inability to enjoy privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification:

a.     Could not be avoided by an alternate development plan that would be of less significant impact to the site and adjacent properties than the project requiring the variance;

b.     Is not self-induced as a result of action taken by the property owner or the property owner’s predecessor(s);

c.     Would not allow such a degree of variation as to constitute a rezoning or other amendment to the zoning code; and

d.     Would not authorize or legalize the maintenance of a public nuisance.

5.     In addition to the required findings, the final determination shall set forth:

a.     The privilege lawfully enjoyed by a substantial number of other property owners in the vicinity and under an identical zoning classification;

b.     The factors which make the subject property special when compared to other property in the area;

c.     The way in which the special circumstances combine with the strict application of the zoning regulations to deprive the applicant of the privilege enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under the identical zoning classification;

d.     The way in which the grant of the variance will bring the applicant’s property development into parity with other property in the vicinity and will not amount to a grant of special privilege over and above those privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zoning classification;

e.     The code section from which the variation is granted, the degree of variation allowed and the conditions imposed on the variation.

C.    A resolution denying a variance application shall set forth the basis of the denial. (Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.78.040 Conditions.
Conditions imposed upon the granting of the variance shall be set forth in a covenant executed by the property owner and recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.78.050 Expiration of Variance.
If substantial construction has not been completed in reliance upon a granted variance within two years of the grant, then upon notice to the property owner and an opportunity to present information to the Director, the Director may declare the variance to have expired with the privileges granted thereby canceled. (Ord. 92-15; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.78.060 Extension to Complete Substantial Construction.
Upon application to the Director and good cause having been shown, the Director may, on one or more occasions, extend the expiration period on the variance. However, the total of all extensions shall not exceed a period of two years. Upon proper filing of an application for extension, public notice shall be made according to the provisions of Chapter 30.01 and this chapter. A public hearing is not required. (Ord. 92-15; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.78.070 Revocation of Variance.
In the event that one or more of the conditions imposed on the variance is violated, the Director, upon notice and an opportunity to present information, may revoke the variance or impose additional conditions. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.78.080 Reapplication.
In the event that an application for variance is denied, the City shall not receive for filing any application for the same or similar variance within 24 months of such denial. (Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.78.090 Appeals.
A final determination by the Director or the Planning Commission under the authority of this chapter may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the procedures specified in this Code (see Chapter 1.12). (Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2017-03)

Chapter 30.80 COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
30.80.010 Purpose and Coastal Development Permit Requirement.
To provide for implementation of the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program (LCP) as described in the General Plan, the procedures contained in this chapter provide for the processing of coastal development permit applications and enforcing permit requirements. A coastal development permit is required for all development within the Coastal Zone of the City, unless exempt, pursuant to Section 30.80.050 of this chapter. Where the procedures described in this chapter for issuing coastal development permits conflict with other procedures in the Zoning Code, the procedures described herein shall take precedence in the Coastal Zone. (Ord. 95-04)

 

30.80.020 Authority to Grant Permit.
A.     The Director of Planning and Building (hereinafter “Director”) shall have authority to render a final determination for coastal development permits on the following application types:

1.     Minor use permits.

2.     Minor variances.

3.     Tentative parcel.

4.     Waivers of Municipal Code Section 30.16.010B10.

5.     Agriculture permits.

6.     Administrative design review permits as follows:

a.     Fences, walls and landscaping projects subject to a design review permit pursuant to Chapter 23.08.

b.     Tennis courts (including permitted fencing) and similar recreational facilities, if the proposed project is part of a residential development and is restricted to private use.

c.     Outdoor storage facilities of less than 1,000 square feet in area.

d.     Agricultural buildings which are the primary use of the parcel and 2,000 square feet or less.

e.     Exterior additions to existing buildings and structures where the proposed project will involve less than 500 square feet in area.

f.      Satellite Antennas. However, satellite antennas less than three feet in diameter shall be exempt provided the antenna/dish is not located on the roof.

g.     Signs which are placed under the design review jurisdiction of the Director by other provisions of this Code (Chapter 30.60).

7.     Lot line adjustments.

8.     Certificates of compliance.

9.     Extension requests.

10.   Other applications as required by this Code.

B.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Planning Commission is authorized to render a final determination for Coastal Development Permits on the following application types:

1.     Major use permits.

2.     Tentative maps.

3.     Design review permits not under the authority of the Director under subsection A of this section.

4.     Variance (major).

5.     Items referred by the Planning and Building Director.

6.     Other applications and duties as required by this Code.

C.    Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council is authorized to render a final determination for coastal development permits for the following application types:

1.     General Plan interpretation.

2.     General Plan amendment.

3.     Zoning Code amendment.

4.     Zoning Map amendment.

 

5.     Specific plan.

6.     Other applications as required by this Code. (Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2003-08; Ord. 2015-01; Ord. 2016-08)

 

30.80.030 Application for Coastal Development Permit.
A.     For all development applications within the Coastal Zone of the City, the Director of Planning and Building shall make the following determinations:

1.     The proposed project requires a coastal development permit or the proposed project is one which is either exempt or categorically excluded from the requirement for a coastal development permit as described in Section 30.80.050 of this chapter.

2.     Whether the proposed project requiring a coastal development permit may be approved by the City of Encinitas or the proposed project requiring a coastal development permit must receive its approval from the California Coastal Commission (hereinafter “Coastal Commission”). The Coastal Commission retains permit jurisdiction in tidelands, submerged lands, filled and unfilled public trust lands and any areas of deferred certification, as well as port master plan development, public works plan development, and state university/college and private university long-range development plans.

3.     Whether the coastal development permit that must be approved by the City is appealable under certain conditions. Appeal jurisdiction for the Coastal Commission is defined in Chapter 30.04 and includes geographic areas between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or within 300 feet of the inland extent of any beach or the mean high tide line where there is no beach, whichever is the greater distance; and any areas located within 300 feet of the top of the seaward face of any coastal bluff, or within 100 feet of any wetland, estuary, or stream; and any major public works project or major energy facility costing more than $100,000.00.

B.     Pursuant to Section 13569 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, the determination of whether a development is categorically excluded pursuant to a categorical exclusion order, non-appealable or appealable for purposes of notice, hearing and appeals procedures shall be made according to the following:

1.     The determination as to whether any proposed development for which a permit is sought lies within the appeals area or a categorically excluded area shall be made by the Director of Planning and Building based on the various components of the certified Local Coastal Program, including, but not limited to, the post certification maps prepared by the Coastal Commission and filed with the City, at the time the application is submitted.

2.     If the determination of the Director of Planning and Building is challenged by the applicant or any interested person, or if the City wishes to have the Coastal Commission determine the appropriate designation, the Director of Planning and Building shall notify the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission of the dispute/question, in writing, and shall request an executive director’s opinion.

3.     The Executive Director shall, within two working days of receipt of the City’s request (or upon completion of a site inspection where such inspection is warranted), transmit his or her determination as to whether the development is categorically excluded, non-appealable or appealable.

4.     Where, after the Executive Director’s investigation, the Executive Director’s determination is not in accordance with the determination of the Director of Planning and Building, the Coastal Commission shall hold a hearing for purposes of determining the appropriate designation for the area. The Coastal Commission shall schedule the hearing on the determination for the next Coastal Commission meeting (to be held in the appropriate geographic region of the state) following the City’s request.

C.    For those projects requiring coastal development permit approval by the City, the property owner or authorized agent may file an application with the Director of Planning and Building. The specific submittal requirements for the application will be prescribed in writing by the Director and will be provided to the applicant upon request. The Director may require any additional information that may be necessary to enable the decision-making body to determine whether the proposed project is consistent with the General Plan, Local Coastal Program, and Zoning Code. The submittal requirements shall require all information necessary to complete environmental review of the proposed project in accordance with state and local guidelines for the implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act as well as information sufficient to determine whether the project complies with all policies and standards contained in the certified Local Coastal Program.

D.    Pursuant to Section 30601.5 of the Coastal Act as amended, where the applicant for a coastal development permit is not the owner of a fee interest in the property on which a proposed development is to be located, but can demonstrate a legal right, interest, or other entitlement to use the property for the proposed development, the City shall not require the holder or owner of any superior interest in the property to join the applicant as co-applicant. All holders or owners of any other interests of record in the affected property shall be notified in writing of the permit application and invited to join as co-applicant. In addition, prior to the issuance of a coastal development permit, the applicant shall demonstrate the authority to comply with all conditions of approval.

E.     Pursuant to Section 13054(b) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, prior to or at the time the application for a coastal development permit has been deemed complete for filing, the applicant must post, in a conspicuous place, easily read by the public and as close as possible to the site of the proposed development, notice that an application for a coastal development permit for the proposed development has been submitted to the City. Such notice shall contain a general description of the nature of the proposed development. The City shall furnish the applicant with a standardized form to be used for such posting and a declaration form to be signed by the applicant or applicant’s authorized agent stating that the site has been posted in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. If the applicant fails to post the completed notice form and return the signed declaration of posting to the City, the Director of Planning and Building shall refuse to file the application, or shall withdraw the application from filing if it has already been filed when he or she learns of such failures.

F.     The application form shall also provide notice to applicants that failure to provide truthful and accurate information necessary to review the permit application or to provide public notice as required by these regulations may result in delay in processing the application or may constitute grounds for revocation of the coastal development permit. (Ord. 92-15; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.80.040 Projects Straddling Jurisdiction Boundaries.
A.     Where a proposed project is physically located both within and outside the Coastal Zone as defined in Public Resources Section 30103 and Chapter 30.04, the following procedures apply:

1.     For divisions of land, a coastal development permit shall be required only for lots or parcels created which contain new lot lines or portions of new lot lines within the Coastal Zone and such review will be confined to those lots or portions of lots within the Coastal Zone.

2.     For any development involving a structure or similar integrated physical construction, a coastal development permit for any structure partially in the Coastal Zone shall be required.

B.     Where a proposed project straddles the boundaries of the City of Encinitas and another local government, or the boundaries of the City’s coastal development permit jurisdiction and Coastal Commission’s permit jurisdiction, the following procedures apply:

1.     The applicant must obtain separate coastal development permits from each jurisdiction.

2.     If the applicant is a public agency seeking approval for a public works project, the agency may obtain a single “public works plan” approval from the Coastal Commission, in lieu of locally-issued coastal development permits. (Ord. 95-04; Ord. 2005-04)

 

30.80.045 Final Local Coastal Program Certification and Permit Review.
A.     The City’s jurisdiction over coastal development permits does not include tidelands, submerged lands and public trust lands as described in Section 30519(b) of the Public Resources Code and described as areas of “Coastal Commission Permit Jurisdiction” as delineated on the Local Coastal Program Post-Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map as amended.

B.     Any proposed development within the certified area which the City preliminarily approved before effective certification of the Coastal Program but which has not been filed complete with the Commission for approval shall be re-submitted to the City through an application for a permit pursuant to this certified Local Coastal Program. The standard of review for such application shall be the requirements of this certified Local Coastal Program. Any application fee paid to the Commission shall be refunded to the applicant.

C.    Any proposed development within the certified area which the City preliminarily approved before effective certification of the Local Coastal Program and for which an application has been filed complete with the Commission may, at the option of the applicant, remain with the Commission for completion of review. Commission review of any such application shall be based solely upon the requirements of this certified Local Coastal Program. Alternatively, the applicant may resubmit the proposal to the City through an application for a coastal development permit to the requirements of this certified Local Coastal Program. The standard of review for such application shall be the requirements of this certified Local Coastal Program. Any application fee paid to the Commission shall be refunded to the applicant.

D.    Upon effective certification of a certified Local Coastal Program, no applications for development shall be accepted by the Coastal Commission for development within the certified area except for development in areas in which the Coastal Commission retains permit jurisdiction as indicated in Sections 30.80.030A2 and 30.80.045A.

E.     Development authorized by a Coastal Commission-issued permit remains under the jurisdiction of the Commission for the purposes of condition compliance, amendment, extension, reconsideration and revocation. (Ord. 95-04)

 

30.80.050 Exempt Development Projects.
The following types of development projects are exempt from the requirement for a coastal development permit when in conformance with all other provisions of the Municipal Code (i.e., no use permit, variance or other discretionary entitlement is required and the development is not governed by the Coastal Bluff Overlay regulations of Chapter 30.34 of the Municipal Code):

A.     Improvements to existing single-family residences, as defined under paragraph (a) of Section 13250 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations; provided, however, that improvements specified under paragraph (b) of Section 13250 of the Code are not exempt.

B.     Improvements to an existing structure other than a single-family residence or a public works facility, as defined under paragraph (a) of Section 13253 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations; provided, however, that improvements specified under paragraph (b) of Section 13253 of the Code are not exempt.

C.    Repair and maintenance activities to existing structures or facilities that do not result in an addition to, or enlargement or expansion of, the structures or facilities; provided, however, that repair or maintenance activities specified under paragraphs (a) and (b) of Section 13252 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations are not exempt.

D.    The installation, testing, and placement in service or the replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing service facility and any development which has been approved under the California Coastal Act.

E.     The replacement of any structure other than a public works facility destroyed by a disaster. The replacement structure shall conform to applicable zoning and development requirements of the City, shall be for the same use(s) as the destroyed structure, shall not exceed the floor area, height, or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than 10%, and shall be sited in the same location on the affected development site as the destroyed structure. For purposes of this paragraph the definitions under paragraph (g) of Section 30610 of the California Public Resources Code shall apply.

F.     Temporary uses or vents, as determined to be exempt under Chapter 30.46 of this Municipal Code.

G.    Signs which are exempted from provisions of the Municipal Code (change of message/copy).

H.    Categorically excluded development pursuant to a Coastal Commission approved categorical exclusion order.

I.      Development excluded from permit requirements as described in the document titled “Interpretive Guideline on Exclusions from Permit Requirements” adopted by the California Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 30610 of the Coastal Act. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.80.060 Application Fee.
For those proposed projects which require a City-approved coastal development permit, the application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of processing the application as prescribed in this chapter.

 

30.80.070 Investigation and Report.
The Director shall investigate the application for coastal development permit, and upon determining it to be complete, shall prepare a written report of findings which shall be submitted to the authorized agent prior to the public hearing. If the Director is the authorized agent for the coastal development permit, no written report shall be prepared; the notice of decision shall incorporate appropriate findings of fact in support of the decision. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.80.080 Public Hearing by Authorized City Agency.
The authorized agency shall hold a public hearing on coastal development permit requests or amendments to existing permits if the associated discretionary actions by the City otherwise require a public hearing, or if the location of the proposed project is within the area subject to appeal to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 30.80.030A3 of this Code. The hearing shall be scheduled and noticed as described in Chapter 30.01 of this Code except as modified by the following:

A.     In addition to the requirements for contents of the notice of public hearing described in Chapter 30.01, the notice shall also state that the proposed project is in the Coastal Zone, contains a request for issuance of a coastal development permit, whether it includes development which is appealable to the California Coastal Commission and the system for local and Coastal Commission appeals, including any local fees required.

B.     In addition to the requirements for ways in which the notice of public hearing is provided as described in Chapter 30.01, the notice shall be sent as first class mail at least 10 calendar days prior to the public hearing to the applicant or authorized agent; interested persons (all persons who have requested to be on the mailing list for that development project or for coastal decisions within the City); residents (occupants) and property owners within 500 feet (300 feet for projects requiring an agriculture permit) of the perimeter of the parcel on which the development is proposed, and the Coastal Commission.

C.    For non-appealable coastal development permits where no public hearing is required, a notice of pending action, containing the same information described above for the notice of public hearing shall be provided. The notice of pending shall also include a description of local review procedures, pending action date, and a statement on public comment. The notice shall be sent as first class mail at least 10 calendar days prior to the local decision on the application to the applicant or authorized agent; interested persons (all persons who have requested to be on the mailing list for that development project or for coastal decisions within the City); residents (occupants) and property owners within 500 feet of the perimeter of the parcel on which the development is proposed, and the Coastal Commission.

D.    Where other land use/development applications requiring a public hearing accompany a coastal development permit application, the information related to all of the applications may be combined in a single notice which includes all of the information required by Chapter 30.01 and this chapter, and the notice shall be distributed and published as described in Chapter 30.01 and this chapter. (Ord. 95-04; Ord. 96-07; Ord. 2006-06; Ord. 2016-08)

 

30.80.090 Action by the Authorized City Agency.
A.     Following the public hearing or review period, the authorized City agency shall render its decision in the form of a final or advisory resolution or notice of decision, with written findings. A decision to approve a coastal development permit must be based upon the following written findings:

1.     The proposed project is consistent with the certified Local Coastal Program of the City of Encinitas.

2.     The proposed development conforms with Public Resources Code Section 21000 and following (CEQA) and that there are no feasible mitigation measures or feasible alternatives available which would substantially lessen any significant adverse impact that the activity may have on the environment.

3.     For projects involving development between the sea or other body of water and the nearest public road, approval shall include a specific finding that such development is in conformity with the public access and public recreation policies of Section 30200 et seq. of the Coastal Act.

B.     The public hearing may be continued to subsequent dates to complete authorized City agency review of the application before a final or advisory determination is rendered. Pursuant to Section 13567 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, if a decision on a development permit is continued by the local government to a time which is neither previously stated in the notice provided pursuant to Section 30.80.080 of this chapter, nor announced at the public hearing as being continued to a time certain, the City shall provide notice of the further hearings (or action on the proposed development) in the same manner, and within the same time limits as established within Section 30.80.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-04; Ord. 96-07)

 

30.80.100 Condition of Approval/Posting of Security.
A.     The agency authorized to render a final determination shall have the authority to impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to protect and enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding area, and to insure that the proposed project for which coastal development permit approval is sought, fully meets the criteria set forth in the General Plan, Local Coastal Program, and Zoning Code.

B.     No coastal development permit shall require a condition which is not reasonably related to the project for which the permit is requested.

C.    Whenever a coastal development permit is granted upon any condition or limitation, the person seeking the permit may be required to furnish security, in a form satisfactory to the Director, in an amount sufficient to insure compliance with conditions and limitation upon which the permit is granted. Such security shall be in a form satisfactory to the Director, shall be payable to the City, and shall be consistent with the conditions and limitations of the granted permit. (Ord. 92-15)

 

30.80.120 Public Access.
A.     Access Required. As a condition of approval and prior to issuance of a coastal development permit or other authorization for any new development identified in paragraphs 1 through 4 of this section, except as provided in subsection B of this section, an offer to dedicate an easement (or other legal mechanism pursuant to Section 30.80.120K2, for one or more of the types of access identified in subsections C through F of this section shall be required and shall be supported by finding required by subsections M through O of this section; provided that no such conditions of approval shall be imposed if the analysis required by paragraphs M1 and M2 of this section establishes that the development will not adversely affect, either individually or cumulatively, the ability of the public to reach and use public tidelands and coastal resources.

1.     New development on any parcel or location identified in the Land Use Plan or in the specific LCP zoning districts.

2.     New development between the nearest public roadway and the sea.

3.     New development on any site where there is substantial evidence of a public right of access to the sea acquired through use or a public right of access through legislative authorization.

4.     New development on any site where a trail, blufftop access or other recreational access is necessary to mitigate impacts of the development on public access.

B.     Exceptions. Subsection A of this section shall apply except in the following instances:

Projects excepted from the definition of “new development” in paragraph A2 of this section, where findings required by subsections M and N of this section establish any of the following:

1.     Public access is inconsistent with the public safety, military security needs, or protection of fragile coastal resources;

2.     Adequate access exists nearby; or

3.     Agriculture would be adversely affected.

Exceptions identified in this subsection B shall be supported by written findings required by subsection O of this section.

C.    Lateral Public Access—Minimum Requirements (also to be used for blufftop access or trail access, as applicable). A condition to require lateral access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to subsection A of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of lateral public access and passive recreational use along the shoreline (or public recreational area, bikeway or blufftop area, as applicable); provided that in some cases controls on the time, place and manner of uses may be justified by site characteristics including sensitive habitat values or fragile topographic features, or by the need to protect the privacy of residential development.

Active recreational use may be appropriate in many cases where the development is determined to be especially burdensome on public access. Examples include cases where the burdens of the proposed project would severely impact public recreational use of the shoreline, where the proposed development is not one of the priority uses specified in Public Resources Code Section 30222, where active recreation uses reflect the historic public use of the site, where active recreation uses would be consistent with the use of the proposed project and where such uses would not significantly interfere with the privacy of the landowner. In determining the appropriate character of public use, findings shall be made on the specific factors enumerated in subsection N of this section. Lateral access shall be legally described as required in subsection H of this section.

D.    Vertical Public Access—Minimum Requirements. A condition to require vertical public access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to subsection A of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of access, (1) located in specific locations identified in the certified Local Coastal Program for future vertical access, or (2) located in a site for which the local government has reviewed an application for a development permit and has determined a vertical accessway is required pursuant to the access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act or the applicable provisions of the Local Coastal Program.

A condition to require vertical access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit shall provide the public with the permanent right of vertical access and be limited to the public right of passive recreational use unless another character of use is specified as a condition of the development. In determining whether another character of use is appropriate, findings shall be made on the specific factors identified in subsection N of this section.

Each vertical accessway shall extend from the road to the shoreline (or bluff edge) and shall be legally described as required in subsection H of this section. The access easement shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide. If a residential structure is proposed, the accessway should not be sited closer than 10 feet to the structure.

E.     Blufftop Access—Minimum Requirements. A condition to require public access along a blufftop as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to subsection A of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of scenic and visual access from the blufftop to the public tidelands.

The blufftop access shall be limited to passive recreational use and coastal viewing purposes unless another character of use is specified as a condition of development. In determining the appropriate character of use, findings shall be made on the specific factors identified in subsection N of this section.

Each blufftop accessway shall be described in the conditions of approval of the coastal development permit as an area beginning at the current bluff edge extending 25 feet inland. However, the accessway shall not extend any closer than 10 feet from an occupied residential structure. Due to the potential for erosion of the bluff edge, the condition shall include a mechanism that will cause the accessway to be adjusted inland as the edge recedes.

The accessway shall be legally described as required in subsection G of this section, with the furthest inland extent of the area possible referenced as a distance from a fixed monument in the following manner:

“Such easement shall be XXX feet wide located along the blufftop as measured inland from the daily bluff edge. As the daily blufftop edge may vary and move inland, the location of this right-of-way will change over time with the then current bluff edge, but in no case shall it extend any closer than XXX feet from XXX (a fixed inland point, such as the centerline of a public road or other easement monument.)”

F.     Trail Access—Minimum Requirements. A condition to require public access as a condition of approval of a coastal development permit pursuant to subsection A of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of access and active recreational use, (1) along a designated alignment of a coastal recreational path or trail in specific locations identified in the LCP for implementation of trail access, or (2) in locations where it has been determined that a trail access is required to link recreational areas to the shoreline or provide alternative recreational and access opportunities pursuant to the access and recreation policies of the LCP and Coastal Act, consistent with other provisions of this chapter. In determining if another character of use is appropriate, findings shall be made on the specific factors enumerated in subsection N of this section. The trail access shall be legally described as required by subsection H of this section.

G.    Protection of Historic Public Use.

1.     Siting and Design Requirements. Development shall be sited and designed in a manner which does not interfere with or diminish any public right of access which may have been established based on historic public use. Only when site constraints are so severe that siting of the accessway or recreational use area in its historic location would significantly impair the proposed development and alternative development siting is not feasible, development may be sited in the area of public right of access based on historic use provided that the applicant provides an equivalent area of public access or recreation to and along the same destination and including the same type intensity of public use as previously existed on the site. Mechanisms for guaranteeing the continued public use of the area or equivalent area shall be required in accordance with subsections C through F of this section.

2.     Minimum Requirements. An access condition shall not serve to extinguish or waive public prescriptive rights. In permits where evidence shows the possibility of such prescriptive rights, the following language shall be added to the access condition:

“Nothing in this condition shall be construed to constitute a waiver of any prescriptive rights which may exist on the parcel itself or on the designated easement.”

H.    Legal Description of an Accessway—Recordation. An access dedication required pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be described in the condition of approval of the permit or maximum amount of certainty as to the location of the accessway. As part of the condition of approval, easements shall be described as follows: (1) for lateral access: along the entire width of the property from the mean high tide line to (as applicable): the toe of the bluff, the toe of the seawall or other appropriate boundary such as stringline or dripline; (2) for blufftop access or trail access: extending inland from the bluff edge or along the alignment of a recreational trail; (3) for vertical access: extending from the road to the shoreline (or bluff edge). A privacy buffer provided pursuant to subsection J of this section shall be described, as applicable.

Prior to the issuance of the coastal development permit, the landowner shall execute and record a document in a form and content acceptable to the Coastal Commission [or local agency authorized pursuant to Title 14 California Administrative Code Section 13574(b)], consistent with provisions of the coastal development permit ordinance, irrevocably offering to dedicate to a public agency or private association approved by the Coastal Commission [or local agency authorized by the Commission pursuant to Title 14 California Administrative Code Section 13574(b)] an easement for a specific type of access and a specific character of use as applicable to the particular condition.

The recorded document shall include legal descriptions of both the applicant’s entire parcel and the easement area and a map to scale. The offer shall be recorded free of prior liens and any other encumbrances which the Coastal Commission (or local agency authorized by the Commission) determines may affect the interest being conveyed. The offer to dedicate shall run with the land in favor of the people of the State of California, binding all successors and assignees, and shall be irrevocable for a period of 21 years, such period running from the date of recordation.

I.      Management Plan—Minimum Requirements. A management plan may be required in conjunction with a dedication of public access in any case where there is substantial evidence of potential conflicts between public access use and other uses on or immediately adjacent to the site. Examples include access in areas of sensitive habitats, agricultural resources, significant hazards, or adjoining residential neighborhoods or military security areas. The plan shall be prepared by the accepting agency and approved by the City of Encinitas prior to the opening of the access to public use. Where applicable, the plan should specify management controls on time and intensity of use, standards for privacy buffers and requirements for maintenance of aesthetic values through such measures as litter control.

J.     Privacy Buffers—Minimum Requirements. Separation between a public accessway and adjacent residential use may be provided when necessary to protect the landowner’s privacy or security as well as the public’s right to use the accessway. Any such buffer shall be provided within the development area. Access should not be sited closer than 10 feet to any residential structure. The buffer can be reduced where separation is achieved through landscaping, fences or grade separation.

K.     Implementation.

1.     A dedicated accessway shall not be required to be opened to public use until a public agency or private association approved in accordance with subsection H of this section agrees to accept responsibility for maintenance and liability of the accessway, except in cases where immediate public access is implemented through a deed restriction, as may be required by subsection K of this section.

2.     In any case where the size and character of a development would impose very substantial burdens on public access, such as a large resort development on the shoreline, and where the applicant has the capacity to operate and maintain the accessway or recreation area, a deed restriction may be required instead of an offer to dedicate in order to assure immediate public use of the area and maintenance of the area by the applicant and successors in interest. In any such case, all other applicable provisions of this chapter shall apply.

3.     Assess facilities constructed on access easements (e.g., walkways, paved paths, boardwalks, etc.) should be no wider than necessary to accommodate the numbers and types of uses that can reasonably be expected. Width of facilities can vary for ramps or paved walkways, depending on site factors.

L.     Title Information. As a requirement for any public access condition, prior to the issuance of the coastal development permit, the applicant shall be required to furnish a title report and all necessary subordination agreements. Title insurance may also be required where easements are being granted. The amount of insurance shall reflect the estimated cost to acquire an equivalent accessway or recreational use elsewhere in the vicinity. All offers shall be made free of all encumbrances which the approving authority pursuant to subsection G of this section determines may affect the interest being conveyed. If any such interest exists which could erase the access easement, it must be subordinated through a written and recorded agreement.

M.    Required Overall Findings. Written findings of fact, analysis and conclusions addressing public access must be included in support of all approvals, denials or conditional approvals of projects between the first public road and the sea (whether redevelopment or new development) and of all approvals or conditional approvals of projects (whether redevelopment or new development) where an access dedication is included in the project proposal or required as a condition of approval. Such findings shall address the applicable factors identified by subsection N of this section and shall reflect the specified level of detail, as applicable. Findings supporting all such decisions shall include:

1.     A statement of the individual and cumulative burdens imposed on public access and recreation opportunities based on applicable factors identified pursuant to subsection N of this section. The type of affected public access and recreation opportunities shall be clearly described.

2.     An analysis based on applicable factors identified in subsection N of this section of the necessity for requiring public access conditions to find the project consistent with the public access provisions of the Coastal Act.

3.     A description of the legitimate governmental interest furthered by any access condition required.

4.     An explanation of how imposition of an access dedication requirement alleviates the access burdens identified.

N.    Required Project-Specific Findings. In determining any requirements for public access, including the type of access and character of use, the City shall evaluate and document in written findings the factors identified in paragraphs N1 through 5 of this section to the extent applicable. The findings shall explain the basis for all conclusions and decisions of the City and shall be supported by substantial evidence in the record. If an access dedication is required as a condition of approval, the findings shall explain how the adverse effects which have been identified will be alleviated or mitigated by the dedication. As used in this section, “cumulate effect” means the effect of the individual project in combination with the effects of past projects, other current projects, and probable future projects, including development allowed under applicable planning and zoning.

1.     Project Effects on Demand for Access and Recreation. Identification of existing and open public access and coastal recreation areas and facilities in the local and regional vicinity of the development. Analysis of the project’s effects upon existing public access and recreation opportunities. Analysis of the project’s cumulative effects upon the use and capacity of the identified access and recreation opportunities, including public tidelands and beach resources, and upon the capacity of major coastal roads from subdivision, intensification or cumulative buildout. Projection of the anticipated demand and need for increased coastal access and recreation opportunities for the public. Analysis of the contribution of the project’s cumulative effects to any such projected increase. Description of the physical characteristics of the site and its proximity to the sea, tidelands viewing points, upland recreation areas, and trail linkages to tidelands or recreation areas. Analysis of the importance and potential of the site, because of its location or other characteristics, for creating, preserving or enhancing public access to tidelands or public recreation opportunities.

2.     Shoreline Processes. Description of the existing shoreline conditions, including beach profile, accessibility and usability of the beach, history of erosion or accretion, character and sources of sand, wave and sand movement, presence of shoreline protective structures, location of the line of mean high tide during the season when the beach is at its narrowest (generally during the late winter) and the proximity of that line to existing structures, and any other factors which substantially characterize or affect the shoreline processes at the site. Identification of anticipated changes to shoreline processes and beach profile unrelated to the proposed development. Description and analysis of any reasonably like changes attributable to the primary and cumulative effects of the project to: wave and sand movement affecting beaches in the vicinity of the project; the profile of the beach; the characterize or affect beaches in the vicinity. Analysis of the effect of any identified changes of the project alone or in combination with other anticipated changes will have upon the ability of the public to use public tidelands and shoreline recreation areas.

3.     Historic Public Use. Evidence of use of the site by members of the general public for a continuous five-year period (such as may be seasonal). Evidence of the type and character of use made by the public (vertical, lateral, blufftop, etc. and for passive and/or active recreational use, etc.). Identification of any agency (or person) who has maintained and/or improved the area subject to historic public use and the nature of the maintenance performed and improvements made. Identification of the record owner of the area historically used by the public and any attempts by the owner to prohibit public use of the area, including the success or failure of those attempts. Description of the potential for adverse impact on public use of the area from the proposed development (including, but not limited to, creation of physical or psychological impediments to public use).

4.     Physical Obstructions. Description of any physical aspects of the development which block or impede the ability of the public to get to or along the tidelands, public recreation areas or other public coastal resources or to see the shoreline.

5.     Other Adverse Impacts on Access and Recreation. Description of the development’s physical proximity and relationship to the shoreline and any public recreation area. Analysis of the extent to which buildings, walls, signs, street or other aspects of the development, individually or cumulatively, are likely to diminish the public’s use of tidelands or lands committed to public recreation. Description of any alteration of the aesthetic, visual or recreational value of public use areas, and of any diminution of the quality or amount of recreational use of public lands which may be attributable to the individual or cumulative effects of the development.

O.    Required Findings for Public Access Exceptions. Any determination that one of the exceptions of subsection B of this section applies to a development shall be supported by written findings of fact, analysis and conclusions which address all of the following:

1.     The type of access potentially applicable to the site involved (vertical, lateral, blufftop, etc.) and its location in relation to the fragile coastal resource to be protected, the agricultural use, the public safety concern, or the military facility which is the basis for the exception, as applicable.

2.     Unavailability of any mitigating measures to manage the type, character, intensity, hours, season or location of such use so that agricultural resources, fragile coastal resources, public safety, or military security, as applicable, are protected.

3.     Ability of the public, through other reasonable means, to reach the same area of public tidelands as would be made accessible by an accessway on the subject land.

P.     Findings for Management Plan Conditions. Written findings in support of a condition requiring a management plan for regulating the time and manner or character of public access use must address the following factors, as applicable:

1.     Identification and protection of specific habitat values including the reasons supporting the conclusion that such values must be protected by limiting the hours, seasons or character of public use.

2.     Topographic constraints of the development site.

3.     Recreational needs of the public.

4.     Rights of privacy of the landowner which could not be mitigated by setting the project back from the accessway or otherwise conditioning the development.

5.     The requirements of the possible accepting agency, if an offer of dedication is the mechanism for securing public access.

6.     Feasibility of adequate setbacks, fencing, landscaping and other methods as part of a management plan to regulate public use.

Q.    Legal Documents. For all coastal development permits which are approved with conditions regarding grants of public access and open space, responsibility for reviewing completed legal documents and assuring that dedications of offers-to-dedicate are properly recorded shall remain with the Coastal Commission staff. Following approval of an application by the City, the resolution of approval containing the access and/or open space conditions and the associated legal documents will be forwarded to the Coastal Commission staff for review. The Executive Director shall have 15 working days from receipt of the documents in which to complete the review and notify both the City and the applicant of any recommended revisions. The coastal development permit may be issued by the City unless it has received notification of inadequacies from Coastal Commission staff during the review period. Any inadequacies noted must be resolved to the satisfaction of the Coastal Commission’s Executive Director prior to permit issuance. (Ord. 95-04)

 

30.80.130 Conformance with Coastal Development Permit.
Prior to commencement of the use and the issuance of a building permit or any other permit required for the construction of a project for which a coastal development permit is required, the Director shall determine whether the plans submitted for such construction permit are in substantial conformance with the coastal development permit.

 

30.80.140 Notice of Final Action and Failure to Act.
A.     Pursuant to Section 13750 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, the City’s decision on the coastal development permit application shall be considered final when:

1.     All required findings have been adopted, including specific factual findings supporting the legal conclusions that the proposed development is or is not in conformity with the certified Local Coastal Program and, where applicable, with the public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act; and

2.     All rights to appeals before the Planning Commission and City Council have been exhausted as defined in Section 30.80.150D.

B.     Following final action on a coastal development permit by the Director of Planning and Building, or Planning Commission, and following final decision by any of the City decision-making bodies on an appeal of a coastal development permit, a notice of final action shall be prepared and distributed as follows:

1.     The notice of final action shall include the notice of decision by the Director, and the resolution by the Planning Commission or City Council containing conditions of approval, if any, and written findings supporting the action, and the procedure for appeal to the Coastal Commission for appealable projects.

2.     The notice of final action shall be distributed within seven calendar days of the final City action by first class mail to the Coastal Commission, project applicant or authorized agent, and all persons who have requested notice of final action on the proposed development.

C.    For appealable projects, the receipt of an adequate notice of final action by the Coastal Commission starts a 10-working-day appeal period and the Commission staff will notify the City and project applicant of the appeal period dates.

D.    Pursuant to Section 13572 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, the City’s final decision on an application for an appealable development shall become effective after the 10-working-day appeal period to the Coastal Commission has expired unless either of the following occur:

1.     An appeal is filed in accordance with Section 30.80.160 of this chapter;

2.     The notice of final local government action does not meet the requirements of subsection B of this section.

When either of the circumstances in this subsection D occur, the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission shall, within five calendar days of receiving the notice of final local government action, notify the City that the effective date of the City action has been suspended.

E.     If the City fails to act on a coastal development permit application within the time limits set forth in Government Code Sections 65950-65957.1, the development is approved due to the expiration of time limits, and a notice of final action shall be prepared and distributed as described above. This subsection is applicable only after required notice is given pursuant to Sections 65950-65957.1. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 96-04; Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.80.150 Internal Appeal of Authorized City Agency Decision.
A.     A coastal development permit decision rendered by the Director, or Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the procedures in this Code (see Chapter 1.12).

B.     Pursuant to Section 13573 of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations as amended, an appellant shall be deemed to have exhausted local appeals for purposes of Section 30.80.140A and shall be qualified as an “aggrieved person” where the appellant has pursued his or her appeal to the local appellate body (bodies) as required by the local government appeal procedures; except that exhaustion of all local appeals shall not be required if any of the following occur:

1.     The City requires an appellant to appeal to more local appellate bodies that have been certified as appellate bodies for permits in the Coastal Zone, in the implementation section of the LCP.

2.     An appellant was denied the right of the initial City appeal by a City ordinance which restricts the class of persons who may appeal a City decision.

3.     The City charges an appeal fee for the filing or processing of appeals.

Where a project is appealed by any two members of the Coastal Commission, there shall be no requirement of exhaustion of local appeals. (Ord. 95-04)

 

30.80.160 Appeal of Decision to Coastal Commission.
A.     For those projects requiring a coastal development permit which lies within the appeal jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission as generally described in Section 30.80.030 and defined in Chapter 30.04, the grounds for appeal are limited as follows:

1.     For projects seaward of the first public road paralleling the sea or within 300 feet of the inland extent of any beach or the mean high tide line where there is no beach, whichever is the greater distance, the grounds for appeal are limited to an allegation that the development does not conform to the standards set forth in the certified Local Coastal Program or the public access policies set forth in Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act.

2.     For other appealable developments, the grounds for an appeal are limited to an allegation that the development does not conform to the certified Local Coastal Program.

B.     Only the applicant, an aggrieved person as defined in Chapter 30.04, or two members of the Coastal Commission may appeal to the Coastal Commission. If a local action is appealed by members of the Coastal Commission, that appeal shall be suspended pending the exhaustion of all local administrative remedies.

C.    To qualify for appeal to the Coastal Commission, the appellant must have exhausted all local City appeals as described in subsection D of this section.

D.    Following the final City action on a coastal development permit, including all internal appeals, a notice of final action is sent to the Commission staff and the 10-working-day appeal period begins on the first working day following the Coastal Commission staff’s receipt of the notice of final action. The appeal must be submitted to the Coastal Commission during this appeal period and must contain the following information:

1.     The name and address of the permit applicant and appellant;

2.     The date of the local government action;

3.     A description of the development.

4.     The name of the governing body having jurisdiction over the project area;

5.     The names and addresses of all persons who submitted written comments or who spoke and left his or her name at any public hearing on the project, where such information is available;

6.     The name and address of all other persons known by the appellant to have an interest in the matter on appeal;

7.     The specific grounds for appeal which shall be limited to those stated in Section 30.80.160A1 and 30.80.160A2;

8.     A statement of facts on which the appeal is based; and

9.     A summary of the significant question raised by the appeal.

E.     The appellant shall notify the applicant, any persons known to be interested in the application and the City of the filing of the appeal. Notification shall be by delivering a copy of the completed notice of appeal to the domicile(s), office(s) or mailing address(es) of parties. In any event, such notification shall be by such means as may reasonably advise parties of the pendency of the appeal. Unwarranted failure to perform such notification may be grounds for dismissal of the appeal by the Coastal Commission.

F.     Pursuant to Section 30623 of the Coastal Act as amended, an appeal to the Coastal Commission of any action on any development approved by the City which is appealable to the Coastal Commission shall cause the operation and effect of that action to be stayed pending a decision of the appeal.

G.    The Coastal Commission will first determine whether the City’s action raises a substantial issue and, if it so determined, will act upon the appeal by approving, denying, or conditionally approving the coastal development permit application. The Coastal Commission’s action on the appeal supersedes the City’s action and requires a public hearing before a final determination is rendered. If the Coastal Commission determines that no substantial issue exists, the appeal will be dismissed and the City’s final action will stand. (Ord. 92-15; Ord. 95-04; Ord. 2017-03)

 

30.80.162 Expiration of Coastal Development Permit.
If substantial construction has not been completed in reliance upon a granted coastal development permit within a minimum of two years of the grant or a longer period as otherwise approved, then upon notice to the property owner and an opportunity to present information to the Director, the Director may declare the coastal development permit to have expired with the privileges granted thereby canceled. (Ord. 95-04)

 

30.80.164 Extension of Coastal Development Permit.
Upon application to the Director and good cause having been shown, the Director may, on one or more occasions, extend the expiration period on the coastal development permit if the Director finds that there are no changed circumstances which would affect the development’s consistency with the certified Local Coastal Program. A request for such an extension shall be filed with the Director at least 15 days prior to the expiration of the coastal development permit, together with the required application fee and evidence of the applicant’s continued legal interest in the property. However, the total of all extensions shall not exceed a period of two years. Upon proper filing of an application for extension, public notice shall be made in accordance with Chapter 30.01 as modified by this chapter. A public hearing may be required. (Ord. 95-04)

 

30.80.166 Suspension of Coastal Development Permit.
A.     The Director shall suspend any coastal development permit and issue no certificate of occupancy if the project is not constructed in compliance with the coastal development permit. The notice of suspension shall be mailed to the proponent by certified mail and posted on the project site.

B.     The suspension of the coastal development permit and the suspension of all related permits shall be lifted by the Director if:

1.     The applicant has completed all necessary changes to bring the project into compliance with the original coastal development permit, or with the coastal development permit as amended by an appeal or modification; or

2.     The final appeals body has determined that no violation of the original coastal development permit exists.

 

30.80.170 Reapplication for Coastal Development Permit.
In the event that a coastal development permit is denied, the City shall not receive for filing any application for a coastal development permit for the same, or substantially the same project at the same location within one year from the date of denial.

 

30.80.180 Emergency Coastal Development Permit.
In the event of a verified emergency, temporary emergency authorization to proceed with remedial measures may be given by the City Manager or his/her designee in accordance with the procedures identified below:

A.     Application shall be made to the City Manager or his/her designee by letter if time allows, or in person or by telephone, if time does not allow. The information, to be reported at the time of emergency or within three days after the emergency, shall include the following:

1.     Nature of the emergency;

2.     Cause of the emergency, insofar as this can be established;

3.     Location of the emergency;

4.     The remedial, protective, or preventive work required to deal with the emergency;

5.     The circumstances during the emergency that appeared to justify the cause(s) of action taken, including the probable consequences of failing to take action.

B.     The City Manager or his/her designee shall not grant an emergency coastal development permit for any development that falls within an area in which the Coastal Commission retains direct permit review authority, or for any development that is appealable to the Coastal Commission. In such areas and for such developments, a request for an emergency authorization must be made to the Coastal Commission. In addition, a waiver from coastal development permit requirements may be obtained from the Coastal Commission Executive Director for development that is required to protect life or public property in accordance with Section 30611 of the Coastal Act.

C.    The City Manager or his/her designee shall provide notice of the proposed emergency action. The extent and type of the notice shall be determined on the basis of the nature of the emergency. If the nature of the emergency does not allow sufficient time for public notice to be given before the emergency work begins, the City Manager or his/her designee shall provide public notice of the action, or being taken, as soon as is practical. Public notice of the nature of the emergency and the remedial actions to be taken shall be posted on the site in a conspicuous place and mailed to all persons the City Manager or his/her designee has reason to know would be interested in such action and to the Coastal Commission.

D.    The City Manager or his/her designee shall grant an emergency coastal development permit upon reasonable terms and conditions, which shall include an expiration date and the necessity for a subsequent regular coastal development permit application if the City Manager or his/her designee finds that:

1.     An emergency exists that requires action more quickly than permitted by the procedures for a coastal development permit and the work can and will be completed within 30 days unless otherwise specified by the terms of the permit.

2.     Public comment on the proposed emergency action has been reviewed, if time allows.

3.     The work proposed would be consistent with the requirements of the certified Local Coastal Program.

E.     An emergency permit shall be valid for 60 days from the date of issuance by the City Manager or his/her designee. Prior to expiration of the emergency permit, the permittee must submit a regular coastal development permit application for the development even if only to remove the development undertaken pursuant to the emergency permit and restore the site to its previous condition.

F.     The City Manager or his/her designee shall report in writing and orally, the granting of an emergency permit to the City Council at its next scheduled meeting, and to the Coastal Commission. The report shall include a description of the nature of the emergency, the development involved and the person or entity undertaking the development. Copies of the report shall be available at the meeting and shall be mailed to the Coastal Commission and to all persons requesting such notification of local coastal development decisions.

The report by the City Manager or his/her designee shall be informational only; the decision to issue an emergency permit is solely at the discretion of the City Manager or his/her designee subject to the provisions of this section.

 

30.80.190 Amendments.
Upon submittal of an application to amend a valid coastal development permit, such permit may be amended by the original approving authority. An amendment application shall follow all procedures and requirements established in this chapter.

 

30.80.200 Assignment of Permits.
A.     Any person who has obtained a coastal development permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may assign such permit to another person subject to the following requirements:

1.     Submission of an application fee as set by the City Council;

2.     An affidavit executed by the assignee attesting to the assignee’s agreement to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit;

3.     Evidence of the assignee’s legal interest in the real property involved and legal capacity to undertake the development as approved and to satisfy the conditions required in the permit;

4.     The original permittee’s request to assign all rights to undertake the development to the assignee; and

5.     A copy of the original permit showing that it has not expired.

B.     The applicant for assignment shall submit the above documents together with a completed application form to the Director of Planning and Building. The assignment shall be effective upon written approval of the documentation submitted, and the reassigned permit shall be granted subject to the terms and conditions of the original permit. (Ord. 2003-08)

 

30.80.210 Enforcement.
In addition to the enforcement provisions contained in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 9 of Division 20 of the Public Resources Code as amended shall also apply with respect to violations and enforcements.

Chapter 30.82 LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM AMENDMENT
30.82.010 Purpose.
As part of the implementation of the City of Encinitas Local Coastal Program (LCP), the procedures contained in this chapter provide for the processing of LCP amendments in a manner consistent with provisions of the California Coastal Act.

Amendments to any portion of the Municipal Code previously certified by the Coastal Commission as implementing regulations of the City’s Local Coastal Program, including Chapter 23.08 (“Design Review”), Chapter 23.24 (“Grading, Erosion, and Sediment Control”), Title 24 (“Subdivisions”), and Title 30 (“Zoning”), are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Amendments to those portions of the General Plan of the City of Encinitas designated and certified as the Land Use Plan (LUP) of the Local Coastal Program are also subject to the provisions of this chapter. Amendments to the LUP or any of its implementing ordinances and regulations shall not become effective until certified by the Coastal Commission, pursuant to requirements of the California Public Resources Code and state administrative regulations pursuant thereto. (Ord. 94-06)

 

30.82.020 Preparation of Amendment to the Local Coastal Program.
In addition to any other requirements of law, a proposed amendment to the City of Encinitas LCP shall be prepared, reviewed, noticed, and considered pursuant to the requirements of Articles 1 and 2 of Chapter 6 of the California Public Resources Code, and Article 15, Division 5.5, Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations.

 

30.82.030 Submittal of Application for Amendment to the Local Coastal Program.
A.     Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submitting an application for an amendment to the Local Coastal Program, a prospective applicant shall consult with the Planning and Building Department to obtain information and to inform the Department of the applicant’s intentions.

B.     Submittal of an amendment to the City of Encinitas certified LCP shall be made by resolution of the City Council, adopted by the city and submitted to the Coastal Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 13551 of the California Code of Regulations. The proposed amendment may be submitted either: (1) as an amendment that will take effect automatically upon approval of the Coastal Commission; or (2) as an amendment that will require formal adoption by the City Council after Coastal Commission approval.

C.    The content of a proposed LCP amendment application shall conform to the requirements of the California Coastal Commission Administrative Regulations Section 13552. (Ord. 94-06; Ord. 2015-01)

 

30.82.040 Effective Date.
No amendment of the City of Encinitas LCP shall become effective until adopted by the California Coastal Commission, pursuant to the provisions of the California Public Resources Code and California Coastal Commission Administrative Regulations. (Ord. 94-06)

Chapter 30.84 SPECIFIC PLANS
30.84.010 Purpose.
In order to address the unique characteristics of particular areas within Encinitas, and to achieve the purposes of this Code and of the General Plan of the City of Encinitas, the following specific plans have been adopted:

A.     SP1 - Home Depot Specific Plan (Ord. 93-17);

B.     SP2 - Downtown Encinitas Specific Plan (Ord. 93-21);

C.    SP3 - Encinitas Ranch Specific Plan (Ord. 94-08);

D.    SP4 - North 101 Corridor Specific Plan (Ord. 97-13);

E.     SP5 - Cardiff-by-the-Sea Specific Plan (Ord. 2010-03).

 

30.84.020 General Provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions or standards set forth in Title 30 of this Code, individual specific plans may establish additional or separate provisions and standards for the plan area; and may adopt zones and amend the Zoning Map of the City of Encinitas.

Refer to the texts and maps of individual specific plans referenced above for regulations within each plan’s jurisdictional boundaries. (Ord. 94-02; Ord. 2017-03)

Chapter 30.86 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
30.86.010 Purpose.
The purpose of reasonable accommodations is to provide provisions in accordance with federal and state fair housing laws (42 USCS Section 3600 et seq. and Government Code Section 12900 et seq.), together referred to as “Fair Housing Laws” for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to housing in the application of the City’s zoning laws. The term “disability” as used in this article shall have the same meaning as the terms “disability” and “handicapped” as defined in the Fair Housing Laws, as may be amended from time to time. The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure by which a person may request reasonable accommodation, how the request is to be processed, and findings to be made that ensure a requested accommodation, if granted, is necessary and reasonable. (Ord. 2019-15)

 

30.86.020 Applicability.
A.     A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to housing opportunities.

B.     A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards, development and use of housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to the housing of their choice.

C.    A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect the obligations of an individual or a developer of housing for an individual with disabilities to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.

D.    Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Section 30.86.030.

E.     If a request for reasonable accommodation is granted, the request shall be granted to an individual and shall not run with the land unless it is determined that: (1) the modification is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with applicable city or state codes; or (2) the accommodation is to be used by another individual with a disability.

F.     Nothing in this chapter shall require the city to waive or reduce development or building fees associated with the granting of a reasonable accommodation request. (Ord. 2019-15)

 

30.86.030 Request for reasonable accommodation.
A.     Application for a request for reasonable accommodation shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Development Services Department. The form shall be signed by the property owner or authorized agent. The application shall state the circumstances and conditions relied upon as grounds for the application and shall be accompanied by adequate plans and all other materials as specified by the Development Services Director, or designee. The application shall include the zoning, land use and/or building code provision, regulation, policy or practice from which modification or exception for reasonable accommodation is being requested including an explanation of how application of the existing zoning, land use or building code provision, regulation, policy or practice would preclude the provision of reasonable accommodation, along with documentation that demonstrates the reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling.

B.     Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. (Ord. 2019-15)

 

30.86.040 Review authority and procedure.
A.     Within 60 days of receipt of a completed application, the Development Services Director, or designee, shall issue a written determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation, and the modification or revocation thereof in compliance with this chapter. The request shall be processed independently of any other required development permits. However, approval of a reasonable accommodation may be conditioned upon approval of other related permits.

B.     The filing of an application for request for reasonable accommodation shall not require public notice.

C.    If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the Development Services Director, or designee, may request:

1.     Further information from the applicant consistent with Fair Housing Laws, specifying in detail the information that is required.

2.     Information from other city departments and divisions or other agencies.

3.     Conditions may be imposed to ensure that any removable structures or physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with the reasonable accommodation be removed once those structures or physical design features are unnecessary to provide access to the dwelling unit for the current occupants. (Ord. 2019-15)

 

30.86.050 Findings.
A.     The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Fair Housing Laws and shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

1.     The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be occupied by an individual, or individuals, with a disability protected under Fair Housing Laws;

2.     The requested accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available and/or accessible to an individual with a disability protected under the Fair Housing Laws;

3.     The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and

4.     The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices, and procedures, and for housing in the coastal zone, the City’s local coastal program.

B.     In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the Development Services Director, or designee, may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection A, above.

C.    In accordance with Section 2.28.090, all decisions of the Director of Development Services are to be posted at City Hall and shall become final 15 days thereafter unless a timely appeal is filed to the City Council. (Ord. 2019-15)

 

30.86.060 Appeals.
Any appeal to reasonable accommodation request denial or conditional approval shall be heard with, and subject to, the notice, review, approval, and appeal procedures prescribed in Chapters 1.12 and 2.28 of the municipal code provided that, notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the standard of review on appeal shall be de novo. The City Council, acting as the appellate body, may sustain, reverse or modify the decision of the Director or remand the matter for further consideration based on the findings required by Section 30.86.050(A). (Ord. 2019-15)

 

30.86.070 Fees.
No application fee is required. (Ord. 2019-15)




