10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 1/581
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of El Segundo, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including Ordinance 1589, passed September 3, 2019.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 1
CODE ADOPTION; DEFINITIONS
1-1-1: ADOPTION OF CITY CODE:
That certain document entitled, "El Segundo City Code", three (3) copies of which have been filed and are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection, together with the secondary codes therein adopted by reference, is hereby adopted as a comprehensive ordinance code for the City, pursuant
to the provisions of the California Government Code sections 50022.1 through 50022.10. Each and all of the provisions, terms and penalties of this Code
on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, incorporated herein, and hereby made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this
Chapter. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-2: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This Code shall be known as the EL SEGUNDO CITY CODE and it shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the "El Segundo City Code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the "El Segundo City Code".
Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "El Segundo City Code" and such reference shall apply to that
numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in this Code. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-3: REFERENCE APPLIES TO AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "El Segundo City Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City, the reference shall
apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-4: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This Code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City, codified pursuant to California
Government Code sections 50022.1 through 50022.10. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-5: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
CITY: The words "the City" or "this City" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of El Segundo".
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.
COUNCIL: Whenever the word "Council" is used in this Code, it means the City Council of El Segundo.
COUNTY: The words "the County" or "this County" mean the County of Los Angeles.
DAY: The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME: "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
GENDER: The masculine "gender" includes the feminine and neuter.
IN THE CITY: Means and includes all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or
other regulatory powers.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 2/581
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving a "joint authority" to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such persons or officers.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUMBER: The singular "number" includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
OATH: "Oath" includes an affirmation.
OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, EMPLOYEES: Officers, departments, boards, commissions, and employees referred to in this
Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions, and employees of the City, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
OFFICIAL TIME: Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean Pacific Standard Time or daylight-saving time, as may be in current use in
the City.
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except "real property", as defined in this Section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
PROCESS: Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK: "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or
subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but, a signature or
subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two (2) witnesses so sign their own
names thereto.
STATE: The words "the State" or "this State" mean the State of California.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part
of such building or land, either alone or with others.
TENSES: The present "tense" includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.
WEEK: A "week" consists of seven (7) consecutive days.
WRITING: Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record
is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
YEAR: A calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-6: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
1-1-7: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
The repeal provided for in this Chapter shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right
established or accruing before the effective date of this City Code; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the
payment of money for the City or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation
assumed by the City; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Code; nor shall it affect the annual tax levy; nor shall it affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the City on any
person or corporation; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to the salaries of City officers or employees; nor shall it affect any ordinance annexing
territory to the City; nor shall it affect any ordinance naming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the City; nor shall it affect any ordinance
relating to zoning; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to State employees' retirement contracts; nor shall it affect any ordinance establishing special
and general City funds; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on or prior to the effective date of this City
Code. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969; amd. 2000 Code)
1-1-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or part of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 3/581
adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 715, 4-28-1969)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PENALTIES
1-2-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Persons convicted of a misdemeanor, the penalty for which is not otherwise prescribed, will be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00); by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months; or by both a fine and imprisonment for each violation of this Code.
B. The City Council may establish lesser fines for specific misdemeanor violations by resolution. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-2: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate, or fail to comply with, any provision of this Code. Each and every violation of any part of this Code including,
without limitation, any franchise or permit issued pursuant to this Code, is a misdemeanor unless otherwise specified.
B. Every person violating this Code is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this
Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person.
C. In addition to these criminal penalties, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code is a public nuisance
and may be abated in accordance with this Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-3: PENALTIES FOR INFRACTIONS:
A. Each infraction is punishable as follows:
1. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;
2. A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year;
3. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within one year of the first violation.
B. Any offense which would otherwise be an infraction may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor if a defendant was convicted for the same violation two (2) or
more times within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense.
C. A fourth violation of the same Code provision regardless of the time of occurrence must be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
D. The City Council may establish lesser fines for specific infractions by resolution. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-4: PROVISIONS PUNISHABLE AS INFRACTIONS:
The following sections of this Code are punishable as infractions and not as misdemeanors:
Section Subject
4-1-1 Business license required
4-1-25 Business license vehicle tags
4-3-2 Alarm permits required
4-4-9 Vehicles for hire/operation permit required
4-4-22 Vehicles for hire/misrepresentation prohibited
4-6-8 Secondhand store and junk shops - compliance
4-8-3 Entertainment permit required; exceptions
4-8-21 Hours of entertainment
4-8-22 Entertainment - conduct upon premises
4-11-3 Business regulations/motion picture, radio and television/permit required
5-2-13 Recycling of organic waste
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 4/581
5-3-2 Littering streets
5-3-3 Littering - containers required for hauling
5-6-3 Smoking prohibited
5-6A-3 Tobacco products - prohibited sale to minors. Prohibited sale without proper identification
7-6-1 Use of vehicle for human habitation
7-6-2 Gambling
7-6-4 Weapons
7-6-5 Merchandise on street or sidewalks
7-6-8 Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages
7-7-2 Handbills - distribution
7-7-3 Handbills - posting property
7-7-4 Handbills - place in vehicles
7-7-6 Handbills - locations where prohibited
7-9-2 Private parking lot - unlawful acts
8-4-19 Vehicles and traffic/miscellaneous traffic/driving on park ground
8-4-24 Vehicles and traffic/miscellaneous traffic/coasters and skateboards
8-5-5 Vehicles and traffic/stopping, standing and parking/stopping or standing in parkway
8-5-12 Vehicles and traffic/stopping, standing and parking/front and side yard parking
9-2-5 Public ways and property/planting vegetation
9-2-6 Public ways and property/obstructions in streets
9-3-7 Public ways and property/street trees/prohibitions
9-4-4 Public ways and property/newsracks/prohibitions
10-4-3 Parks and recreation/skateboard/protective gear required
(Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013; amd. Ord. 1541, 12-6-2016; Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
1-2-5: CODE ENFORCEMENT:
A. Authorization: The Police Department, Fire Department, and building official, and other persons designated by the City Manager are authorized to
enforce the various provisions of this Code under their respective authority or as is specifically assigned to them by the City Manager or City Council.
B. Powers Of Arrest: Officials and employees designated to enforce provisions of this Code have authority to arrest persons pursuant to Penal Code
section 836.5 for purposes of issuing citations for violations of provisions of this Code. Police officers have full authority to arrest persons for violations
of the provisions of this Code pursuant to any applicable provision of the Penal Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-6: CITATION PROCEDURE FOR VIOLATIONS:
A. Any City officer or employee arresting any person for a violation of any provision of this Code, who does not immediately take such arrested person
before a Magistrate, as prescribed in the Penal Code of the State, must prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court.
B. The notice must contain:
1. The name and address of the person arrested;
2. The offense charged, the time and place of the alleged violation;
3. Where and when such person must appear in court. The time specified in the notice for appearance must be at least ten (10) days after such arrest.
The place specified in the notice to appear and the notice must conform with all applicable provisions of the Penal Code.
4. The arresting City officer or employee must deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the alleged violator. In order to secure immediate release, the
violator must give a written promise to appear in court at the time and place indicated on the notice by signing the duplicate notice. That signed copy
must be retained by the City officer or employee. Thereafter, the arresting City officer and employee must release the alleged violator from custody.
The duplicate copy of the notice to appear must be filed in the manner prescribed in the Penal Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-7: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
Any person who wilfully violates a written promise to appear in court by failing to appear at the time and place stated is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 5/581
of the disposition of the charge upon which the person was originally arrested. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
1-2-8: PROSECUTORIAL DUTIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY:
A. In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to the City Attorney by this Code or California law, the City Attorney will:
1. Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for violations of this Code; any franchises or permits issued pursuant to this Code; City
ordinances; and any State misdemeanors that the City Council elects to enforce.
2. Draft complaints for such cases and prosecute all recognizances and bail bonds forfeited arising from or resulting from the commission of such
offenses.
3. Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties, forfeitures, and other money accruing to the City under this Code or otherwise.
4. Represent the City in all appeals arising as a consequence of the City Attorney's prosecutions.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the City Attorney is the only officer that may file misdemeanor charges in accordance with this Code.
The City Attorney may, in his or her discretion, prosecute misdemeanor violations of this Code as infractions.
C. Nothing contained in this section will interfere with the authority of public safety officials to arrest persons pursuant to any applicable provision of this
Code and/or the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1479, 6-4-2013)
Chapter 2A
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
General Provisions
1-2A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers and Government Code section 53069.4 for the purpose of making any violations of this Code
subject to an administrative fine and to set forth the procedures for the imposition and collection of such fines. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter provides for administrative citations that are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which the City may pursue to address any
violation of this Code. The use of this chapter is at the sole discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
CITEE: The person(s) to whom a Code Enforcement Officer issued an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: City employees from the Public Works Department, Planning and Building Safety Department, Police or Fire
Department with the authority to enforce this Code. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013; amd. Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
1-2A-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, all notices and citations required by this chapter must be served on citee via personal service or first class mail, postage
prepaid, to citee's last known address. Service is effective when personally served or when deposited into the United States mail. The individual serving a
citee with notice must complete a declaration of service. Failure to receive any notice does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted under this
chapter. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
Citations
1-2A-5: CITATION PROCEDURES:
A. Issuance: Issuing an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter is in lieu of any criminal citation that could have been issued for the same violation.
The issuance of the administrative citation does not, however, prevent the issuance of a criminal citation for a subsequent violation of the same nature.
B. Contents: Each administrative citation must contain the following information:
1. The date of the violation;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 6/581
2. The address or a definite description of the geographic location where the violation occurred or is occurring;
3. The section of this Code that was violated;
4. A description of the conditions causing the code violation;
5. The amount of the administrative fine for the code violation;
6. A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which, and the place where, the fine must be paid;
7. An order prohibiting the continued or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation;
8. Notification that payment of a fine under this chapter does not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is
the subject of the administrative citation;
9. A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the
manner in which a request for review of the citation may be requested; and
10. The name of the citing Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Service And Filing: The Code Enforcement Officer must serve the original citation on the person cited in the manner set forth in this chapter and forward
a copy of the administrative citation to the City Clerk. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-6: AMOUNT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
The amounts of the administrative fines imposed for code violations under this chapter will be established by City Council resolution. That resolution must
also set forth any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within twelve (12) months from the date of a
previous administrative citation. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-7: PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
An administrative fine must be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation or, if a request for an initial administrative
review is submitted, within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice of the conclusions of that initial administrative review, whichever is later. (Ord. 1364,
7-1-2003)
1-2A-8: DELINQUENT ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
A. A penalty of ten percent (10%) is added on any delinquent fines on the last day of each month after the due date. The penalty will not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the fine.
B. In addition to penalties provided by this section, delinquent fines accrue interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, exclusive of penalties, from
the due date. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-9: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS OR LICENSES:
Should a Code Enforcement Officer issue a citation because the citee lacks a required permit or license and the fine is delinquent, the City will not issue
such permit or license until the delinquent fine, and any applicable penalties and interest, is paid. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-10: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
Before issuing an administrative citation for any violation of building, plumbing, electrical, or similar regulation set forth in this Code or incorporated by
reference, or any violation of title 15 of this Code, the Code Enforcement Officer must first issue a written compliance order to the person(s) responsible for
the violation unless the violation constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety. The Code Enforcement Officer may, but is not required to, issue
a compliance order for any other violation of this Code. Any compliance order issued by a Code Enforcement Officer must contain all of the following:
A. The date on which, and geographic location where, the violation was observed;
B. The section of this Code violated;
C. A description of the conditions causing the code violation;
D. Actions required to correct the violation;
E. A reasonable time period for the correction of the violation;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 7/581
F. Notice that if the violation is not corrected by the date specified in the compliance order, that an administrative citation may be issued and administrative
fines imposed for failure to correct violations by the date specified. (Ord. 1480, 6-4-2013)
1-2A-11: CORRECTION OF VIOLATION:
No further action is required if the Code Enforcement Officer determines that all violations in the compliance order were cured. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that all violations were not corrected within the time specified, an administrative citation may be issued to each person named in the
compliance order as a responsible person. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
Review And Hearings
1-2A-12: INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; REQUEST:
Citees may request an initial administrative review of the citation within twenty (20) days of its issuance. This request must be made in writing to the City
Clerk and set forth with particularity the reasons the citee believes a violation did not occur or that the citee was not responsible for the violation(s); must
include a copy of the citation; and contain the address to which the conclusions of the City's review should be mailed. A request for an initial administrative
review is a mandatory prerequisite to a request for an administrative hearing. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-13: INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; PROCEDURE:
The City Clerk will forward initial administrative review requests to the following persons (collectively identified as "reviewing officer"):
A. To the Director of Planning and Building Safety if the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the administrative citation is an employee within the Planning
and Building Safety Department;
B. To the Fire Chief if the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the administrative citation is an employee within the Fire Department; or
C. To the Public Works Director if the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the administrative citation is an employee within the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-14: INITIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; DECISION:
A. Upon receiving these requests from the Clerk, the reviewing officer will review the requests and provide the Clerk with a written notification that:
1. The citation should be vacated because there was no violation, or the citee was not responsible for the violation, and setting forth the basis for that
conclusion;
2. The citation should not be vacated because no justification could be found.
B. The city clerk's office should mail a copy of the notification to the citee at the address on the request for initial administrative review along with notice
establishing the fine due date and the procedure for requesting an administrative hearing.
C. The reviewing officer should complete his/her review within ten (10) days of receiving the citee's request. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
Hearing Procedures
1-2A-15: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
Any citee dissatisfied with the conclusions of an initial administrative review may contest that citation by requesting an administrative hearing. A citee must
request an administrative hearing within fifteen (15) days after the date the city served the citee with notice of the administrative review decision. Requests
must be submitted to the city clerk's office and be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine or a request for a hardship waiver. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-16: ADVANCE DEPOSIT; HARDSHIP WAIVER:
A. Citees financially unable to make an advance deposit of the administrative fine, may file for a hardship waiver. The request for a hardship waiver must
be filed with the city clerk's office on a form containing information that may be required by the city clerk. The city clerk will review the request and
determine whether a waiver is justified. A waiver may only be approved if the request for waiver is accompanied by a sworn affidavit, together with any
supporting documents or materials, demonstrating that the citee's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine.
B. The city clerk will inform the citee in writing regarding whether the city clerk approved the waiver. This determination must be served upon the citee by
mail at the address provided in the waiver application. The city clerk's determination is final.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 8/581
C. Should the clerk determine that a waiver is unjustified, the citee must deposit the fine amount with the city not later than ten (10) days after the date of
that decision. Failure to make a deposit within ten (10) days after waiver denial is deemed a waiver of the citee's right to an administrative hearing and
the administrative fine will be deemed delinquent. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-17: HEARING OFFICER:
The city manager designates the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-18: HEARING DATE:
After receiving a timely hearing request and deposit, or waiver, of the fine amount, the city clerk sets an administrative hearing on a date not less than
fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the hearing is requested. Written notice of the date, time and location of the administrative hearing
must be provided to the citee at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing date. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-19: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
A. Evidentiary Rules: The administrative citation is prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in the citation. Both the citee and code
enforcement officer have the opportunity to testify and present additional evidence concerning the administrative citation. Evidence may include,
without limitation, witness testimony, documents, or other similar evidence. Evidence sought to be introduced is not limited to any legal rules of
evidence except for the rule that it must be relevant and material to the issues of whether the violation alleged in the citation occurred and whether the
citee was responsible for the violation.
B. Waiver Of Personal Appearance At Hearing: In lieu of personally appearing at an administrative hearing, the citee may request that the hearing officer
decide the matter based on the citation itself and any other documentary evidence submitted by the citee or code enforcement officer before the
hearing date.
C. Failure To Appear At Hearing: Failure of a citee to appear at the hearing is deemed a waiver of the right to be personally present at the hearing. The
hearing officer must then decide the matter based upon the citation itself, any documentary evidence previously submitted, and any additional evidence
that may be presented at the hearing by the code enforcement officer.
D. Attendance Of Code Enforcement Officer: The code enforcement officer who issued the administrative citation may, but is not required to, attend the
administrative hearing. If the code enforcement officer does not attend, the code enforcement officer may, before the hearing date, submit reports,
photos or other documentation regarding the violation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing.
E. Continuation Of Hearings: The hearing officer may continue any hearing and request additional information from the code enforcement officer or citee
before issuing a written decision. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-20: HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION:
A. The hearing officer must issue a written decision to uphold or set aside the administrative citation and present the reasons for that decision.
B. The city clerk must send a copy of the hearing officer's decision to the citee with notice of the citee's right to appeal the decision in superior court.
C. The hearing officer's decision is the city's final action on the matter. There is no right to an appeal other than as provided in this chapter. The hearing
officer's decision is final as of the date of the decision. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-21: DISPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A. Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation, then the city can retain the deposited fine amount.
B. Should the hearing officer vacate the administrative citation, then the city must promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, if any.
C. Should the hearing officer uphold the administrative citation and a hardship waiver was previously granted, the due date for paying the administrative
fine will be thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of the hearing officer's decision.
D. The city may use all legal means to collect any past due fines, including penalties and interest, should a citee fail to pay in a timely manner. (Ord. 1364,
7-1-2003)
1-2A-22: RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A. A citee may appeal the hearing officer's decision by filing an appeal with the superior court pursuant to Government Code section 53069.4, or any
successor statute, within twenty (20) days from service of the hearing officer's decision.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 9/581
B. Should the citee file a timely appeal with the superior court, the requirement to pay the fine is suspended and the payment of the fine, if any, will be in
accordance with the superior court decision. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
Collection And Lien Procedures
1-2A-23: RECOVERY OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION FINES AND COSTS:
In addition to any other legal remedy, the city may place a lien on property owned by the citee in an amount equal to the sum of the fines delinquent for
more than ninety (90) days, plus penalties and interest. Imposition of a lien must stem from a citation for the condition or use of real property, or its
improvements, that is owned by the citee. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-24: LIEN PROCEDURE:
A. The city manager, or designee, may initiate proceedings to record a lien conforming with this article if the decision is not appealed.
B. Before recording the lien, the city manager, or designee, must submit a report to the city clerk stating the amounts due and owing.
C. The city clerk will fix a time, date, and place for the city council to consider the report and any protests or objections to it.
D. The city clerk must serve the citee with a hearing notice not less than ten (10) days before the hearing date. The notice must set forth the amount of the
delinquent administrative fine, and any penalties and interest that is due. Notice must be delivered first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each
citee's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the county of Los Angeles, whichever is more current.
Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and failure of citee to actually receive notice does not affect its validity.
E. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council will adopt a resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-25: RECORDING A LIEN:
Within thirty (30) days following the city council's adoption of a resolution imposing a lien, the city clerk will file same as a judgment lien in the Los Angeles
County recorder's office. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-26: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
Each citee against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this chapter will also be assessed an administrative fee in an amount established
by city council resolution based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment. The administrative fee will be included in the lien amount approved by the
city council and recorded against the citee's property. (Ord. 1364, 7-1-2003)
1-2A-27: SATISFACTION OF LIEN:
Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs, the city clerk will either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the
citee with a notice of satisfaction for recordation at the Los Angeles County recorder's office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city's lien. (Ord.
1364, 7-1-2003)
Chapter 3
CITY SEAL, CITY LOGO
1-3-1: ADOPTION OF CITY SEAL; DESCRIPTION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 34501 of the State Government Code, as the same presently provides, the City Council does hereby approve and
adopt as and for the Corporate Seal of the City the following seal, with lettering, form, arrangement and designs all as set forth and shown in the
embossed or stamped impression thereof which follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 10/581
(Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-2: USE REQUIRED:
The only form of Corporate Seal for use by or for the City shall be the form of a seal set forth in section 1-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-3: CUSTODY OF SEAL:
The City Clerk shall have the official custody of the Official Seal of the City. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-4: ADOPTION OF CITY LOGO:
The City Council of the City of El Segundo, California, hereby approves and adopts as and for the official logo of the City the following logo, with lettering
and form, arrangement and design all as set forth and shown in the embossed or stamped impression thereof which follows:
(Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-5: USE OF CITY SEAL AND LOGO:
The City Seal and City logo shall only be used for the official business of the City of El Segundo and its City Council except upon written approval of the
City Manager. No person may reproduce, make, use, display, give away, sell, or distribute the City Seal or City logo, or imitation or facsimile thereof,
without the written authorization of the City Manager. In the event such written authorization is granted, it is unlawful for any person to reproduce, use or
display the seal or logo in any manner or at any time contrary to such written authorization. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-6: PROMOTIONAL USE OF CITY SEAL AND LOGO:
The City Manager or his designee is empowered to authorize the use of the City Seal or City logo on items that are offered for sale by the City or otherwise
promote the City. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-7: CUSTODY OF LOGO:
The City Manager is the official custodian of the City logo. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
1-3-8: ADDITIONAL CITY LOGOS:
The City of El Segundo City Manager retains the right to create variations of the City logo and to adopt and establish other official logos. Such variations
may include, but are not limited to, centennial logos, or other logos which mark anniversaries, events, and/or any other City occasion the City Manager
wishes to commemorate. (Ord. 1565, 2-20-2018)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 11/581
1-3-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating this chapter is guilty of an infraction. Unauthorized use of the City Seal or City logo is declared a public nuisance and the City can
abate or enjoin such use pursuant to this Code. A violation of this chapter may be prosecuted by the City Attorney in the name of the people of the State of
California, or redressed by civil action. The City reserves the right to take any other legal action it finds appropriate to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 1565, 2-
20-2018)
Chapter 4
CITY COUNCIL
1-4-1: ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE:
The City Council members, five (5) in number, shall be elected and serve four (4) year terms, as provided by statute. (2000 Code)
1-4-2: SELECTION OF MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM:
After the election results are certified by the City Clerk, the newly seated City Council shall meet and choose one of its members as Mayor, and one of its
members as Mayor Pro Tem. (Ord. 1517, 2-2-2016)
1-4-3: COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 36516, each City Council member will receive a salary of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per month as
compensation for serving on the City Council. In addition, Council members may also be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties as determined by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1392, 3-7-2006)
1-4-4: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: Regular City Council meetings are scheduled for the first and third Tuesdays of every calendar month. Regular City Council
meetings begin at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. in the West Conference Room for closed session matters and interviews or appointments for committees,
commissions and boards, and at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in the Council Chambers for all other matters to be addressed in open session. (Ord. 1582, 4-
16-2019)
B. Holidays: Should the date of a regular meeting fall upon a holiday when City Hall offices are closed then the regular meeting will be scheduled for the
next succeeding business day. (Ord. 1434, 11-3-2009)
C. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor, or by a majority of the Council, upon providing twenty four (24) hours'
notice, pursuant to Government Code section 54956.
D. Open Meetings: Unless otherwise provided by the Government Code, all City Council meetings are open and public. All persons are permitted to attend
any City Council meeting, except as otherwise provided in the Government Code. (Ord. 1346, 8-20-2002)
1-4-5: DISTURBANCE AT MEETINGS:
It is unlawful for any person present at any Council meeting, and while the Council is in session, to fail or refuse to be seated or remain quiet when ordered
or commanded so to do by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore. On order of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or of
any police officer of the City to eject from any meeting of the City Council any person who disturbs any meeting of the Council or who fails or refuses to be
seated or remain quiet when ordered or commanded so to do by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore. No such ejection, however, shall release or relieve the
person so ejected from prosecution for any violation of this section. (Ord. 269, 5-12-1943)
1-4-6: RULES OF ORDER:
Except as may be otherwise provided by law, the proceedings of the Council shall ordinarily be conducted according to "Robert's Rules of Order";
provided, however, that a failure to observe or enforce such rules shall in no manner affect the regularity, validity or legality of any action or proceeding
taken by the Council, and the Council, in its discretion and in accordance with its right to govern its own proceedings, does hereby reserve the right to
proceed at any time otherwise than as prescribed or indicated in "Robert's Rules of Order". (Ord. 269, 5-12-1943)
Chapter 4A
ELECTIONS
1-4A-1: GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 12/581
Beginning in March 2020, general Municipal elections for the election of Council members, the City Clerk and the City Treasurer, and for such purposes as
the City Council may prescribe, will be held in the City on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March in each even-numbered year. (Ord. 1578, 11-20-
2018)
Chapter 5
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES1
1-5-1: HOLIDAYS:
Public offices of the City shall be closed on any day designated a holiday by the City Council by resolution or by the Mayor by proclamation. (Ord. 818, 9-
18-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
1-5-2: AID TO DISTRESSED PEOPLE AND ANIMALS:
In addition to the performance of their regular and ordinary duties, it shall be the duty of all of the officials of the City and of all police officers, firefighters
and other employees of the City, at all times and under all circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons and animals in distress or danger, and render them
such help and assistance as lies within the power of the officials, police officers, firefighters or employees. (Ord. 172, 9-7-1930)
1-5-3: COMPENSATION FOR INJURY:
In case any official, police officer, firefighter or other employee of the City should be injured while rendering additional services as required by Section 1-5-
2 of this Chapter, he or she, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be injured in the course of his or her employment and shall be entitled to workers'
compensation therefor, as provided by law. (Ord. 172, 9-7-1930)
1-5-4: GRAND JURY TESTIMONY:
A. Refusal To Testify Under Oath: The refusal of any officer or employee of the City to testify under oath before any grand jury having jurisdiction over any
then pending cause or inquiry in which the investigation of governmental bribery or misconduct in public office is involved shall constitute good and
sufficient grounds for the immediate discharge of the public officer or employee.
B. Furnish Copies To Officers And Employees: The City Clerk is hereby instructed to furnish a copy of subsection A of this Section to each and all of the
present officers and employees of the City and to deliver a like copy thereof to each future officer or employee thereof at the time of his induction into
Municipal service. (Ord. 438, 6-30-1954)
ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER
1-5A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of the City Manager is hereby created and established. The City Manager may be appointed by the City Council by resolution wholly on the
basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office at the will of and for and during the pleasure of the City Council. The
City Council may, in its sole discretion, contract with a person meeting the qualifications of this Chapter to perform the duties of City Manager in the
manner described in, and subject to, all of the provisions of this Chapter and any additional terms and conditions the City Council determines are
necessary and advisable and in the public interest. (Ord. 1143, 8-15-1989)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1590 - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR THE CITY MANAGER. Go to new ordinance.
1-5A-2: RESIDENCE:
Residence in the City at the time of appointment of a City Manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within one year thereafter
the City Manager must become a resident of the City, or the City Council shall declare the office of the City Manager to be vacant. (Ord. 1071, 4-16-1985)
1-5A-3: ELIGIBILITY:
No person elected as a Council member of the City shall, subsequent to the election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has
elapsed after the Council member has ceased to be a member of the City Council. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
1-5A-4: BOND:
The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City Council. The
bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the City Manager as prescribed in this Article. Any premium for the
bond shall be a proper charge against the City. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 13/581
1-5A-5: INTERIM CITY MANAGER:
In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may designate some qualified City employee to perform the duties of the City
Manager during the period of absence or disability of the City Manager, subject, however, to the person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth in Section 1-5A-4 of this Article. In case of a vacancy in the office of the
City Manager, the City Council may appoint, by resolution or contract, an interim City Manager to serve at the will and pleasure of the Council upon such
terms and conditions the City Council determines are necessary and advisable and in the public interest. (Ord. 1143, 8-15-1989)
1-5A-6: COMPENSATION:
The City Manager shall receive such compensation, benefits and expense allowance as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix by
resolution or contract, as the case may be. (Ord. 1143, 8-15-1989)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1591 - CITY MANAGER’S SIGNATURE AUTHORITY. Go to new ordinance.
1-5A-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General: The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City, under the direction and control of the City Council, except as
otherwise provided in this Article. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his control. In
addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in this
Article.
B. Enforcement Duty: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, contracts,
permits and privileges granted by the City Council are faithfully observed.
C. Employee Authorization Duty: It shall be the duty of the City Manager and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of
departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the City under his jurisdiction through their department heads. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
D. Preemployment Criminal Records Checks:
1. Authority To Access History Information: It shall be the duty of the City Manager, and he, the City Attorney, or any other City official designated by the
City Manager, is hereby authorized to access State and local summary criminal history information for preemployment screening purposes pursuant
to State Penal Code sections 11105(b)(10), 11105.3 and 13300(b)(10).
2. Prior Convictions: Except as otherwise provided in section 432.7 of the State Labor Code, no person who has been convicted of a felony, or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, shall be eligible for employment by the City; except that such conviction may be disregarded if it is
determined that mitigating circumstances exist, or that the conviction is not related to the employment in question. (Ord. 1104, 1-12-1988)
E. Appointment And Demotion Duty: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to and he shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and
employees of the City except the City Clerk, City Attorney and City Treasurer. (Ord. 1071, 4-16-1985)
F. Office Reorganization Duty: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to recommend to the City Council such reorganization of offices,
positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the City's
business.
G. Ordinance Recommendation: It shall be the duty of the City Manager and he shall recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and
ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient.
H. Council Meeting Attendance: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused therefrom, except when
his removal is under consideration. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
I. Execute Contracts: The City Manager is authorized to sign contracts on behalf of the City as directed by the City Council or as necessary to fulfill the City
Manager's responsibilities set forth in chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 1338, 8-21-2001)
J. Financial Reports: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of
the City.
K. Budget And Salary Plan Preparation: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed
annual salary plan to the City Council for its approval.
L. Investigations: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to make investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof, and into
any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the City.
M. Complaint Investigation; Public Utilities And Franchises: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City, and to see that all franchises
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 14/581
and permits granted by the City are faithfully performed and observed.
N. Public Property Supervision: It shall be the duty of the City Manager and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and
all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council.
O. Entire Time Devoted To Office: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to devote his entire time to the duties of his office in the interest of the City.
P. Additional Duties: It shall be the duty of the City Manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from
time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the City Council. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956; amd. Ord. 1338, 8-21-2001)
1-5A-8: COUNCIL RESTRICTIONS:
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry,
and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
1-5A-9: ASSISTANCE TO MANAGER:
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the City Clerk, City Treasurer and City Attorney to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of
the City efficiently, economically and harmoniously, so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and the ordinances of the City. (Ord.
486, 5-28-1956)
1-5A-10: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission, Recreation and Parks Commission and any other commissions, boards
or committees hereafter created by the City Council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At the meetings which the City Manager
attends, he shall be heard by the commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof and he shall
inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the City Council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of
all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the City Council. (Ord. 486, 5-28-1956)
ARTICLE B. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
1-5B-1: OFFICE CREATED:
Pursuant to the provision of section 40805.5 of the State Government Code, there is hereby created and established the office of Director Of Finance of
the City. (Ord. 483, 6-11-1956)
1-5B-2: DUTIES:
The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by section 40802 of the State Government Code are hereby transferred to the Director of
Finance. He shall perform the following duties:
A. Maintenance Of Financial Records: Maintain all records readily reflecting the financial condition of the City and all of its departments;
B. Report For Fiscal Year: At the end of each fiscal year, prepare and present to the City Council a summary statement of receipts and disbursements by
departments and funds, including opening and closing fund balances in the City Treasury;
C. Furnishing Financial Statement: Cause the financial statement of the City to be furnished in accordance with the provisions of section 53891 of the
State Government Code;
D. Compilation Of Financial Information For Budget: Compile all financial information necessary for the preparation of the City's budget and make the
information available to the officer whose responsibility it is to prepare the budget;
E. Monthly Financial Report: Prepare a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the financial condition of the City
and each of its departments;
F. Payroll Records: Supervise and be in charge of all payroll records;
G. Insurance Policies: Maintain a record of all insurance policies and keep the City Manager informed of their expiration dates;
H. Collection Of Taxes, Assessments, Fees: See that all taxes, assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City, or for whose collection the City
is responsible, and all other monies receivable by the City from the County, State or Federal government, or from any court, office, department or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 15/581
agency of the City are collected; and
I. Duties Assigned By City Manager: Perform such other duties that are from time to time assigned to him by the City Manager. (Ord. 483, 6-11-1956; amd.
Ord. 697, 7-22-1968; Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
1-5B-3: JURISDICTION OF CITY MANAGER:
The Director of Finance shall be under the jurisdiction of the City Manager. (Ord. 483, 6-11-1956)
1-5B-4: BOND:
Pursuant to the requirements of the laws of the State with reference thereto (section 37209 of the State Government Code), the Director of Finance, before
entering upon the duties of his office, shall execute a bond in the penal sum to be fixed by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 724, 6-12-1969)
Chapter 6
PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM
1-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT; WORD CONSTRUCTION:
A. Word Construction: Words used in this chapter in the present tense include the future as well as the present; words used in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter; the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular; writing includes printing and typewriting; and the word
"employee" includes appointive officers.
B. System Established; Rank:
1. There is hereby created and established a merit system for certain officers and members of the Fire Department, Police Department, and for other
departments as may be designated from time to time by the City Council. All full time, regular and permanent positions in the Police Department and
Fire Department, except the department heads and clerical employees, are included in the personnel merit system and shall for the purpose of this
chapter be known as the classified service.
2. Department heads will, while serving in that capacity, retain their last previous rank in the classified service. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-2: BENEFIT DESIGNATION:
The personnel merit system, created and established in section 1-6-1 of this chapter, and all of its benefits are extended to and, by this section, do include
all regular and permanent officers and members of all departments of the City who are members of the State employees retirement system, subject to the
provisions of the State Employees Retirement Act1, except department heads, elective officers, and those expressly excluded in section 1-6-4 of this
chapter. (Ord. 639, 9-13-1965)
1-6-3: CITY DEPARTMENTS:
Effective March 1, 2017, the organization of City government consists of the following departments:
City Administration
Finance Department
Fire Department
Human Resources Department
Information Systems Department
Library Services Department
Planning and Building Safety Department
Police Department
Public Works Department
Recreation and Parks Department (Ord. 1546, 1-17-2017)
1-6-4: EXCLUSIONS:
Those officers and members of departments in addition to department heads and elected officers who are expressly excluded from the merit system are:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 16/581
Assistant City Manager
City Attorney
City Engineer
City Manager
Deputy City Manager
Information Systems Director
Senior Civil Engineer
Senior Executive Assistant (Ord. 1576, 11-6-2018)
1-6-5: DEPARTMENT HEADS:
For the purpose of this chapter and for the purpose of initiative ordinance 586 and for the purpose of ordinances expanding the coverage of initiative
ordinance 586, and not by way of limitation, effective October 16, 2018, the term "department head" includes:
Assistant City Manager
Chief of Police
City Manager
Deputy City Manager
Director of Finance
Director of Human Resources
Director of Library Services
Director of Planning and Building Safety
Director of Public Works
Director of Recreation and Parks
Fire Chief
Information Systems Director (Ord. 1576, 11-6-2018)
1-6-6: PURPOSE:
It is hereby the declared personnel policy of the City that:
A. Employment in the City government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal or political considerations.
B. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of
the City government.
C. High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this chapter, and by every consideration of the rights and interests of employees consistent
with the best interests of the public and the City.
D. Tenure of employees covered by this chapter shall be subject to satisfactory performance of work, necessity of the performance of work, behavior
consistent with the interests of the City, and the availability of funds. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-7: PERSONNEL OFFICER:
The City Manager shall be ex officio personnel officer. With the approval of the Council, the City Manager may delegate any of the powers and duties
conferred upon him as personnel officer in this Chapter to any other officer or employee of the City; provided, that the other officer or employee is qualified
by education and/or experience to perform the duties, or the City Manager may recommend that the powers and duties, or any portion thereof, be
performed under contract as provided in Section 1-6-28 of this Chapter. The personnel officer shall:
A. Prepare and recommend to the City Manager personnel rules. The City Attorney shall approve the legality of these rules prior to their submission to the
City Council for its approval. Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution. Amendments to the rules shall be made in accordance with the above
procedures.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 17/581
B. Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan for those positions included under the classified service including class specifications.
The allocation or reallocation of any position to any existing class shall not be considered a revision of the plan.
C. The initial classification plan shall be revised from time to time as changing conditions require. The revisions may consist of the addition, abolishment,
consolidation, division or amendment of existing classes.
D. Be responsible for administration of the following procedures within the framework of this Chapter, the classification and salary ordinance and the
personnel rules:
1. The formulation of standards and qualifications for each class of position in the classified service;
2. The public announcement of vacancies and examinations and the acceptance of applications for employment;
3. The preparation and conduct of examinations and the establishment and use of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for
appointment;
4. The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists to fill vacancies and the making of temporary and emergency appointments;
5. The evaluation of employees during probationary period and periodically thereafter;
6. The transfer from one department to another, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees;
7. The allocation of positions to classes on the basis of duties, responsibilities and requirements;
8. The standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions, and the development of employee morale, welfare,
training and safety;
9. The separation of service of employees through layoff, suspension and dismissal;
10. The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms;
11. The establishment and maintenance of suitable methods for effective communication between employees and their supervisors; between
employees and the City Manager relating to conditions of employment in the City service.
E. Administer all other provisions of this Chapter, the classification and salary ordinance, and the personnel rules established which are not specifically
reserved to the Council. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-8: HEARING OF APPEALS:
A. Suspension Of Employees: Employees who are suspended for six (6) working days or longer, where discharge is not provided at the end of the
suspension period, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
B. County To Hear Certain Appeals: The City shall contract with the Los Angeles County Civil Service Commission to hear appeals from the following:
1. Dismissal;
2. Demotion;
3. Suspension for a period of six (6) days or longer where discharge is provided; and
4. Suspension for a period in excess of thirty one (31) days.
C. County Action: Following the giving of notice as specified in these rules, the cases shall be certified to the Los Angeles County Civil Service
Commission for hearing and report of their findings. The decision of the County Civil Service Commission will be final in each case. The decisions and
findings of the County Civil Service Commission will be subject to review of courts only. Hearings shall be conducted according to the rules of the Los
Angeles County Civil Service Commission, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-9: EXAMINATIONS:
A. Appraisal Of Qualifications: All applicants for positions in the classified service shall be subject to an appraisal of their qualifications as provided herein.
B. Open Or Promotional: Examinations may be specified by the Personnel Officer, as promotional only, as open only, or as both open and promotional. It
shall be the policy of the Personnel Officer to encourage the general practice of promotion within the City service wherever in his view a sufficient
number of fully qualified candidates are available and such policy will continue to contribute to a sound and efficiently operating City organization.
C. Veterans: Honorably discharged veterans of the Armed Forces of the United States, as defined in the applicable statutes and regulations of the State
pertaining to veterans' preferences may be given five (5) points, which shall be added to the earned total passing examination score in examinations
for entry level positions in the classified service. The Personnel Officer shall determine in advance of the publication of the announcement of an
examination, whether veterans' preference will be granted, and it shall be stated in the official announcement. No additional points shall be credited to
any veteran's scores on any promotional examination.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 18/581
D. Recommend Examination Plan: The Personnel Officer shall review and recommend to the City Manager, who in turn shall recommend to the City
Council, an appropriate examination plan and weights for each portion of the examination. For departments other than the Police and Fire
Departments, the plan may consist of any one or combination of the following techniques:
1. Written;
2. Oral;
3. Demonstration;
4. Any evaluation of education, experience, or skills or physical fitness which fairly evaluates the relative capacities of the applicants. (Ord. 586, 4-10-
1962)
E. Police And Fire Departments: The examination plan, for entrance or promotional, for the Police and Fire Departments shall consist of a written
examination and one or more of the following:
1. Oral;
2. Demonstration;
3. Any evaluation of education certification, experience, or skills or any test of manual skills or physical fitness which fairly evaluates the relative
capacities of the applicant. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-10: NOTICE OF EXAMINATIONS:
A. Notice of time, place and general scope of every examination shall be posted by the Personnel Officer in a conspicuous place. The posting shall be not
less than two (2) weeks prior to the examination, at the City Hall, at the office of the appropriate department, and at such other places as the Personnel
Officer deems appropriate.
B. An announcement of time, place and general scope of promotional examinations shall be posted by the Personnel Officer in such places as specified in
subsection A of this Section, not less than thirty (30) days prior to posting of "Notice of Examinations" at the end of which thirty (30) day period, the plan
for examination will be submitted to the City Council for approval. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-11: INSPECTION OF EXAMINATION PAPERS:
A. Examination papers of the candidates are not subject to inspection by the public. Upon request any candidate may inspect his own papers, including his
application and the questions and answers thereto except for copyrighted or standardized tests for entrance classes.
B. Inspection of a keyed copy of the examination question booklet, which is for the purpose of requesting a review of such items as the candidate may
believe are incorrectly or improperly keyed, will be allowed for the five (5) working days immediately following an examination. The inspection time
allowed a candidate will not exceed one-half (1/2) the amount of the time originally allowed to answer the questions during the administration of the
examination. During key inspection a representative of the personnel office will be present to assure that the candidate takes no notes of any kind
regarding any test materials. The candidate may protest any item or group of items or the whole test on the basis of either inappropriateness or
inaccuracy. All protests shall be resolved and answered before the completion of the final scoring.
C. Inspection of a candidate's answer booklet, which is for the purpose of detecting whether any clerical or other error has been made in the scoring of the
booklet, shall be allowed for a thirty (30) day calendar period immediately following the notification to the candidate of examination results. Candidates
are not allowed to review the question booklet during this inspection period. Not more than one hour will normally be allowed for answer booklet review
during which time a representative of the Personnel Officer shall be present to assure that no changes or marks of any kind are made by the candidate
on his answer booklet or the keyed answer booklet. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-12: EMPLOYMENT LISTS:
A. Priority For Consideration: Priority for consideration for employment shall be given to the various employment lists in the following order: re-employment
lists, promotional lists and open competitive lists.
B. Names On Re-Employment List: The re-employment list for any position shall consist of the names of permanent employees who have been laid off, for
lack of work or lack of funds, from a position in the same class or an equivalent class to that in which the vacancy exists. The names shall be placed on
the re-employment list in reverse order of layoff. Employees whose positions have been reallocated to a lower class, but who have not been demoted
for cause, shall also have their names placed on the re-employment list for the class from which their position was reallocated.
C. Promotional Lists: Promotional lists shall consist of the names of permanent employees who have been successful in a promotional examination for a
higher class.
D. Open Competitive Lists: Open competitive lists shall consist of the names of persons not employed by the City who have been successful in an
examination, or of employees of the City who have passed the examination but have not yet attained permanent status in their present class, or in the
case where an examination has been designated as open competitive only, the names of all passing candidates, whether permanent employees,
nonpermanent employees, or persons not employed by the City, shall be placed on the list in order of their scores.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 19/581
E. Creation Of Lists: Promotional lists and open competitive lists shall be created as a result of examination as provided herein. The names of probationary
employees who are laid off for lack of work or lack of funds may be restored to the same employment list from which the original appointment was
made and in the same rank as when the original appointment was made.
F. Request For Certification: When request for certification from an employment list has been received, certification shall be made in conformance with the
following provisions:
1. If a re-employment list exists for the class, the highest name on the list shall be certified for each vacancy to be filled. Promotional and/or open
employment lists shall not be certified if there are any names on the re-employment list for the class.
2. If there are less than three (3) qualified names on the promotional list, the appointing power may request additional highest one or two (2) names to
be certified from the open competitive list if the list exists.
3. If no re-employment or promotional lists exist, the Personnel Officer shall certify to the department head from the open competitive employment list
as prescribed in subsection 1-6-9B of this Chapter.
4. Except for re-employment lists, when all appropriate employment lists for a class contain a total of fewer than three (3) names, the department head
may, with approval of the City Manager, make provisional appointments until additional names are secured through another examination.
5. No person shall be appointed to any classified service position unless that person has the qualifications for the position as set forth in the
specifications for the class.
G. Expiration Of Lists: Employment lists shall expire at such time as the Personnel Officer determines; provided, that:
1. Names shall remain on the re-employment list for a period of not less than three (3) years;
2. Promotional and open competitive lists shall have an expiration date of one year unless otherwise announced in the notice of examination. (Ord.
586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-13: APPOINTMENT IN CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
A. Basis For Appointments: Appointments and promotions to vacant positions in the classified service shall be based on merit and fitness to be
ascertained insofar as practicable by competitive examination. Appointments and promotions shall be made by the City Manager upon
recommendation of the various department heads.
B. Names Transmitted By Personnel Officer: When appointments and promotions are to be made to vacancies in the classified service, the names of the
highest eligible persons willing to accept appointment shall be transmitted by the Personnel Officer to the department head in the order in which they
appear on the list as follows: for one vacancy the names of three (3), for two (2) or secondary vacancies the names of five (5), for each additional or
each subsequent vacancy, three (3) additional names shall be submitted and appointment shall be limited to any of these eligible persons.
C. Provisional Appointment: In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a provisional appointment may be made of a person meeting the
qualifications established for the classification. Any employment list shall be established within six (6) months, for any permanent position filled by
provisional appointment. No person shall be employed by the City under provisional appointment for a total of more than six (6) months in any fiscal
year except that the City Manager may, with approval of the City Council, extend the period of any provisional appointment for not more than thirty (30)
days by any one action.
D. Special Credit Not Allowed: No special credit shall be allowed in any examination or the establishment of any employment or promotional lists, for
service rendered under a provisional appointment.
E. Temporary Appointments: Appointments to temporary, emergency and seasonal positions may but need not be made from eligible lists and those
appointed shall not be in the classified service. Appointments of this type shall include temporary employment for the replacement of employees on
leave of absence other than military leave, or vacation, emergency appointments to meet emergencies which threaten life, property or the general
welfare of the City, or for work seasonal in nature.
F. Filling Vacancy During Suspension: During the period of suspension of any employee, or pending final action on proceedings to review the suspension,
demotion or dismissal of an employee, the vacancy created may be filled only by temporary appointment.
G. Transfer: With the approval of the City Manager, an employee may be transferred by the department head from one position to another position in the
same class or a comparable class at the same salary level. If the transfer involves a change from one department in the classified service to another
department in the classified service, the department heads and the employee involved must consent thereto before the action shall be considered
effective. Transfers shall not serve to affect in any way the status, rights and privileges of an employee under this Chapter.
H. Reinstatement: The department head may, with the approval of the City Manager, reinstate to a vacant position any person who has resigned in good
standing to a position in a class or equivalent class in which he had acquired status in the classified service; provided, that the reinstatement is
accomplished within one year of the date of resignation. A reinstatement may, at the discretion of the department head, take precedence over any
employment list except a re-employment list. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-14: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 20/581
A. Length Of Probation: All original and promotional appointments shall be for a probationary period of one year. During the probation period the employee
may be rejected by the appointing authority at any time without right of appeal or hearing.
B. Release From Promoted Position: An employee released during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be
reinstated to the position from which he was promoted, unless he is discharged for a reason, as provided in this Chapter and the rules, which would
have been sufficient to cause his discharge from his former position as well. In this case the employee shall be entitled to appeal his dismissal as
provided in this Chapter.
C. Report Following Completion Of Probation: An employee's status shall be considered permanent upon completion of the probationary period only if the
department head reports to the Personnel Officer that the services of the employee have been satisfactory and that the employee is recommended for
a permanent appointment. A favorable or unfavorable report must be rendered on each employee upon completion of his probationary period. (Ord.
586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-15: CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT:
A. Submission Of Information: The Personnel Officer shall have the right to require all employees to complete and submit any applications, agreements or
statements pertinent to their employment.
B. Medical Examination: The Personnel Officer shall have the right to require, at the expense of the City, a medical examination of any applicant for
employment or new employees and, in addition, shall have the right to require periodic medical examinations for any or all employees in the classified
service.
C. Employee Request For Reassignment Or Separation: Reassignments, demotions or separations, at the request of the employee, shall be reviewed by
and be subject to the approval of the Personnel Officer. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-16: EMPLOYEE APPEALS:
A. Suspension; Time Limit For Appeal: Any permanent employee in the classified service who has been suspended, for a period of six (6) days or more,
demoted, dismissed, or reduced in pay shall have a period of ten (10) days following written notification in which to file an appeal or answer the
charges.
B. Notification Statement: The employee shall forthwith be given in the written notification a statement of the extent and nature of any disciplinary action
and a full explanation of the reasons for the action including specific information as to time and place of incidents.
C. Disciplinary Action: Each disciplinary action shall automatically be given administrative review by the City Manager, immediately after the written
notification, and the City Manager may countermand the disciplinary action or modify the discipline imposed prior to any hearing as hereinafter
provided.
D. Filing With County: Appeals and requests for hearings shall be filed with the City Manager, and then immediately referred to the Los Angeles County
Civil Service Commission or City Council, as the case may be.
E. Right To Refuse To Hold Hearing: The Commission shall have the right to refuse to hold a hearing in any case in which the appellant fails to present
sufficient grounds to warrant a hearing.
F. Procedures For Hearing: Procedures for all hearings to be conducted by the County shall be in accordance with the rules of the Los Angeles County
Civil Service Commission. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-17: GROUNDS FOR DEMOTION, SUSPENSION AND DISCHARGE:
No person in the classified service shall be demoted, suspended or discharged from his position except for:
A. Inefficiency, misconduct, insubordination, disregard of orders;
B. Incompetency, incompatibility, dereliction of duty, malfeasance;
C. Drunkenness on duty;
D. Conviction of a felony;
E. Having a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale or transaction to which the City is a party;
F. Being privately engaged in other business, employment or other activities which occupy a substantial part of his time or attention which interferes with
the performance of his duties;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 21/581
G. Wilful violation of any provisions of this Chapter or the personnel rules established thereunder;
H. Incapacity to perform duties satisfactorily due to insanity, or other mental or physical disability;
I. Obtaining appointment or promotion through falsification, subterfuge or other illegal means;
J. Any other acts, or failures to act properly, which bring discredit upon the City service or otherwise cause the employee to be unfit for the responsibilities
of his position. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-18: REIMBURSEMENT FOR LOSS OF PAY:
Reimbursement for loss of pay due to disciplinary action which is subsequently revoked or modified shall be made to an employee, but only to the extent
of such modification, if any. Any additional salary or wages received from other employment performed during the normal work schedule period of the
employee shall be deductible from any City compensation payable under this Section. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-19: LAYOFF PROCEDURE:
No member shall be dismissed because of the discontinuance of the particular office or position held by him, but employees dismissed because of
curtailment of expenditures, reduction in force, and for like causes, shall be the last employee or employees, including temporary appointees, that have
been appointed to the respective department, until the reductions necessary have been accomplished. Vacancies to be filled in the lowest class or rank,
resulting from the removal, shall be filled from the last employee or employees that have been appointed to the next higher class or rank, and their places
likewise filled under proper distribution has been accomplished; provided, further, that in the event the department shall again be increased in numbers,
the persons dismissed, or reduced in class or rank, under the terms of subsection 1-6-12B of this Chapter shall have the privilege of being re-employed
before any new appointments to the department shall be made. Any layoffs in accordance with this Section shall not be subject to appeal and hearing. Any
wilful violation hereof, or violation through culpable negligence, shall be sufficient ground to authorize the discharge of any officer or employee. (Ord. 586,
4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-20: LEAVE OF ABSENCE:
A. Military Service: Any member who is called to serve in any branch of the military service of the United States shall, upon his return, and with an
honorable discharge, maintain his priority rights within this Chapter, and in accordance with the State Military and Veterans Code section 395.
B. Council Consent: On recommendation of the department head and approval of the City Manager, leave of absence without compensation not to exceed
one year for any purpose may be taken by written consent of the City Council, and temporary appointments may be made to fill the vacancies in the
manner herein provided for permanent appointments. The leaves may be extended for not to exceed one additional year. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-21: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
A. Any person holding a position or employment included in the classified service who, on the effective date hereof, has served continuously in the
position, or in some other position included in the classified service, for one year prior to inclusion in the classified service, shall assume regular status
in the classified service in the position held on the effective date without qualifying examination or working tests, and shall thereafter be subject in all
respects to the provisions of this Chapter, except those with the rating of detective and patrolman assigned to motorcycle duty, the assignments shall
be made administratively and are not a part of the classified service.
B. Any other persons holding positions or employments in the classified service shall be regarded as holding their positions or employments as
probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods before obtaining regular status. The probationary periods shall be computed
from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-22: HIRING OF EXTRA EMPLOYEES:
Department heads, with the approval and sanction of the City Manager, may, during an emergency or during vacation periods, hire extra employees as
may be needed to properly conduct the departments at a compensation to be fixed by the City Council. These extra employees may be selected from the
employment list at the option of the heads of the departments. However, no extra employee shall be hired for a period in excess of one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days or six (6) months in any fiscal year, and the hiring of extra employees as herein provided for, shall not in any way mean, or be
construed to mean, that said extra employee shall be under probation as defined by Section 1-6-14 of this Chapter. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-23: AMENDMENTS:
The City Council may, from time to time by ordinance, add additional departments, appointive officers or employees of the City to the list originally
designated in this Chapter creating a merit system. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-24: POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 22/581
No person holding an office or position in any department placed under the personnel merit system, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, with respect
to any Municipal political campaign, shall seek or accept election, nomination or appointment as an officer of a political club or organization, or serve as a
member of a committee of the club or organization or circle, or seek signatures except where it pertains to this Chapter, or act as a worker at the polls, or
distribute badges or pamphlets, dodgers, or handbills of any kind favoring or opposing any candidate for election, or for nomination to Municipal office;
provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent any such officer or employee from becoming or continuing to be a member of
a political club or organization, or from attendance at a political meeting, or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting his vote. (Ord. 586,
4-10-1962)
1-6-25: SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS:
No officer or employee of the City, or any other person, directly or indirectly shall solicit or receive, from anyone on an eligible list or employed in the
service of the City any assessment, subscription, contribution, or political service, for aiding or assisting in the campaign for election, or appointment to any
political or official position in the service of the City, or for any political purpose whatever. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-26: DISCRIMINATION:
No person in the competitive service or seeking admission thereto shall in any way be favored or discriminated against in his employment because of sex,
age, sexual preference, physical or mental disability, medical condition, marital status, familial status, political affiliations, race, or religious belief. (Ord.
586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
1-6-27: APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS:
The City Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-28: RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICE:
The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the Council regarding the extent to which the City should contract for the performance of
technical services in connection with the development and administration of any phase of the personnel program and the Council may contract for the
performance of the services with any qualified person or agency. (Ord. 586, 4-10-1962)
1-6-29: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, charged with the administration of this Chapter who is guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon a conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-2-1 of this Code. Ord. 586, 4-10-1962; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 7
PURCHASING
1-7-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A. This chapter is adopted to authorize City officers to procure supplies, services and professional services with City funds and to establish the manner by
which such actions may occur. Supplies, services and professional services for City departments must be purchased in accordance with this chapter,
those administrative regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and any additional regulations that the City Council may adopt.
B. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor does it, apply to:
1. Public works projects as defined by State law, which are subject to chapter 7C of this title.
2. The procurement of services, supplies and equipment with non-City funds.
3. The employment of any person by the City at a regular salary.
4. The acquisition, disposal or lease of real property. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
CONTRACT: Means a purchase order, contract, or professional services contract, or any amendment thereto, as the context may dictate.
FORMAL BIDDING: Means the process and requirements outlined in section 1-7-8 of this chapter.
INFORMAL BIDDING: Means the process and requirements outlined in section 1-7-7 of this chapter.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 23/581
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Means services typically performed by professionals, such as financial, economic, accounting, architectural, engineering,
legal, personnel training or administrative services, including but not limited to those described in Government Code sections 4526 and 53060.
PURCHASING OFFICER: Means the City Manager or designee.
SERVICES: Means general services to be provided to the City, such as the rental, repair and maintenance of equipment, machinery and other personal
property, but not including professional services or any services related to a public works project.
SUPPLIES: Means supplies and equipment. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-3: PURCHASING OFFICER'S POWERS AND DUTIES:
In addition to those powers granted by applicable law, the Purchasing Officer has the authority and duty to:
A. Purchase or contract for supplies, services and professional services;
B. Promulgate administrative rules and regulations to implement the purposes of this chapter and as approved by the City Manager;
C. Prescribe and maintain such forms as necessary for the proper operation of this purchasing system;
D. Supervise the inspection of all supplies purchased under this chapter in order to ensure conformance with City specifications;
E. Perform such other tasks as may be necessary for the proper conduct of purchasing or procurement of supplies, services and professional services.
(Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-4: ENCUMBERING FUNDS:
Except in cases of emergency or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Purchasing Officer or Department Directors may not purchase supplies or
procure any services or professional services unless there is an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase or
procurement would be charged. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-5: REQUISITIONS:
All City departments must submit to the Purchasing Officer requisitions for supplies, services or professional services in excess of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per fiscal year for a single item or bulk purchase of an item. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-6: PURCHASING SUMMARY:
The purchase of supplies or services are subject to the following requirements, unless such purchase is otherwise exempt pursuant to section 1-7-9 of this
chapter:
Amount Of
Purchase1 Bidding Process Required?
Purchase
Order
Required?
Contract
Required? Approval Authority
$5,000.00 or
less
None required. May be purchased on open
market/direct negotiated contract
No Yes, if procurement of
services; otherwise, no
City Manager, Department Director
or Department Manager
$5,001.00 to
$10,000.00
None required. May be purchased on open
market/direct negotiated contract
Yes Yes City Manager or Department
Director
$10,001.00 to
$25,000.00
Informal bidding Yes Yes City Manager or Department
Director
$25,001.00 to
$50,000.00
Informal bidding Yes Yes City Manager
$50,001.00 and
above
Formal bidding Yes Yes City Council
Note:
1. For purchases of supplies, the dollar amounts listed above apply to the purchase of a single item or bulk purchase of an item. For the procurement of
services, the dollar amounts listed above apply to the amount paid per contract, per fiscal year.
(Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-7: INFORMAL BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 24/581
As used in this chapter, the term "informal bidding" refers to the following process and requirements:
A. Purchases must, whenever possible, be based upon at least three (3) informal bids or quotes and be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.
B. Bids must be written.
C. The Purchasing Officer or Department Directors may solicit such bids.
D. Bids may be evaluated based upon bid amount, compliance with bid specifications, responsibility of the bidder, and any other reasonable matter
identified in the notice soliciting bids, this Code, or any other rule or regulation promulgated to implement this chapter.
E. If the City does not receive any bids or quotes, the Purchasing Officer may act as follows, provided the requesting department concurs:
1. Abandon the purchase;
2. Rebid the purchase on an informal basis; or
3. Purchase the supplies or procure the services on a direct negotiated contract.
F. If the Purchasing Officer determines bids are unacceptably high, or specifications were misleading, the Purchasing Officer may reject any bids
presented and the item may be rebid.
G. The Purchasing Officer may reject all bids or award the purchase contract to the best qualified bidder whose bid or proposal fulfills the purpose
intended according to criteria designated in the solicitation, provided that the contract award amount is within the unencumbered appropriation for that
item. The Purchasing Officer may waive any minor bid irregularities.
H. If a successful bidder refuses to comply with, or fails to execute, a contract issued by the City within ten (10) calendar days after being awarded the
contract, the Purchasing Officer may cancel the award and retain any bid security. Compliance with contract requirements includes, without limitation,
submission of adequate and complete insurance documentation. Should this occur, the Purchasing Officer may award the contract to the next lowest
responsible bidder. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-8: FORMAL BIDDING (SEALED BIDS) REQUIREMENTS:
As used in this chapter, the term "formal bidding" refers to the following process and requirements:
A. A notice inviting formal bids must be posted at City Hall and electronically mailed or faxed at least ten (10) calendar days before the deadline for
submitting bids to all vendors on the City's list for the category of supplies or services being sought and to such other vendors as the Purchasing Officer
deems appropriate.
B. The notice inviting bids must describe the supplies or services needed in general and generic terms, identify security required for the bid, how bid
specifications can be obtained, and designate the deadline and place for submitting formal bids.
C. The Purchasing Officer may require bidders to secure bids and performance in a manner approved by the Purchasing Officer and in a form approved by
the City Attorney. Unsuccessful bidders are entitled to the return of bid security within sixty (60) calendar days after the date of the award.
D. Bids must be submitted to the City Clerk's Office in a sealed envelope and be clearly marked as a bid along with the bidder's name and project or bid
number written on the outside of the envelope. The City Clerk's Office will open properly submitted bids at the time and place stated in the notice
inviting bids. A written record must be made at the time all bids are received and then opened.
E. Bids may be evaluated based upon bid amount, compliance with bid specifications, responsibility of the bidder, and any other reasonable matter
identified in the notice soliciting bids, this Code, or any other rule or regulation promulgated to implement this chapter.
F. The department seeking the supplies or services will make a recommendation to the City Council regarding the award of a contract based upon the
department's and Purchasing Officer's evaluation.
G. If the City does not receive any bids, the City Council may:
1. Abandon the purchase;
2. Authorize rebidding the purchase on either a formal or an informal basis; or
3. Authorize purchasing the supplies or procurement of services on a direct negotiated contract.
H. The successful bidder is selected by the City Council acting within its sole discretion. The City Council is under no obligation to contract with any bidder.
If the City Council determines bids are unacceptably high, or specifications were misleading, it may direct the Purchasing Officer to reject all bids
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 25/581
presented and the item may be rebid.
I. The City Council may waive any minor bid irregularities.
J. If a successful bidder refuses to comply with, or fails to execute, a contract issued by the City within ten (10) calendar days after being awarded the
contract, the Purchasing Officer may cancel the award and retain any bid security. Compliance with contract requirements includes, without limitation,
submission of adequate and complete insurance documentation. Should this occur, the City Council may award the contract to the next lowest
responsible bidder and the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the City to the difference between the lowest and second lowest
bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-9: EXCEPTIONS TO THE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
When purchasing supplies and services, the procedures outlined in sections 1-7-7 and 1-7-8 of this chapter need not be followed in the following
situations:
A. When the City Council waives the purchasing procedures otherwise required by this chapter when the City's best interests are served by a direct award
of a contract without a competitive selection process.
B. When the supplies or services are available from only one vendor as supported by appropriate documentation.
C. When the Purchasing Officer identifies a cooperative competitive bidding procedure, being prepared by and processed through another local, State, or
Federal governmental agency. Under such circumstances, the Purchasing Officer may join into an existing written purchase contract obtained within
the last five (5) years through a competitive bidding process prepared by and awarded by another local, State or Federal governmental agency. City
Council consent is required for such purchases where the estimated value of the supplies is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more for a single
item or bulk purchase of a single item.
D. When the City Manager or acting City Manager finds that there is an immediate or imminent emergency or other exigent circumstance that threatens
the City or the City's interests, and such purchases are required for the immediate protection of public health, safety, or welfare, or the City's interests.
A declaration of emergency as set forth in this Code is conclusive evidence of such an event. In such an event, the City Manager or acting City
Manager may bind the City, with or without a written contract, for the acquisition of equipment, materials, supplies, labor, services or other items. The
City Manager or acting City Manager must provide a report to the City Council as soon as practicable regarding such emergency purchases which sets
forth the circumstances requiring such action. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-10: SEGMENTATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to knowingly take action to separate purchases into smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the competitive formal or
informal bidding requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-11: INSPECTION:
The Purchasing Officer or department requesting the item shall inspect all deliveries of supplies and equipment to assure conformance with the contract or
order specifications. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-12: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
All vendors who provide on-site services or professional services to the City must hold a valid City of El Segundo business license and must be otherwise
in compliance with all requirements of this Code. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-13: RECYCLED PRODUCTS:
Whenever practicable, the City will purchase and use recycled products and recyclable goods. The City will place special emphasis on the purchase of
products manufactured with at least twenty percent (20%) post-consumer recycled materials. When faced with a choice of two (2) or more recycled
content products, and the price between the products is within ten percent (10%) and the products are of comparable quality and availability, the City will
purchase the product with the greatest recycled content. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7-14: COMPETITIVE PROPOSALS:
Professional services should, whenever possible, be procured through competitive proposal procedures, whereby competitors' qualifications are evaluated
and the most qualified competitor is selected. If this method is used, the following requirements apply:
A. Requests for proposals (RFP) must be publicized;
B. All evaluation factors, along with their relative importance, must be identified and included in the RFP;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 26/581
C. The evaluation process may include the review of written proposals, panel interviews, and reference checking;
D. Awards must be made to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the City, with price and all factors identified in the RFP
considered. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
Chapter 7A
EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS
1-7A-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's general and specific contracting powers and, without limitation, Government Code section 40602 for the
purpose of setting forth the requirements to bind the City by contract.
B. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the employment of any person by the City at a regular salary. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions set forth in chapter 7 of this title govern the construction of the words and
phrases used in this chapter. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-3: GENERALLY:
A. The City is not bound by any contract unless the contract is in writing, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and signed on behalf of the City by an
officer or officers as set forth in this chapter. Any such officer must sign a contract on the City's behalf when directed to do so by the City Council.
B. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a written contract is required to purchase supplies or procure services on the City's behalf, regardless of the
source of the funds. The use of non-City funds, private funds, donated funds, or grant monies does not alleviate the requirement of a written contract
for the purchase of supplies or procurement of services on the City's behalf. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-4: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a resolution, or ordinance, the City Council must approve all contracts and direct the Mayor, or other officer, to
sign a contract on the City's behalf. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-5: SIGNATURE AUTHORITY:
In accordance with Government Code section 40602, the following officers are authorized to sign contracts on the City's behalf:
A. The Mayor;
B. The City Manager when directed to do so by the City Council, resolution, ordinance, or any provision of this Code;
C. The City Manager, for contracts where the City is receiving or expending an amount not in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per fiscal year;
D. Department Directors, for contracts where the City is receiving or expending an amount not in excess of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per
fiscal year;
E. Department Managers, for contracts or amendments to contracts where the City is receiving or expending an amount not in excess of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) per fiscal year. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
1-7A-6: SEGMENTATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to knowingly separate purchases or procurements into smaller units or segments solely for the purpose of evading the signature authority
thresholds set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1564, 12-19-2017)
Chapter 7B
DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 27/581
1-7B-1: AUTHORITY:
The purchasing officer is authorized to sell or dispose of surplus personal property having a salvage value in the open market. Property disposition may
occur by public auction, competitive sealed bids, or exchange or trade in for new goods. The sale or lease of surplus personal property to a governmental,
public, or quasi-public agency may be without advertisement for or receipt of bids. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-2: PROPERTY WITHOUT SALVAGE VALUE:
Surplus personal property without salvage value, as determined by the purchasing officer, should be disposed of in a manner that salvages recyclable
components. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-3: PROPERTY VALUED AT TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS OR MORE:
The city council must direct disposition of surplus personal property with a value estimated at ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or greater based upon a
recommendation from the purchasing officer. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-4: RECORDS:
The purchasing officer must keep regular logs showing surplus personal property disposed of, the method of disposal, and the amounts recovered from its
disposal and maintain records for public inspection relative to the disposal of surplus personal property for a period of time in compliance with state law
and the city's records retention schedule. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-5: DONATIONS:
Upon the advance written approval of the city manager, surplus personal property may be donated to governmental, public or quasi-public agencies,
charities, or nonprofit organizations. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
1-7B-6: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
Proceeds from the sale of surplus personal property must be deposited into the appropriate city fund. (Ord. 1423, 9-16-2008)
Chapter 7C
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
1-7C-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers and California Public Contract Code section 22034, and any succeeding or related statutes,
for the purpose of implementing the informal bid procedures set forth in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act1. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter may be used for public projects with a value equal to or less than the amount set forth in Public Contract Code section 22032(b), and any
successor statute or regulation, or, when applicable, as established pursuant to Public Contract Code section 22020. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions in Public Contract Code section 22002 and set forth below will govern the
construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:
CITY MANAGER: The City Manager or designee. (Ord. 1506, 4-21-2015)
1-7C-4: SOLICITING BIDS AND AWARDING CONTRACTS:
The City Manager may solicit bids, award contracts, and execute contracts for public projects up to sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00). Contracts for
public projects costing more than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) must be awarded by the City Council. (Ord. 1583, 5-21-2019)
1-7C-5: QUALIFIED CONTRACTORS:
The Public Works Department will maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work. Any licensed contractor requesting to
have its name placed on this list must be included. The list may be periodically revised to remove inactive names. A name may be deemed inactive if:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 28/581
A. Letters addressed to the contractor at its last known address are returned without a forwarding address;
B. The contractor does not obtain plans for, or bid on, a public project for two (2) years;
C. The contractor's license is revoked or suspended by the California State Licensing Board;
D. The contractor removes its name; or
E. For other good cause as determined by the City Manager. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-6: NOTICE INVITING BIDS:
A. The notice inviting bids must describe the project in general terms, indicate how to obtain more detailed information regarding the project, and state the
time and place for submitting bids.
B. Unless the product or service is proprietary, not less than ten (10) calendar days before the date set for opening bids, the City Manager must notify
contractors using one or both of the following methods:
1. Mail notices to each contractor on the list for the category of work to be performed;
2. Mail notices to each of the construction trade journals specified in Public Contract Code section 22036. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-7: BID SECURITY:
A. Bid security is required for all bids on public projects when the City Manager estimates that the price will exceed sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00).
Bid security may be a bond issued by a licensed and duly qualified corporate surety, or the equivalent in cash, money order, cashier's check, certified
check, unconditional letter of credit, or other form approved by the City Attorney. Nothing in this section prevents the City from requiring bid security on
public projects of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) or less when the City Manager believes such security is needed to protect the City's interests.
B. Bid security must equal at least ten percent (10%) of the bid amount.
C. If the notice inviting bids requires a bid security, noncompliance or defective, inadequate, or incomplete security will render the bid nonresponsive.
D. Bid security will be forfeited or paid to the City should the bidder fail to execute a contract within the time specified in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 1583,
5-21-2019)
1-7C-8: BID OPENING:
The City Clerk, or designee, will publicly open all bids in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place specified in the invitation for bids.
Late, misplaced, or unsealed bids cannot be considered. If no bids are received, the City may proceed as set forth in Public Contract Code section 22038.
(Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-9: AWARD:
A. The contract may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder if the City Manager or City Council considers the bid to be reasonable, sufficient funds
are appropriated for the public project, and the bid is within the limits specified by Public Contract Code section 22032(b) or, if applicable, Public
Contract Code section 22020.
B. Should all qualified bids exceed the limits in Public Contract Code section 22032, the city council may, by adopting a resolution upon four-fifths (4/5)
vote, award the contract, provided the award is expressly authorized by Public Contract Code section 22034(f).
C. Nothing in this section restricts the city from taking any action set forth in Public Contract Code section 22038. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-10: BONDS AND INSURANCE:
Contractors awarded a contract under this chapter are required to provide sureties and insurance in forms approved by the city attorney and conforming
with the contract documents. (Ord. 1391, 1-17-2006)
1-7C-11: DESIGN APPROVAL:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 29/581
The public works director is authorized to approve designs for purposes of design immunity pursuant to Government Code section 830.6. Nothing in this
section is intended to, nor will it, preclude the city council from separately or additionally approving designs for purposes of design immunity pursuant to
Government Code section 830.6. (Ord. 1506, 4-21-2015)
Chapter 8
POLITICAL ACTIVITY
1-8-1: PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM:
A. During Working Hours: No officer or employee of the City whose position is covered by the personnel merit system shall engage in political activity
during working hours.
B. City Premises: No officer or employee of the City whose position is covered by the personnel merit system shall engage in any political activity on
premises of the City. (Ord. 928, 4-19-1977)
C. Uniformed Officers And Employees: No officer or employee of the City whose position is covered by the personnel merit system shall participate in
political activities of any kind while in uniform. (Ord. 1248, 3-5-1996)
1-8-2: NONMERIT SYSTEM EMPLOYEES:
A. Applicability: The provisions of subsections B and C of this Section shall apply to every officer and employee of the City who is compensated for a fulltime
or part-time basis whose position is permanent or temporary except elected officials, members of the Planning Commission, members of the
Recreation and Parks Commission and employees whose positions are covered by the personnel merit system and are regulated by subsections 1-8-
1A and B of this Section.
B. During Working Hours: No officer or employee of the City enumerated in subsection A of this Section shall engage in political activity during working
hours.
C. City Premises: No officer or employee of the City designated in subsection A of this Section shall engage in political activity on premises of the City.
(Ord. 933, 6-7-1977)
D. Uniformed Officers And Employees: No officer or employee of the City enumerated in subsection A of this Section shall participate in political activities
of any kind while in uniform. (Ord. 1248, 3-5-1996)
1-8-3: SOLICITATION OF POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS:
A. Restrictions:
1. For purposes of this Section, the term "contribution" shall have the same meaning as defined in section 82015 of the California Government Code,
as may be amended from time to time.
2. An officer or employee of the City shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit a political contribution from an officer or employee of the City, or from a
person on an employment list of the City, with knowledge that the person from whom the contribution is solicited is an officer or employee of the City.
3. A candidate for elective office of the City shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit a political contribution from an officer or employee of the City, or from a
person on an employment list of the City, with knowledge that the person from whom the contribution is solicited is an officer or employee of the City,
or is a person on an employment list of the City.
4. This Section shall not prohibit an officer or employee of the City, or a candidate for elective office in the City, from requesting political contributions
from officers or employees of the City if the solicitation is part of a solicitation made to a significant segment of the public which may include officers
or employees of the City.
5. Violation of this Section is punishable as a misdemeanor. The District Attorney shall have all authority to prosecute under this Section.
B. Applicable: The provisions of subsection A of this Section shall apply to every officer and employee of the City who is compensated for a full-time or
part-time basis whose position is permanent or temporary, including elected officials, members of the Planning Commission, members of the
Recreation and Parks Commission and employees whose positions are covered by the personnel merit system and are regulated by subsections 1-8-
1A and B of this Chapter. (Ord. 1248, 3-5-1996)
1-8-4: CITY LOBBYISTS:
A. Defined: The following shall be considered a "City lobbyist" and be subject to the provisions of this Chapter:
Any person, business entity or other organization which is employed, contracts or otherwise receives value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, in any form
whatsoever in a twelve (12) month period, to communicate directly or through agents, employees or subcontractors with any elected or appointed City
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 30/581
official, employee or agent for the purpose of influencing any City legislative or administrative action on behalf of any other person, business entity, or
organization. Provided, however, a City lobbyist shall not include:
1. An elected or appointed public official or public employee when acting in his or her official capacity as an elected or appointed public official or public
employee.
2. A newspaper or other regularly published periodical, radio or television station (including any individual who owns, publishes or is employed by any
such newspaper or periodical, radio or television station) which in the ordinary course of business publishes news items, editorials or other
comments, or paid advertisements, which directly or indirectly urge action upon City legislative or administrative action.
3. An attorney providing legal representation to a person, business entity or other organization which is a party to an administrative proceeding with the
City.
4. An employee who has been employed on a full-time basis, forty (40) hours per week or more ("full time employee"), at the time the employee
attempts to influence a City legislative or administrative action on behalf of his/her employer with respect to a proposed City legislative or
administrative action.
B. Registration: Prior to communicating with an elected or appointed City official, City employee or City agent about any potential City legislative or
administrative action, each City lobbyist shall file with the City Clerk a statement under oath which contains the following information:
1. The full name, business and home addresses and telephone numbers of the City lobbyist;
2. The names of all persons, business entities or other organizations that the City lobbyist is performing lobbying services on behalf; and
3. A statement that the City lobbyist has read and understands the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Disclosure Requirement; City Lobbyists And Full-Time Employees: City lobbyists shall not communicate with an elected or appointed official, City
employee, or City agent about any potential City legislative or administrative action on behalf of any other person or business entity, other organization
without first disclosing their status as a City lobbyist and the name of the person, business entity or other organization which has engaged the services
of the City lobbyist. A full-time employee shall disclose his/her status as employee and the name of his/her employer when communicating with an
elected or appointed City official, City employee or City agent on behalf of his/her employer about a legislative or administrative action.
D. Violations; Penalty: Any violation of subsection 1-8-4B or C of this Section shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in Section 1-2-1 of this
Code. (Ord. 1256, 7-16-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 9
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS AND DISCLOSURES
1-9-1: PURPOSE:
The California political reform act1 imposes a number of requirements upon persons supporting or opposing candidates and ballot measures. Among other
things, the political reform act generally restricts anonymous contributions and requires disclosure for mass mailings. Under Government Code sections
81013 and 85703 the city may impose more restrictive regulations for local elections. Accordingly, this chapter is added to this code to further the public's
compelling interest for full disclosure in local elections in order to better inform the electorate and prevent political corruption. Nothing contained in this
chapter is intended, nor should it be construed, to supplant the political reform act's requirements, or its regulations; this chapter is intended only to
supplement the political reform act as to local elections. (Ord. 1341, 11-7-2001)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise stated below, the words and phrases used in this chapter generally have the same meanings as in the California Elections Code, the
political reform act, and those regulations promulgated by the fair political practices commission. In addition, unless the contrary is stated or clearly
appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:
CAMPAIGN LITERATURE: Unsolicited circulars, pamphlets, letters, posters, political signs, or other reproduced matter referring to an election, candidate,
or any ballot measure. Campaign literature does not include other campaign paraphernalia such as, without limitation, pencils, buttons, or similar items.
CONTRIBUTION: A payment, loans and extensions of credit (other than those made by financial institutions), a payment of a loan from a financial
institution by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a payment, except to the extent that full and adequate consideration is received, unless it is
clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is not made for political purposes. An expenditure made at a candidate's, committee's, or elected officer's
direction is a contribution to the candidate, committee, or elected officer, unless full and adequate consideration is received for making the expenditure.
A. "Contribution" includes purchasing tickets for events such as dinners, luncheons, rallies, and similar fundraising events; granting discounts or
rebates not extended to the public generally or granting discounts or rebates by television and radio stations and newspapers not extended on an
equal basis to all candidates for the same office; and paying compensation by any person for the personal services or expenses of any other person
if such services are rendered or expenses incurred on behalf of a candidate or committee without payment of full and adequate consideration.
B. "Contribution" also includes any transfer of anything of value received by a committee from another committee. The term does not include amounts
received under an enforceable promise to the extent such amounts were previously reported as a contribution. However, these amounts will be
reported in the appropriate campaign statement.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 31/581
C. "Contribution" does not include volunteer personal services or payments made by any individual for his or her own travel expenses if such payments
are made voluntarily without any understanding or agreement that they will be directly or indirectly repaid to him.
D. In accordance with Buckley v. Valeo (1976) 424 U.S. 1, a candidate's direct contribution to his or her campaign is not regulated by this chapter.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, controlled committee,
or committee. (Ord. 1420, 9-2-2008)
1-9-3: ANONYMOUS CONTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED; CONTRIBUTION LIMIT:
A. It is unlawful for any person to make, and any candidate, controlled committee, or committee to solicit or accept, any anonymous contribution in a local
election.
B. For local elections, it is unlawful for any person to make a contribution to a candidate, controlled committee, or committee that exceeds seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) in a calendar year. (Ord. 1420, 9-2-2008)
1-9-4: CAMPAIGN STATEMENT INFORMATION:
Candidates, elected officers, controlled committees, and committees must comply with Government Code section 84211 regarding all persons contributing
one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more to a campaign for a local election. In addition, candidates, elected officers, controlled committees, and committees
must list the zone improvement plan ("ZIP") code assigned by the United States postal service for the business or residential postal address of persons
making contributions of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) during a campaign for a local election. (Ord. 1384, 4-5-2005)
1-9-5: ANONYMOUS MAILINGS PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any person, candidate, or committee to send any unsolicited piece of mail supporting or opposing any candidate or ballot measure in a
local election that does not comply with the requirements of Government Code section 84305 or, if a slate mailer, Government Code section 84305.5.
B. In addition to the requirements of Government Code section 84305 or, if applicable, Government Code section 84305.5, campaign literature including,
without limitation, mailers, must include the name and telephone number of any person contributing twenty five percent (25%) or more of the cost for
producing the campaign literature. The text identifying such persons must conform with the requirements of Government Code section 84305 or, if
applicable, Government Code section 84305.5. (Ord. 1420, 9-2-2008)
1-9-6: LIBERAL INTERPRETATION:
This chapter will be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose. (Ord. 1341, 11-7-2001)
1-9-7: FILING DEADLINES:
A final preelection filing of updated versions of all documents required by the political reform act and this chapter will be filed by candidates and
committees and received by the city clerk by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the final Friday before the election and will reflect all actual and anticipated
expenditures and contributions through the date of the election. (Ord. 1384, 4-5-2005)
1-9-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
The means of enforcing this chapter, and the penalties for violating it, are set forth in the political reform act which will apply to this chapter and are
mandatory. In addition to any other penalty, the court may award a prevailing party costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 1341, 11-7-
2001)
Chapter 10
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
1-10-1: RECEIPT BY POLICE CHIEF:
The Police Chief shall make provision for receiving and safekeeping found property and money delivered to him or coming into his possession. A receipt
shall be issued to the person delivering the property or money. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-2: HOLDING PERIOD:
The property, except unclaimed bicycles, shall be held in a safe place and the money deposited with the Director of Finance for a period of at least six (6)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 32/581
months, and unclaimed bicycles shall be held for a period of at least three (3) months, unless sooner claimed by the true owner, and shall then be deemed
to be unclaimed property or unclaimed money, subject to disposal as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-3: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP:
During such time as any such property or money is so held, it may be delivered or paid to the true owner. The property shall be delivered upon proof of
ownership satisfactory to the Police Chief after ten (10) days' notice by mail to any others who have asserted a claim of ownership, at any address given
by the persons. The money shall be paid to the true owner upon written order to the Director of Finance from the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall make
the order upon the same proof of ownership and with the same notice as prescribed in the case of property. If ownership cannot be determined to the
satisfaction of the Police Chief, he may refuse to deliver the property or order the payment of the money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court. (Ord.
671, 2-3-1964)
1-10-4: RECLAIM BY FINDER:
If the true owner does not appear during the time the property or money is so held, and claim the property or money, it may be delivered back to the finder,
other than a City employee who found the same while performing his regular duty, if the finder has served written notice upon the City that he wishes to
assert a claim to the property or money as a finder, and if he has complied with the requirement of the State Civil Code governing the duties and
obligations of a finder. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-5: DEPOSIT OF UNCLAIMED MONEY:
All monies so received by the Police Chief and not delivered to the true owner during a six (6) month period or the finder, shall thereafter be deposited in
the General Fund. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-6: SALE OR USE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
Upon expiration of the initial three (3) or six (6) month period, as such may be applicable, any property so received and not delivered to the true owner or
finder may be appropriated to the use of the City upon order of the City Manager, and property not appropriated to City use may be sold at public auction
to the highest bidder. Notice of the sale shall be given by the Police Chief at least five (5) days before the time fixed therefor by at least one publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-7: SALE PROCEEDS:
After the auction is completed, the Director of Finance shall deposit the proceeds of the auction in the General Fund. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-8: UNSALABLE AND UNUSABLE PROPERTY:
Any property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the City shall be deemed to be of no value and
shall be disposed of in such manner as the City Manager directs. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-9: DANGEROUS OR PERISHABLE PROPERTY:
Any property coming into the possession of the Police Chief which he determines to be dangerous or perishable may be disposed of immediately, without
notice, in such manner as he determines to be in the public interest. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
1-10-10: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to apply to property subject to confiscation under the laws of the State or of the United States of
America, and shall apply to property held as evidence only when the same is unclaimed by any person and no other provisions of law are applicable
concerning its disposition. (Ord. 617, 2-3-1964)
Chapter 11
RECORDS DESTRUCTION
1-11-1: DUPLICATE RECORDS:
Whenever an original of an instrument or document is on file in the City and duplicates thereof are on file in that office or any other office, the duplicates
may be destroyed by the department head or officer who is in charge of the records on file. (Ord. 923, 3-15-1977)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 33/581
Chapter 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A Planning Commission which may be known and referred to as the "City Planning Commission" or "Planning Commission" of the City is hereby created
and established, pursuant to the provisions of The Planning Law of the State (commencing with section 65000 of the State Government Code). (Ord. 677,
12-26-1967)
2-1-2: COMPOSITION:
The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City with the approval of the City Council. (Ord.
300, 8-20-1946)
2-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Planning Commission and the members thereof shall respectively have and exercise each and all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and
authorities of city planning commissions and of members of the commissions, all as set forth and contemplated in and under The planning law of the State
(commencing with section 65000 of the State Government Code) as same now exists and as same may hereafter be amended, and shall perform the
functions of the city planning commissions and members thereof, respectively, all as indicated, set forth and referred to in the Act and in the manner
therein stated. (Ord. 677, 12-26-1967)
2-1-4: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of members of the Planning Commission shall be for four (4) years. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the term, it shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. Terms shall begin on July 1 of the year of appointment and expire June 30 of the fourth year
thereafter. Terms shall be staggered amongst the members such that not more than two (2) Commission terms expire in any given year. (Ord. 689, 5-23-
1968; amd. 2000 Code)
2-1-5: EXPENSES:
The City Council may in making its annual tax levy and as a part thereof levy and collect a tax each year hereafter in the manner and for the purpose of
defraying the lawful expenses incurred by the Planning Commission in carrying out the purposes of this Chapter; provided, that the tax shall not exceed in
any fiscal year the sum of two (2) mills on the dollar of assessed valuation of the City. The City Council, however, reserves the right to make additional
appropriations from the general revenues of the City for the purposes of the Planning Commission whenever the City Council deems the action necessary
or advisable. (Ord. 300, 8-20-1946)
2-1-6: RECORDS; REPORT:
The Planning Commission shall cause proper records to be kept of all of its official acts and proceedings and shall make reports to the City Council, all as
contemplated in the planning law of the State (commencing with section 65000 of the State Government Code). (Ord. 677, 12-26-1967)
2-1-7: EXPENDITURES IN EXCESS OF APPROPRIATION:
The Planning Commission shall have no power or authority to bind or obligate the City or any officer or department thereof for any money, debt,
undertaking or obligation of any kind in excess of the appropriation which the City Council may have made for the purposes of the Planning Commission
for any fiscal year. (Ord. 300, 8-20-1946)
2-1-8: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS:
The Planning Commission shall provide for its own organization, shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business and shall designate the
time and place for the regular meetings of the Planning Commission. Permission is granted to the Planning Commission to use the Council Chamber in the
City Hall as the place for its meetings; provided, that the meetings shall not conflict or interfere with meetings of the City Council. (Ord. 300, 8-20-1946;
amd. 2000 Code)
2-1-9: NOTIFICATION OF CITY COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS:
The City Clerk is hereby authorized and instructed to notify the Planning Commission of any matters which may hereafter be pending before the City
Council and to forward to the Planning Commission from time to time any and all documents, proceedings and instruments which may hereafter be so
pending, which documents, proceedings and instruments, according to law, are required to be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to final action
thereon by the City Council. (Ord. 300, 8-20-1946)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 34/581
Chapter 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION
2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to
any condition relating to a labor controversy.
LOCAL EMERGENCY: The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial
limits of this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions
resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this
city and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.
STATE OF EMERGENCY: The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state
caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake or other conditions causing a "state of war emergency", which
conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single
county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat.
STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY: The condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever this state or
nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy
attack is probable or imminent. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-2: PURPOSES:
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city
in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public
agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-3: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection
and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-4: DISASTER COUNCIL:
A. Creation: The city disaster council is hereby created.
B. Composition: The city disaster council created under the provisions of the preceding subsection shall consist of the following:
1. The mayor, who shall be chairman;
2. The city manager, who shall be director of emergency services and vice chairman;
3. The assistant director, appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city council who, under the supervision of the director, shall
develop emergency plans and organize the emergency services program of the city, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the
director;
4. Such deputy directors and chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in the current emergency plan of the city, adopted pursuant to this
chapter; (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
5. Such representatives of the school district, civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency
responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council;
6. A council member appointed by the mayor to serve for a period of one year on a rotating basis. (Ord. 1388, 11-1-2005)
C. Meetings: The disaster council shall meet upon the call of the chairman, or in his absence from the city or inability to call the meeting, upon the call of
the vice chairman.
D. Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the city disaster council and it is hereby empowered to review and recommend for adoption by the city
council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to
implement the plans and agreements. (Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-5: DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The officer shall be the city manager.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 35/581
B. Powers And Duties: The director of emergency services is hereby empowered:
1. To request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" and the termination thereof, if the city council is
in session, or to issue the proclamation if the city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council within seven (7) days thereafter
or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.
2. To request the governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when in the opinion of the director the resources of the area are inadequate to cope with
the disaster. The request must be confirmed by a resolution adopted by the city council.
3. To control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.
4. To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and to resolve questions of
authority and responsibility that may arise between them.
5. To represent the disaster organization of the city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to civil defense and disaster.
6. To designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his
duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.
C. Powers In Event Of Disaster: In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by
the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency", the director is hereby empowered:
1. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council.
2. To impose a curfew which prohibits all individuals from being present on or at any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, sidewalk, alley,
park, playground or other public ground, public place or public building between the hours of sundown and sunrise, or such other hours which the
director determines are reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency. Such curfew shall not apply to
individuals whose presence on or at any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, sidewalk, alley, park, playground or other public ground,
public place or public building is required pursuant to their responsibilities under the city emergency organization and city "emergency plan", as such
terms are defined under sections 2-2-1 and 2-2-7 of this chapter. The director's imposition of a curfew shall be confirmed at the earliest practical time
by the city council.
3. To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for
the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use.
4. To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which
this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency", to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary
in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered
disaster service workers.
5. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency.
6. To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution (or emergency
plan) adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful
authority, and in conformity with section 38791 of the state Government Code, to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police
power vested in the city by the constitution and general laws. (Ord. 1195, 3-16-1993)
2-2-6: EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION; COMPOSITION:
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and
persons who may by agreement or operation of laws, including persons commandeered under the provisions of subsection 2-2-5C4 of this chapter, be
charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during the emergency shall constitute the emergency organization of the city.
(Ord. 917, 1-4-1977)
2-2-7: EMERGENCY PLAN:
The functions and duties of the emergency organization shall be established in the city emergency plan. The plan shall be consistent with the standardized
emergency management system and provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition
constituting a "local emergency", "state of emergency", or "state of war emergency"; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services,
and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption of resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1282, 10-21-1997)
2-2-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-2-1 of this code, for any person during an emergency to: (Ord. 1195, 3-16-1993; amd. 2000
Code)
A. Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this
chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter.
B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter.
C. Violate a curfew imposed pursuant to this chapter.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 36/581
D. Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 1195, 3-16-1993)
Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 1
TAXATION
3-1-1: TRANSFER TO COUNTY:
A. Compliance With State Law: The City does hereby elect to avail itself of all of the provisions of an act of the legislature of the State entitled: "An act to
provide for the levy and collection of taxes by and for the use of municipal corporations and cities incorporated under the laws of the State, except
municipal corporations of the first class, and to provide for the consolidation and abolition of certain municipal offices, and to provide that their duties
may be performed by certain officers of the county, and fixing the compensation to be allowed for such county officers for the services so rendered to
such municipal corporation", approved March 27, 1895, and all acts of the legislature of the State amending the same, except the provisions of section
2 of said Act.
B. Taxes Collected By County: All assessments for taxes in the City shall be made and all the taxes collected by the assessor and tax collector,
respectively, of the County, and the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed heretofore by the assessor and
tax collector of the City, shall hereafter be performed by the assessor and tax collector, respectively, of the County, until the City shall, by ordinance,
elect not to avail itself of the provisions of the Act for any longer time. (Ord. 3, 1-31-1917)
Chapter 2
BUSINESS ATTRACTION PROGRAM
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the BUSINESS ATTRACTION PROGRAM OF THE CITY. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth a mechanism for establishing financial incentives to businesses to facilitate business attraction in the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-3: BUSINESSES ELIGIBLE FOR INCENTIVES:
"Business" as used in this chapter is defined as a business proposing to locate in the city which meets most of the following criteria and is eligible for
consideration for the incentives established under this chapter:
A. The business is engaged in a primary or secondary target industry as identified in the city economic development strategic plan dated September 23,
1993, as amended from time to time by the city council.
B. The business has developed a business plan for long-term growth.
C. The business will provide the city with a return on investment within three (3) years or a longer term if approved by the city council. The method used to
determine the return on investment for the city shall consider the costs of city services provided to the business and the revenue and other benefits that
the business provides to the city. The revenue and benefits provided to the city shall include, but not be limited to, the following factors: increase in
number of jobs, increase in square footage occupied, increase in sales and use tax revenue, increase in utility users tax revenue, increase in franchise
fees, and increase in any other taxes or fees paid to the city.
D. Commitment of the business to stay in the city for a minimum of six (6) years.
E. Business has the capability of utilizing existing businesses located in the city or attracting support industries into the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-3-1: COUNCIL APPROVAL OF INCENTIVES:
A. The authority granted to the city manager to approve financial incentives to businesses under sections 3-2-5 and 3-2-6 of this chapter is limited to an
aggregate amount of twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500.00) per eligible business. The city council shall have the exclusive authority to
approve incentives to businesses under sections 3-2-5 and 3-2-6 of this chapter which exceed the aggregate amount of twelve thousand five hundred
dollars ($12,500.00) per eligible business.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 37/581
B. In the event a business seeks an incentive which requires city council approval under subsection A of this section and such business needs a land use
approval which is subject to city council review, the council shall only consider the request for the incentive concurrently with or subsequent to the
council's review of the land use application; or, in the event city council's potential review of the land use application is only by way of appeal and no
appeal is filed within the time limits established by the El Segundo municipal code, subsequent to the expiration of time to file the appeal.
C. An incentive requiring city council approval under this section shall be placed on the consent calendar section of the city council meeting agenda. (Ord.
1324, 9-19-2000)
3-2-4: BUSINESS LICENSE TAX CREDIT:
A. Determination Of Credit: Any business which increases the amount of sales and use tax revenue received by the city from the business or its activities
above its "baseline", as defined hereunder, shall receive a credit to its business license tax equal to the dollar amount of the increase above the
baseline. The amount of business license tax credit shall be determined annually and is subject to approval by the city manager. Said credit shall be
applied to the business license tax owed in the next fiscal year only; provided, that, in no event, shall the credit exceed the amount of business license
tax owed.
B. Baseline Determination: For the purposes of this section, the "baseline" for a business shall be determined as follows: For each fiscal year, the baseline
shall be equal to the amount of sales and use tax and business license tax revenue projected to be generated for the city as calculated from projections
based on the business plan submitted by the business to the city.
C. Limitation: A business may only be granted business license tax credits under this section for the first three (3) years that the business operates in the
city or such longer term as determined pursuant to subsection 3-2-3C of this chapter. A business is not eligible to receive any business license tax
credits based on sales and use tax revenue established under title 4 of this code which the business is receiving a business license tax credit under
this section. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-5: UTILITY USERS TAX CREDIT:
The city manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to negotiate and enter into a tax credit agreement which grants to a business a credit on the
utility users tax imposed by the city for a period not to exceed three (3) years following the date of the agreement or such longer term as determined
pursuant to subsection 3-2-3C of this chapter. The credit shall be calculated annually and shall be applied to the utility users tax owed for the next fiscal
year only; provided, that, in no event, shall the credit exceed the amount of tax owed. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-2-6: PLANNING AND BUILDING FEES AGREEMENTS:
A. Fee Reduction: Director of community, economic and development services or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to negotiate an agreement
which reduces the planning and/or building fees applicable to a project developed by a business in an amount not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
fees imposed. The fee reduction shall only apply to projects specified in the agreement. Said agreement shall be approved by the city manager.
B. Completion Timetable: The director of community, economic and development services or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to negotiate an
agreement which establishes a timetable for the completion of the review, approval and inspection process conducted by the city in connection with a
project developed by a business. Under said agreement, the planning and/or building fees applicable to the project shall be refunded and/or waived if
the failure to meet the timetable is solely caused by city inaction. The fee refund and/or waiver shall only apply to the project specified in the
agreement. Said agreement shall be approved by the city manager.
C. Fees Defined: For the purpose of this section, "planning and/or building fees" is defined as any or all of the fees imposed by the city under the zoning,
subdivision, building, electric, plumbing, and mechanical codes of the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
3-2-7: TAX REDUCTIONS AND SUSPENSIONS:
The city council has the authority to: a) provide for the suspension of taxes collected under this title and title 4 of this code; and b) provide for a reduction in
the tax rates assessed under this title and title 4 of this code. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
Chapter 3
SALES AND USE TAX
3-3-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX REGULATIONS OF THE CITY. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
The City Council hereby declares that this Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 38/581
A. To adopt sales and use tax regulations which comply with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and
Taxation Code1.
B. To adopt sales and use tax regulations which incorporate provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the State insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code.
C. To adopt sales and use tax regulations which impose a one percent (1%) tax and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by
the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the State sales and use taxes.
D. To adopt sales and use tax regulations which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of part 1.5
of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the
burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-3: OPERATIVE DATE; STATE CONTRACT:
This Chapter shall become operative on April 1, 1956, and prior thereto, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all the
functions incident to the administration and operation of this Chapter; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of
Equalization, as above set forth, prior to April 1, 1956, this Chapter shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the
execution of the contract by the City and by the State Board of Equalization; and provided further, that this Chapter shall not become operative prior to the
operative date of the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the County. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-4: SALES TAX:
A. Designation:
1. For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date of this Chapter.
(Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold
is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from the sales shall include delivery charges, when the charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to where
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places
at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of
Equalization. (Ord. 581, 11-27-1961, eff. 1-1-1962)
B. General Regulations:
1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 (commencing with section
7200) of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of such Code, as amended and in force and effect on April
1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this Section as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
2. Wherever, and to the extent that, in part 1 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, the State is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the City for the
word "State" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the constitution of the State; nor shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the State in
any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any agency thereof, rather than by or
against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains
subject to tax by the State under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the said State Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect
to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of
that Code; and in addition, the name of the City shall not be substituted for that of the State in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the City shall not be substituted for
the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in section 6203. (Ord.
581, 11-27-1961, eff. 1-1-1962)
3. If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be
required by reason of this Section. (Ord. 823, 10-16-1973, eff. 1-1-1974)
4. There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer;
b. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which
the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws
of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 1057, 12-20-1983, eff. 1-1-1984)
5. There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 39/581
b. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the
City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes;
c. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which
the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws
of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 1057, 12-20-1083)
3-3-5: USE TAX:
A. Imposition: An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date of this Chapter, for storage, use or other consumption in the City at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales price
of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges, when the charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made.
B. General Regulations:
1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of such Code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes
are hereby adopted and made a part of this Section as though fully set forth herein.
2. Wherever, and to the extent that, in part 1 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, the State is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this
City for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State
Board of Equalization or the name of the State Treasury, or of the constitution of the State; nor shall the name of the City be substituted for that of the
State in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof, rather than by
or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter; and neither shall the
substitution be deemed to have been made in those Sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains
subject to tax by the State under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to
certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the provisions of that
Code; and in addition, the name of the City shall not be substituted for that of the State in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof),
6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as adopted, and the name of the City shall not be substituted for the word
"state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in section 6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in section 6203. (Ord. 479, 2-27-
1956)
3. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this Section:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer on consumer;
b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county,
or city in this State;
c. In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other
consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in
the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
d. The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. (Ord. 1057, 12-20-1983)
3-3-6: AMENDMENTS TO STATE CODE:
All amendments of the State Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter which relate to the sales and use tax
and which are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this Chapter. (Ord.
479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-7: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
A. Subsection 3-3-4B5 of this Chapter shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts
an assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the State
Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time subsections 3-3-4B4 and 3-3-5B3 of this Chapter shall become inoperative.
B. In the event that subsection 3-3-4B5 of this Chapter become operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio
for State-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the State Revenue and Taxation
Code, subsections 3-3-4B4 and 3-3-5B3 of this Chapter shall become operative on the first day of the month following the month in which such higher
ratio is adopted, at which time subsection 3-3-4B5 of this Chapter shall become inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which
the Board again adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by section 401 of
the State Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time subsection 3-3-4B5 of this Chapter shall again become operative and subsections 3-3-4B4 and 3-
3-5B3 shall become inoperative. (Ord. 823, 10-16-1973, eff. 1-1-1974; amd. 2000 Code)
3-3-8: ENJOINING COLLECTION:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 40/581
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City,
or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the State Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 479, 2-27-1956)
3-3-9: SUSPENSION OF EXISTING SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCES:
At the time this Chapter goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinances 480 and 481 (existing City sales and use tax ordinances) shall be suspended
and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the
administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed by this Chapter; provided, however, that if for any reason it is determined that the City is
without power to adopt this Chapter, or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and
operation of the taxes imposed by this Chapter, the provisions of Ordinances 480 and 481 (existing City sales and use tax ordinances) shall not be
deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of one percent (1%) continuously from and after
April 2, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes
imposed by this Chapter, the provisions of Ordinances 480 and 481 (existing City sales and use tax ordinances) shall again be in full force and effect at the
rate of one percent (1%). (1969 Code § 3.08.100)
Chapter 4
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX REGULATIONS OF THE CITY. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.
HOTEL: Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment
house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
OPERATOR: The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent
shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON: Any firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money,
goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The director of finance.
TRANSIENT:
A. Any "person" as defined in this section, who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access,
license or other agreement, for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less.
B. Any individual who personally exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement, for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less.
Any such person or individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient.
In determining whether an individual is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date hereof
may be considered. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-4-3: IMPOSITION; RATE:
A. Tax Imposed: For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and must pay a tax of twelve percent (12%) of the rent charged by
the operator. (Ord. 1519, 5-3-2016)
B. Payment To Operator: The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at
the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 41/581
due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator
may require that the tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-4-4: EXEMPTIONS:
A. No tax shall be imposed upon:
1. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
2. Any federal or state of California officer or employee while on official business only and when payment for such occupancy is made by duly
authorized voucher payment from the governing agency;
3. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
B. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by
the tax administrator. (Ord. 1121, 9-20-1988)
3-4-5: COLLECTION:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-6: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE:
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel
renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the Tax Administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at
all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
A. The name of the operator;
B. The address of the hotel;
C. The date upon which the certificate was issued;
D. This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform transient
occupancy tax regulations by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and
remitting such tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those
requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.
(Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-7: RENT REPORT; TAX REMITTANCE:
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the Tax Administrator, make a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms provided by him of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to
the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure
collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any
reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax
Administrator. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-8: FAILURE TO REMIT; PENALTY:
A. Original Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%)
of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
B. Continued Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which
the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount
of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.
C. Fraud: If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty five
percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this Section.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 42/581
D. Interest: In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of
one percent (0.5%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid.
E. Penalties Merged With Tax: Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax
herein required to be paid. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-9: OPERATOR VIOLATION:
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion
thereof required by this Chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to
base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the
assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make the report and
remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Chapter. In case the
determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. The operator may within ten (10) days after the serving
or mailing of the notice make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a
hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and
conclusive and immediately due and payable. If the application is made, the Tax Administrator shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the
manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for the
tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why the specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.
After the hearing the Tax Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner
prescribed herein of the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen
(15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3-4-10 of this Chapter. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-10: OPERATOR APPEAL:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix
a time and place for hearing the appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to the operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the
Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount
found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-11: RECORD RETENTION:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period
of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to
the City, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-12: REFUNDS:
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the City under this Chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this Section, provided: 1) the tax was paid under
protest, and 2) a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax
Administrator within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
B. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or
illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.
C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in
the manner provided in subsection A of this Section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a
refund from the operator who collected the tax.
D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-13: TAX DEEMED DEBT TO CITY:
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City
under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of the amount. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-14: OPERATIVE DATE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 43/581
This Chapter shall become operative on August 1, 1964. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964)
3-4-15: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Penalty Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in
Section 1-2-1 of this Code.
B. Prohibited Acts: Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who
fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is
guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false
or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this Chapter to be made, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 621, 7-13-1964; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 5
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3-5-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX REGULATIONS OF THE CITY, adopted pursuant to part 6.7 (commencing with
section 11901) of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City, shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional
part thereof. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-3: PAYMENT:
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3-5-2 of this Chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to
the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-4: APPLICABILITY EXCEPTIONS:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-5: LIABILITY:
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is
a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 734, 1-26-1970)
3-5-6: CONVEYANCE FOR REORGANIZATION OR ADJUSTMENT:
A. Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization
or adjustment:
1. Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
2. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended;
3. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a "corporation", as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of title 11 of the United
States Code, as amended; or
4. Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.
B. Subdivisions A1 to A4, inclusive, of this Section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within
five (5) years from the date of the confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-7: CONVEYANCE FOR SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION ORDER:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 44/581
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:
A. The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which the conveyance is made recites that the conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79K of title 15 of the United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
B. The order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
C. The conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-8: LEVY:
A. Realty Held By Partnership: In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer
of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:
1. Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954; and
2. The continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
B. Termination Of Partnership: If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for
purposes of this Chapter, the partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value
(exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by the partnership at the time of the termination.
C. Limitation On Taxing: Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this
Chapter, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by the partnership at the time of the termination. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-9: ADMINISTRATION:
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of part 6.7 of division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code and
the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
3-5-10: REFUND CLAIMS:
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 5 (commencing with section 5096) of part 9 of
division 1 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 674, 11-27-1967)
Chapter 6
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3-6-1: CREATION OF FUND:
In order to comply with the provisions of sections 182 to 207 of the State Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to section 2113 thereof,
there is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. (Ord. 678, 12-26-1967; amd.
2000 Code)
3-6-2: MONIES PAID INTO FUND:
All monies received by the City from the State under the provisions of sections 182 to 207 of the State Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of
real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways, other than State highways, shall be paid into
the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund. (Ord. 678, 12-26-1967)
3-6-3: EXPENDITURES:
All monies in the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by, and subject to all of the
provisions of sections 182 to 207 of the State Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 678, 12-26-1967)
Chapter 7
UTILITY USERS TAX
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 45/581
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings stated elsewhere in this code, or in accordance with applicable law.
ANCILLARY TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES: Services associated with or incidental to providing use or enjoyment of telecommunication services,
including, without limitation, the following:
Conference Bridging Service: An ancillary service that links two (2) or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include
providing a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunication services used to reach the conference bridge.
Detailed Telecommunication Billing Service: An ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer's billing
statement.
Directory Assistance: An ancillary service of providing telephone number information or address information.
Vertical Service: An ancillary service offered in connection with one or more telecommunication services, which offers advanced calling features that
allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.
Voice Mail Service: An ancillary service that enables customers to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include
any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.
BILLING ADDRESS: The mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
COGENERATOR: Any corporation, including an electrical corporation, or commercial or industrial utility user employing cogeneration technology for
producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL UTILITY USER: Any commercial or industrial utility user conducting business as described in sections 4-2-4, 4-2-9, 4-2-
11, 4-2-13, 4-2-14, 4-2-15, 4-2-16, 4-2-17, 4-2-25, 4-2-28, 4-2-29, 4-2-31, 4-2-32, 4-2-36, 4-2-37, 4-2-38, 4-2-41, 4-2-43, and subsections 4-2-20C, F and
4-2-23C of this code and means "electrical corporation", "gas corporation", and "water corporation".
COMMUNICATION SERVICES: "Telecommunication services" and "ancillary telecommunication services" as defined herein.
ELECTRICAL CORPORATION, GAS CORPORATION, AND WATER CORPORATION: The same meaning as defined in sections 218, 222, and 241,
respectively, of the state Public Utilities Code as said sections existed on January 1, 1975, except "electrical corporation" is construed to include any
municipality, franchised agency, or cogenerator.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the mobile telecommunications sourcing act (4 USC
section 124) and the regulations promulgated thereto or any successor statutes or regulations.
MONTH: A calendar month.
PERSON: Means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint
stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation
(other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: The street address representative of where the service user's use of a communication service primarily occurs, which must be
the business street address of the service user.
POSTPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE: A telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication by communication basis
either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service
number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.
PREPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE: The right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the
origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined
units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.
PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE: A telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and
includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or
channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer
channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).
SERVICE ADDRESS: Either:
A. The location of the service user's communication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the
communication is billed or paid; or
B. If the location in subsection A of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the
location of the service user's place of primary use.
C. For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" means the location associated with the service number.
SERVICE SUPPLIER: Any entity which receives taxes paid and remits same as imposed by this chapter.
SERVICE USER: A commercial or industrial utility user required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 46/581
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The finance director of the city of El Segundo.
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES:
A. The transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever
the technology used, and includes broadband services (e.g., T-1, digital subscriber line (eDSL), fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless broadband,
including Wi-Fi, WiMAX, and wireless MESH) to the extent federal or state law permits taxation of such broadband services, now or in the future. The
term telecommunication services includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on
the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to
as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the federal communications commission as enhanced or value added, and
includes video or data services that are functionally integrated with telecommunication services.
B. Telecommunication services include, without limitation, the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are
calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; broadband service (to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of such service);
mobile telecommunication service; prepaid telecommunication service (to the extent that it is practicable for the service supplier to collect the correct
tax imposed under this chapter from the service supplier); postpaid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service;
800 service (or any other toll free numbers designated by the federal communications commission); and 900 service (or any other similar numbers
designated by the federal communications commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to prerecorded or live service).
C. Telecommunication services also include, without limitation, charges for connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of
telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including, without limitation, call waiting,
call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges;
universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and text. Telecommunication
services do not include digital downloads that are not ancillary telecommunication services, such as video programming, music, ringtones, games,
and similar digital products. (Ord. 1438, 4-13-2010)
3-7-2: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that commercial or industrial utility user
would be in violation of the constitution of the United States or that of the state or upon the city or any of its departments, agencies, boards or commissions
or upon the El Segundo unified school district, Centinela Valley union high school district and the Wiseburn school district, or upon any other person when
imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the constitution of the United States or the constitution of the state. The tax administrator
shall prepare a list of the commercial or industrial utility users exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof
to each service supplier. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-3: ELECTRICITY USERS TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or industrial utility user in the city using electrical energy in the city. The tax
imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three percent (3%) of the charges made for such energy and shall be paid by the commercial or industrial
utility user paying for such energy. "Charges", as used in this section, shall include charges made for: 1) metered energy; and 2) minimum charges for
service, including customer charges, services charges, demand charges, standby charges and annual and monthly charges, fuel cost adjustments, etc.
B. Definition: As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery
owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received;
provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term
include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business as an electric public utility; nor shall the term include
the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or
government agency at a point within the city for resale; or the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a
governmental agency.
C. Collection: The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing such energy. The amount of the tax
collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. Remittance of tax may be predicated
on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's customer. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-4: TAX ON COGENERATED ELECTRICITY:
A. Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or industrial utility user in the city using cogenerated electrical energy in the city.
The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three percent (3%) of the value of the cogenerated energy. The value shall be equal to the price
an electrical corporation, serving the city, would pay to purchase electrical energy from a cogenerator. The cogenerator shall install and maintain an
appropriate utility type metering system which will enable compliance with this section.
B. Collection: The tax shall be collected and paid by the cogenerator if the cogenerator consumes the energy. If the cogenerator sells the energy, the tax
shall be paid by the commercial or industrial utility user to whom the energy is sold and collected by the cogenerator.
C. Time For Remitting: The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following
month. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-5: GAS USERS TAX:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 47/581
A. Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or industrial utility user in the city other than a gas corporation, using in the city,
gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three percent (3%) of the charges made for such
gas and shall be paid by the commercial or industrial utility user paying for such gas. "Charges", as used in this section, shall include: 1) gas which is
delivered through mains of pipes; and 2) minimum charges for services, including customer charges, service charges, and annual and monthly
charges.
B. Exclusions: There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed: 1) charges made for gas which is to be resold
and delivered through mains or pipes; 2) charges made for gas sold for use in production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental
agency; 3) charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities; 4) charges made for
gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the state vehicle code, utilizing natural gas; and 5) charges related to late
payments and returned checks.
C. Collection; Time For Filing Return: The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling the gas. The person
selling the gas shall, on or before the twentieth of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective
date hereof, make a return to the tax administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are
filed, the person selling the gas shall remit tax payments to the tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the tax
administrator. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
D. Nonapplicability: The tax imposed by this section is not intended to apply to gas not purchased from third party vendors and gas used for nonutility
purposes.
1. For the purposes of this subsection D, the phrase "gas not purchased from third party vendors" shall mean gas which is produced and owned by the
same legal entity where ownership is not the result of a sale or purchase transaction.
2. For the purposes of this subsection D, the phrase "gas used for nonutility purposes" shall mean gas which is a component part of a manufactured
product produced by an entity which is subject to the utility users tax. (Ord. 1226, 8-2-1994)
3-7-6: WATER USERS TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed a tax upon every commercial or industrial utility user in the city using water which is delivered though mains or
pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three percent (3%) of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the
commercial or industrial utility user paying for such water.
B. Exclusions: There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold
and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a county or municipal water district for water
used and consumed by such department, utility or district.
C. Collection: The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling the water. The amount collected in one month
shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-7: COMMUNICATION SERVICES USER TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed upon every service user in the city using communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section is two
percent (2%) of the charges made for such services and must be collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing
agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services billed to a billing or service address in the city are used, in whole or in part,
within the city's boundaries and such services are taxable under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service
address, the service address of the service user must be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term "charges" include the
value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the
communication services.
B. Mobile Service Sourced: Mobile telecommunications service is sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act (4 USC section 124), regulations promulgated thereto, and any successor statute or regulation. The tax administrator may issue and
disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of
other communication services including, without limitation, postpaid communication services, prepaid communication services, and private
communication services, provided that such rules are based upon industry custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and
minimize multijurisdictional taxation.
C. Tax Credit: To prevent actual multijurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the
tax administrator that the service user previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such communication services, is allowed a credit against
the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit cannot
exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.
D. Combined Charge Subject To Tax: Except as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, if any nontaxable charges are combined with and
not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the
service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the
service supplier's books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not
created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 48/581
E. Collection Of Tax: For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this section, "substantial nexus" and "minimum
contacts" are construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection or remittance of the tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law and
as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a person
with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, is subject to a
rebuttable presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a
tax, under this chapter. A service supplier is deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities
include, without limitation, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any
nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a
continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or distributed
from a location within the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in
the city by means other than the United States mail. Upon request, the city must make available an accurate description of its jurisdictional boundaries
based on street addresses or ZIP plus four, in an electronic format. If a service supplier relies upon such information provided by city, it is not
responsible for any errors in taxation that may result.
F. Satisfaction Of Tax Obligation By Service Users: Any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to this section with respect to any charge for a
communication service is deemed to have satisfied that person's obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to former section 3-7-7 as codified
immediately before adoption of this regulation with respect to that charge. Likewise, before October 1, 2010, any person who pays the tax levied
pursuant to former section 3-7-7 as codified immediately before adoption of this regulation is deemed to have satisfied the person's obligation to pay
the tax levied pursuant to this section with respect to that charge. The intent of this subsection is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a
single utility charge during the transition period from the previous telephone tax to the new tax (which transition period ends October 1, 2010) and to
permit communication service providers during that transition period to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.
G. Collection Of Tax By Service Supplier: Service suppliers must begin to collect the tax imposed by this section as soon as feasible after the effective
date of the section, but in no event later than permitted by Public Utilities Code section 799. (Ord. 1438, 4-13-2010)
3-7-8: REPORTING AND REMITTING:
Each service supplier shall, on or before the last day of each month, make a return to the Tax Administrator on forms provided by him, stating the amount
of taxes billed by the service supplier during the preceding month, except as provided in subsection 3-7-5C of this Chapter. At the time the return is filed,
the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is authorized to require such further information as he
deems necessary to determine if the tax imposed hereby is being levied and collected in accordance with this Chapter. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-9: INTEREST AND PENALTY:
A. Delinquency: Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this Chapter are
delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked the first regular working day following a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday.
B. Penalty Rate: Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination pursuant to this Chapter shall attach to, and
be paid by, the person required to collect and remit at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax collected or imposed by this Chapter.
C. Additional Penalty For Fraud: The Tax Administrator is hereby empowered to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit
taxes under the provisions of this Chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the amount of the tax
collected or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.
D. Penalty Part Of Tax: Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-
1996)
3-7-10: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any such tax received from a service user which has wilfully been withheld from the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the
person required to collect and remit. Any person holding such money contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the
name of the City for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-11: DUTY TO COLLECT; PROCEDURES:
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be performed as follows:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 3-7-5C of this Chapter, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with
the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier
is less than the full amount of the energy charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a
service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In
those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charges, subsection 3-7-13C of
this Chapter will apply.
B. The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where
all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or
more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 49/581
3-7-12: ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR:
A. The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter.
B. The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this Chapter for the purpose of carrying out
and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax
Administrator's office.
C. The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this Chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here
may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in
conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office.
D. The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any commercial or industrial utility user who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by
this Chapter. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any commercial or industrial utility user who the Tax
Administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any
such exempt commercial or industrial utility user. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service supplier of the termination of any commercial or
industrial utility user's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt commercial or industrial
utility user. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-13: ASSESSMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY:
A. The Tax Administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit.
B. Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted
to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax to such person, or whenever the Tax Administrator
deems it in the best interest of the city, he may relieve such person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service
users for specified billing periods.
C. The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to
pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two (2) or more
billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due.
D. The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand
payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States
mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or,
should the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen
(15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of
twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars ($5.00). The penalty shall
become part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-14: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3)
years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of a remittance to the tax
administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-14-1: VIOLATION OF RECORDS REQUIREMENT; PENALTY:
If any person subject to record keeping under this chapter unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator's designated representative,
access to such records, the person unreasonably denying access shall be subject to a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. The
person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which denial of access is committed, continued or permitted by
such person. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this code. (Ord. 1325, 9-19-2000)
3-7-15: REFUNDS:
A. Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax
administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided: 1) the tax was paid under protest;
and 2) a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax
administrator within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and
remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from
whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the
tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to
collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from
a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any
other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 50/581
C. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto.
D. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California public utilities commission or a court
of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of
such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes
against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be
borne by the city.
E. A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary practice.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
F. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. (Ord. 1325, 9-19-2000)
3-7-16: REDUCTION OF TAX BASED ON SALES TAX RECEIPTS:
Whenever in this title a utility users tax is imposed on any person subject to the utility users tax, the amount of the utility users tax shall be reduced
proportionately whenever the preceding fiscal year exceeds the limit determined by the formula in subsection A of this section.
A. The sales tax limit which will trigger a reduction in the utility users tax shall be equal to eighty percent (80%) of the sales tax revenue received in the
1979-1980 fiscal year multiplied by the appropriations limit established annually since 1980-1981 under the provisions of article XIIIB of the California
constitution.
B. In any year in which sales tax revenue exceeds the limit established in subsection A of this section, the utility users tax imposed the following July 1
shall be reduced by the percentage that revenue exceeds the limit. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-17: UTILITY USERS ACCOUNT:
The tax administrator shall establish a utility users tax account within the general fund and shall place therein any and all taxes collected under this chapter
which are in excess of the amounts needed to balance the adopted general fund budget during any one fiscal year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
3-7-18: ANNUAL REVIEW:
A. Each year in conjunction with the annual budget deliberations and prior to September 30, the city council shall reconsider the provisions and rate of the
utility users tax as well as any taxes that may have been placed in the utility users tax account as provided in section 3-7-17 of this chapter during the
preceding and current fiscal years. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3-7-16 of this chapter, the council may reduce or suspend all or a part of
the tax rate for the current fiscal year; or may provide no tax on one or more utilities for the current fiscal year.
B. The city will give the service supplier at least one month's notification prior to any requested change in the utility users tax percentage. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-
1996)
3-7-19: APPEALS:
A. If the service user or service supplier is aggrieved by any decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, or with the failure to grant a refund or
exemption as provided for under this chapter, he may appeal to the city manager, or his or her duly authorized designee, by filing a notice of appeal
with the city clerk within fourteen (14) days of the decision or administrative ruling which aggrieved the service user or service supplier. The city clerk
shall thereupon fix a time and place for a hearing of such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing as
herein provided.
B. The decision of the city manager, or his or her duly authorized designee, shall be final unless appealed to the city council, in the manner provided for in
this section, no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date of the decision.
1. The notice of appeal shall contain the name and address of the person appealing the action, the decision appealed from and the grounds for the
appeal. A defect in the form of the notice does not affect the validity or right to an appeal. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee fixed
by resolution of the city council.
2. A city council member may appeal a decision of the city manager. The appeal shall be processed in the same manner as an appeal by any other
person but need not be accompanied by the fee prescribed for an appeal. The city council member appealing the decision is not disqualified by that
action from participating in the appeal hearing and the deliberations nor from voting as a member of the city council.
3. The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city council and shall give notice of the hearing on the appeal.
4. The city council shall hear the appeal as a new matter. The original applicant has the burden of proof. The city council may reverse or affirm the city
manager's decision in whole or in part, or may modify the decision that is being appealed, irrespective of the precise grounds or scope of the appeal.
In addition to considering the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing on the appeal, the city council shall consider all pertinent information
from the file as a result of the previous actions from which the appeal is taken.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 51/581
C. No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against
any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted.
(Ord. 1325, 9-19-2000)
Title 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
4-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED GENERALLY; COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct in the City, any business specified, named, designated or referred to in this Code without first having
procured a license from the City so to do as provided in this Title, or without complying with all of the requirements or provisions of this Title and any other
ordinance of the City now existing or which may hereafter be adopted by the City Council, and which refers or relates to such business. The commencing
or conducting of any such business without having first procured the license and paid the required license fee or without having complied with any and all
such requirements or provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day that the business is so commenced and conducted. (Ord.
1054, 8-16-1983)
4-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Manager shall have the discretion to designate any City official or employee as the licensing authority under this Title to exercise responsibility for
administration of the license and fee requirements set forth herein in this Title. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. 2000 Code)
4-1-3: FEE DEEMED TAX; ESTABLISHED BY RESOLUTION:
The fees provided for in this Title are exclusively a tax imposed for revenue purposes and imposed only with the intent of the City to have each commercial
activity, as herein provided, sustain its just share of the burden or expense of local government, and defray the costs of administration of this Title. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-4: BUSINESS REGISTRATION FEE:
Any license fee for a license issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be denominated a business registration fee. In addition to any other legend
the licensing authority considers appropriate, the business registration fee document shall carry on its face the following legend:
This business registration fee document does not constitute a permit to engage in any business. In appropriate cases when required by City ordinance a
separate permit is issued.
(Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-5: UNLAWFUL BUSINESSES:
No license shall be issued for any business which is prohibited within the City by this Code or by any ordinance of the City. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-6: DISABLED VETERANS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, every soldier, sailor or marine of the United States of America, who has received an honorable discharge
or release from active duty under honorable conditions from the service and who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a
voter of this State, shall have the right to peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other
intoxicating liquor, without payment of any license fee; and, the licensing authority shall issue to the soldier, sailor or marine without cost a license therefor,
upon presentation of proper and sufficient credentials; provided, however, that no such business shall be commenced or continued by the soldier, sailor or
marine without first procuring the license herein referred to. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-7: CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not require the payment of a license fee to conduct any business wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes; a
license fee shall not be required for the conduct of an amusement, entertainment, concert or similar activity if the receipts thereof, immediately are to be
appropriated to an established local church, school or other approved agency and used for a religious, charitable or civic purpose within the City; nor shall
any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational,
military, State, County or Municipal organization or association, if the receipts of the entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture immediately are to
be appropriated wholly for the proper and lawful purposes and objects of the association; provided, however, that nothing contained in this Section shall be
deemed to exempt the institution or organization from complying with any ordinance of the City which requires a permit from the City Council to conduct,
manage or carry on the lecture, entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, show or business. (Ord. 612, 10-28-1963)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 52/581
4-1-8: CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS:
Nothing contained in this Title with reference to the payment of license fees shall be deemed or construed as applying to any person commencing or
conducting any business which is exempt from the payment of license fees or license taxes by municipal corporations under or by virtue of the Constitution
or laws of the United States of America. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-9: VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION APPLICANTS:
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this Title, the City Council reserves the right to waive the payment of any license fee required under this Title
from any licensee who is recommended in writing to the City Council by the Vocational Rehabilitation Bureau of the State Department of Education, as
worthy of consideration, and who, after personal interview of the applicant by the City Council sitting as a committee of the whole, may be extended such a
privilege by the City Council. In case the privilege is so extended, the City Council may fix such conditions as to the City Council may seem proper or
desirable in connection with the business, occupation or activity to be so licensed and conducted by the applicant. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-10: MINORS; CONDITIONS:
Upon application therefor, and subject to any administrative requirements the City Manager may prescribe, the licensing authority is authorized to issue a
license without payment of any license fee to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years where the following conditions are present:
A. Minor person conducting business is currently enrolled in school not above high school;
B. Business activity is conducted only outside of school hours or during school vacation;
C. Business activity produces not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in gross receipts during any calendar year, and any profits therefrom,
accrue only to the applicant;
D. Only the applicant and others under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be employed in the business;
E. The applicant has filed with the licensing authority the written consent of the parent or legal guardian, to issuance of the license. (Ord. 612, 10-28-1963;
amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-11: EXEMPTION STATEMENTS:
A. Interstate Commerce: Each person claiming exemption from payment of any license fee provided for in this Title upon the grounds that the imposition of
such fee casts an undue burden upon his right to engage in commerce with foreign nations, or among the several states, or conflicts with the regulation
of interstate commerce by the United States of America, shall file a verified statement with the licensing authority of the City, disclosing the interstate or
other character of his business entitling him to such exemption. Such statement shall include the name and location of the person for whom the orders
are to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or State manager, if any, and his address; the kind of goods, wares, merchandise or
services to be delivered or performed; the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded or the services performed; the method of
solicitation or of taking orders; the location of any warehouse, factory, or plant within the State; the method of delivery; the applicant's residence, or any
other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption. The applicant shall also be required to furnish his fingerprints and thumbprints. A copy of
the order blank, contract form or other papers used by such person in taking orders shall be attached to the affidavit. An application for exemption of
license fee shall be filed with the licensing authority and the applicant shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for processing the application. If the
application is approved by the licensing authority, a certificate of exemption will be issued. The applicant shall not conduct any business prior to the
issuance of this certificate of exemption. (Ord. 751, 12-28-1970; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
B. Filing Of Statement: Any person claiming a license exemption shall file a verified statement with the licensing authority upon an application form therefor
approved by the licensing authority, stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. The licensing authority shall, upon a proper showing
contained in the verified statement, issue a license or permit to the person claiming exemption under this Section without payment to the City of the
license tax required by this Title. In addition to the above, the applicant shall obtain from the licensing authority an identification card to be carried on
his person when conducting the business. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-12: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION; BASIS FOR FEES:
A. Basis For Fee: In all cases, the amount of business license fee to be paid under the provision of this Title, by any person, is based upon the number of
persons employed, or upon the number of square feet of floor space, or upon square acre of space owned, leased, or rented, or upon the number of
vehicles used, or upon the number of machines or other devices used for any business, enterprise, game or activity, or upon the number of rooms or
units in any building or structure.
B. Renewal Application: Before any person can obtain a business license renewal, and prior to January 31 of each year, that person must file a business
license renewal application signed under penalty of perjury that all information is true, with the licensing authority for guidance in ascertaining the
amount the person is required to pay or deposit, and provide the following information: the number of employees employed by the person, or upon the
number of square feet of floor space, or upon square acre of space owned, leased, or rented, or the number of vehicles used, or the number of
machines or other devices used for any business, enterprise, game or activity by the person, or the number of rooms or units contained in the building
or structure, for the quarters in the calendar year during which the person was, or will actually be, doing business in the City.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 53/581
C. Initial Application: If a business is seeking its initial El Segundo business license, that business shall, within the first five (5) days of business activity (or
upon a timely written request, the licensing authority may grant an extension of time not to exceed 30 calendar days), file a business registration
application, signed under penalty of perjury that all information is true, with the licensing authority for guidance in ascertaining the amount the business
is required to pay or deposit, showing the number of employees employed by the business, or upon the number of square feet of floor space, or upon
square acres of space owned, leased, or rented, or the number of machines or other devices used for any business, enterprise, game or activity by the
business, or the number of rooms or units contained in the building or structure, for the quarters in the calendar year during which they will actually be
doing business in the City.
D. Maintain Records For Calculating Tax: Each person subject to any tax in this Title shall retain records documenting the information upon which any
applicable tax is calculated and which shall support the calculation of tax reflected on that person's return. Unless a subcontractor of a taxpayer has a
valid City business license, said records shall include records of the taxpayer's subcontractors and the taxpayer shall be held responsible for the failure
of any of its subcontractors to maintain records necessary to calculate any tax under this Title. Said records shall be kept for three (3) years from the
date upon which the tax to which the records related is due. Where no records are available or those available are insufficient to calculate the tax due
hereunder, the City shall have the authority to determine the tax due. Upon fifteen (15) days' notice (or upon a timely written request, the licensing
authority may grant an additional extension of time, not to exceed 15 calendar days), a taxpayer or any business which the City contends should pay
tax, must make available to the City, within the City, all records requested by the City relating to said tax.
E. Amount Due Per Statement: No statement shall be conclusive upon the City, or upon any officer thereof, as to the matters therein set forth, or
otherwise, and the same shall not prejudice the right of the City to recover any amount that may be ascertained to be due from the person, in addition
to the amount shown by the statement to be due, in case the statement should be found to be incorrect.
F. Failure To Provide Information; Penalty: If any person required by this Section to provide information fails to do so, the person shall be required to pay a
penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day if the business employs ten (10) or less employees or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day if the business
employs more than ten (10) employees until such time as the information required by this Section is properly filed with the licensing authority. That
person shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter which shall be punishable as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-
1996)
4-1-13: RECORD KEEPING AND AUDITS:
Each person subject to any tax in this Title shall retain records documenting the information upon which any applicable tax is calculated and which shall
support the calculation of tax reflected on that person's return. Said records shall include records of the taxpayer's subcontractors. The taxpayer shall be
held responsible for the failure of any of the subcontractors to maintain records necessary to calculate any tax under this Title. Said records shall be kept
for three (3) years from the date upon which the tax to which the records relate is due. Where no records are available or those available are insufficient to
calculate the tax due hereunder, the City shall have the authority to determine the tax due. Upon five (5) working days' notice, a taxpayer or any business
which the City contends should pay tax, must make available to the City at City Hall in El Segundo all records requested by the City relating to said tax.
Failure to do so may result in a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for every day, beyond the notice period, for which the person fails to comply. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-14: FALSE STATEMENTS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person required to apply for a license and pay a license fee under this Title to make any false statement on said application.
(Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
4-1-15: APPEAL PROCEDURE; BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION METHOD:
A. Hearing Request Procedure: Any applicant for a business license under this Title, or any licensee hereunder, may appeal the amount of any tax,
interest or penalty that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Title,
in the manner provided herein. Within ten (10) days of the provision of an interpretation of this Title, or of an opinion concerning this Title from a license
inspector, auditor, or designated City official, any party affected thereby may pay the tax so assessed under protest and request a hearing before the
licensing authority or his/her designee. Said hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days from the date of the first appeal and a final decision shall be
rendered at the hearing. Within ten (10) days from the date of the hearing, an appeal of the licensing authority's decision may be filed with the City
Council. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the second appeal, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing with the City Council.
However, appeal to the City Council may only be made when the dispute concerns the accuracy of calculation of the amounts due, or the facts upon
which a tax assessment is based.
B. Claim To Appeal Final Decision: A claim appealing the final decision of the licensing authority or of the City Council may be filed in writing, stating under
penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, provided such claim is filed with the licensing authority within one year of the
date of payment.
C. Nonpayment; Penalty And Interest Continue: If the full amount of the tax and any penalty and interest due is not paid, there shall be no rights of appeal,
and penalty and interest shall continue to run. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
D. Loss Of Appeal Rights: Any appeal rights provided for herein are lost if the procedures set forth herein are not fully complied with and if the appeal is
not made in writing with the licensing authority within the time specified herein. (Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; 2000 Code)
4-1-16: LICENSE PREPARATION:
It shall be the duty of the licensing authority to prepare in duplicate a license under this Title for every person liable to pay a license fee hereunder;
provided, that the licensing authority may prepare such additional number of duplicate copies thereof as the business and accounting practices of the City
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 54/581
may require. Each license shall show the amount of the fee therefor, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the
business license, and if a fixed or established place of business, the location or place where the business is to be commenced or conducted. All licenses
under this Title shall be signed by the licensing authority or his authorized deputy. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-17: INVESTIGATION, INSPECTION AND FEE:
A. Investigation By City: Notwithstanding any provisions of this Title, when in the discretion of the licensing authority it shall be deemed necessary, an
application for a business license or permit, or renewal thereof, shall be forwarded to the appropriate departments of the City, including, but not limited
to, City Manager, City Attorney, Police Department, Fire Department, and Community, Economic and Development Services Department for
investigation and/or inspection. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. Time Limit: The appropriate departments shall conduct any investigation and/or inspection to determine whether said license or permit should be issued
in accordance with the appropriate provisions of this Code. A period of not less than thirty (30) days shall be allowed for the purpose of conducting said
services.
C. Fees: In addition to the applicable licensing and permit fees, all investigation and inspection fees shall be due and payable at the time the application is
filed. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-18: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
When the required license fee has been paid and all other provisions of this Title have been complied with, the licensing authority shall issue the original
license provided for in this Title to the licensee named in the license, and shall retain the first duplicate copy of the license on file in his office. Other
duplicate copies, if any, shall be filed as the business and accounting practices of the City may from time to time require. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord.
1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-19: FEE PAYMENT:
Annual license fees shall be due and payable in advance on January 1. A license fee for a new business commenced on or after July 1 of any year shall
be prorated on a semiannual basis, except that no prorated fee shall be less than twelve dollars ($12.00). (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
4-1-20: FEE ERROR:
No error or mistake on the part of the licensing authority or otherwise in the determination, statement or collection of the amount of any license fee shall
prevent or prejudice the collection by or for the City what shall be actually due from any person commencing or conducting any business subject to a
license under this Title. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-21: TRANSFERABILITY:
A. Transferability Generally: Licenses are nontransferable; however, an owner of a relocated business may obtain a license for the business at the new
location for the unexpired calendar year upon surrendering the license issued for the former place of business and the payment of a six dollar ($6.00)
fee.
B. Acquisition Of Business: Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, where a business that is properly licensed under this Code is the subject
of an acquisition, merger or reorganization and the nature of such business will remain substantially the same as prior to the acquisition, merger or
reorganization, the owner or new owner, as the case may be, may obtain a license for the business for the unexpired calendar year upon surrendering
the previously issued license and the payment of a six dollar ($6.00) fee. The owner or new owner, as the case may be, shall provide documentation
verifying such acquisition, merger or reorganization to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance. The acquisition, merger or reorganization of an
ongoing business that is properly licensed under this Code where the nature of such business will remain substantially the same as prior to the
acquisition, merger or reorganization shall not be deemed to be a new business for purposes of Title 4 of this Code. (Ord. 1294, 2-2-1999)
4-1-22: DUPLICATE LICENSES:
The licensing authority may on receipt of an affidavit filed in the office of the licensing authority by or on behalf of any licensee stating that any license
issued under this Title has been lost or destroyed, issue a duplicate of the license to the licensee therein named. A charge of three dollars ($3.00) shall be
made for each such duplicate license issued, which sum shall be paid into the Treasury of the City to the credit of the General Fund. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-
1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-23: DISPLAY:
Every person having a license issued under the provisions of this Title and commencing or conducting the business therein mentioned at a fixed place
shall keep the license conspicuously posted and exhibited in the place of business while the same is in force. Every person having the license and not
having a fixed place of business shall carry or transport the license with him at all times while conducting the business. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-24: RENEWAL:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 55/581
Every person having a license issued under the provisions of this Title shall exhibit the same to the licensing authority or his authorized deputy when
applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any police officer of the City or by any inspector or officer thereof authorized to issue
or inspect licenses or collect license fees. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-25: VEHICLE TAGS:
In all instances in which a license is required under the provisions of this Title and a vehicle is used in conducting the business, the licensee shall request
and the licensing authority shall furnish the licensee with a suitable license tag or plate therefor, which tag or plate shall be permanently displayed in a
seven inch (7") square in the lower corner of the windshield farthest removed from the driver. The sum of fifty cents ($0.50) for the tag or plate shall be
paid by the licensee. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-26: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under this Title are granted and accepted by all parties receiving licenses with the express understanding that the City Council may
revoke the same at any time if satisfied that any of the conditions of the license or terms of this Title have been violated, that the license was obtained by
fraudulent representation or that the holder of the license is an unfit person to be trusted with the privileges granted by the license; provided, however, that
no license shall be revoked without first giving the holder an opportunity to appear before the City Council in his own behalf. On the revocation of the
license, no part of the money in the hands of the City shall be returned but the license fee shall be forfeited to the City. When the license of any person is
revoked for any cause, no new or other license shall be granted to the same person within six (6) months from the date of the revocation. (Ord. 776, 11-22-
1971)
4-1-27: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
A. Other Than Fixed Place Of Business: A license for a business from other than a fixed place of business within the City is due and payable upon the first
day of business activity, and delinquent thereafter.
B. New Business, Fixed Place: A license for a new business with a fixed place of business within the City is due and payable upon the first day of business
activity, and delinquent five (5) days thereafter.
C. Previously Licensed Business, Fixed Place: A license for a business previously licensed, or doing business in the City during the prior tax year from a
fixed place of business, is due and payable January 1, and delinquent February 1.
D. Interest: Any person who fails to pay any tax required to be paid by this Title shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction
thereof, on the amounts of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first became delinquent until paid. Interest shall run during any
period of time for which an extension of time has been granted by the City for payment of the tax. Interest required by any of the provisions of this Title
shall not be subject to waiver or compromise except as the City Council may direct. Said interest shall not be compounded, but shall be on principal
only.
E. Penalties: All taxes imposed by this Title shall be subject to the following penalties.
1. Delinquency: Any person who fails to pay any tax, or any fraction thereof required to be paid by this Title within the time required, shall pay a penalty
of twenty percent (20%) per month of the amount of the unpaid tax. Such penalty shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the tax for any
calendar year for each year that the tax is unpaid. This penalty shall accrue on the first day of each calendar month for which the tax remains unpaid.
2. Fraud: If the City official administering the tax, after notice to taxpayer and hearing, determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under this
Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of ninety percent (90%) of the amount of the unpaid tax shall be added thereto, in addition to any other penalties
set forth in this Section. Where, after notice and hearing to the taxpayer, the City determines that a corporate director, officer, or shareholder is
responsible for the fraud resulting in the nonpayment of the tax of a corporation, the City may designate the tax, interest, and penalties unpaid,
including the penalty provided for in this subsection due to said fraud as a personal debt of said director, officer, or shareholder.
3. Merger Of Interest And Penalties: Such interest as is accrued, and every penalty imposed under the provisions of this Section, shall become a part
of the tax required to be paid under this Title.
4. Penalties On Principle: All penalties imposed hereunder shall be calculated on principle only, and shall not be compounded. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-28: CREDIT FOR PENALTIES PAID:
A. Past Penalties Paid: A credit against the business license tax for past penalties paid shall be granted beginning with the tax due in January 1992, to be
calculated and administered as follows:
1. For Tax Due January 1, 1992: Any taxpayer who has been assessed and has, by September 10, 1991, paid a penalty for the tax year 1989 and/or
1990 and/or 1991, shall receive a credit in a sum equal to fifty percent (50%) of the penalty paid, to be applied against the business license tax due
January 1, 1992 and years thereafter. Said credit shall only be effective if the entire tax (less the credit) is paid before February 1, 1992. As provided
for in subsection A3 below, the credit granted hereunder may be carried over from year to year until exhausted.
2. For Subsequent Tax Years: Any taxpayer who has been assessed a penalty and paid that penalty by September 30 in the year prior to the January 1
a tax is due, may claim a credit against that tax in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of said penalty paid if the tax (less the credit) is paid before
February 1 of the year in which the tax is due.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 56/581
3. For All Tax Years: City staff shall calculate the credit granted hereunder and reflect the amount of said credit upon tax statements mailed to
taxpayers.
B. Amount Of Reduction: No tax, to which the credit granted hereunder is applied, shall be reduced by said credit to less than fifty percent (50%) of the
amount due before application of the credit, in any tax year. However, where the amount of the credit exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the tax due in any
given year, the unused balance of the credit may be carried over to future tax years and applied to the tax then due so long as the full amount of the tax
(less the credit) is paid by February 1 of the year in which the tax is due. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-29: FEE DEBT TO CITY:
The amount of any license fee imposed by this Title shall be deemed a debt to the City, and any person commencing or conducting any business without
having a license under this Title so to do shall be liable to an action by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license fee
imposed by this Title on the business. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-30: COMPLAINTS AGAINST VIOLATORS:
It is the duty of the Chief of Police to cause a complaint to be made against all persons violating any of the provisions of this Title, and as soon as he has
knowledge of the same, to deliver to the licensing authority the names of all persons not paying a license whom he believes should be charged with the
payment of a license fee. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-1-31: FAILURE TO PAY FEE:
The conviction and punishment of any person for commencing or conducting any business without a license as required by the provisions of this Title, or
without a special permit from the City Council when required, shall not excuse or exempt the person from the payment of any license fee due or unpaid
under this Title at the time of the conviction, and nothing contained in this Title shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of any of the provisions
of this Title. (Ord. 776, 11-22-1971)
4-1-32: SMALL INCOME BUSINESSES:
Upon the filing of an application for a small income business license and an affidavit stating, among other things, that the volume of contemplated business
would be so small that the regular business license fee therefor would impose a hardship of unfair proportions; and upon the City Council's finding and
determining that the representations are true and correct, the City Council may order the issuance of a small income business license which shall be for
the current fiscal year, and shall be issued upon payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) license fee. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-1-33: ENFORCEMENT:
All police officers of the City and all other authorized persons shall have and exercise their power to enter, free of charge, any place of business for which
a license is required and provided, and to demand the exhibition of the license for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the
transaction of the business, and the person then and there shall exhibit the license. (Ord. 612, 10-28-1963)
4-1-34: CONFIDENTIALITY OF TAX RECORDS:
The City shall retain as confidential all tax statements, returns and receipts submitted or provided under this Title, any records required to be submitted by
a taxpayer hereunder and any business data disclosed to the City as a result of any tax audit hereunder. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
Chapter 2
BUSINESS LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
4-2-1: FEES PAID TO CITY:
A. The amount of license fee to be paid to the city by persons commencing or conducting any business subject to this chapter are set forth in this chapter.
B. Beginning on January 1, 2011, license fees imposed in this title will be increased annually each January 1 on a percentage basis using the percentage
increase in the consumer price index ("CPI") for all urban consumers as calculated by the United States department of labor, bureau of labor statistics,
for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area, all items, calculated as follows:
1. The most recent ten (10) year CPI percentages are added together and then divided by ten (10) to derive an average ten (10) year CPI percentage
("ACPI"); and
2. The ACPI is multiplied by the amount of existing license fees. The sum of that multiplication is added to the amount of the license fees imposed by
the city for the previous calendar year.
3. For purposes of this section, a "year CPI percentage" is the percentage change in CPI based upon comparing a twelve (12) month period ending on
March 31 with the subsequent twelve (12) month period ending on March 31. For example, and without limitation, on January 1, 2011, the ACPI will
be calculated using the ten (10) years of CPI percentages that include the following time periods: March 31, 2000 to March 31, 2001; March 31, 2001
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 57/581
to March 31, 2002; and calculated in the same manner for the subsequent years with the final and tenth year CPI percentage measured from March
31, 2009 to March 31, 2010.
C. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, license fees imposed in this chapter will be increased by a minimum of one cent ($0.01) every two (2)
calendar years. (Ord. 1439, 4-13-2010)
4-2-2: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
Every person owning or operating a business which is subject to the provisions of this chapter shall pay a single license fee for all branch locations or
separate places of business within the city. In addition to the single license fee, such persons shall pay an additional nine dollars ($9.00) per year for each
branch location or separate place of business within the city. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-3: TAX REDUCTION; TAX CREDIT:
A. Tax Reduction: Except for section 4-2-4 of this chapter and increases imposed by subsection 4-2-1B of this chapter, the amount of a business license
tax imposed on any business by this title shall be reduced by ten percent (10%) and the remainder of such tax shall be reduced by an additional five
percent (5%).
B. Tax Credit: A business subject to the tax imposed by this chapter is entitled to a tax credit against the tax imposed by section 4-2-4 of this chapter
whenever it generates sales and/or use tax in the year immediately preceding the year in which the tax is due. The credit is applied to the business
registration tax due for the following year.
C. Percentage Of Tax: The tax credit referred to in subsection B of this section, will equal up to forty percent (40%) of the sales or use tax generated by the
business and received by the city during the twelve (12) month period ending on June 30 preceding the date the tax is due.
D. Amount Of Tax Credit: Under no circumstances can the amount of the tax credit for any year be calculated to be greater than the total amount of tax
due for any year under this chapter. (Ord. 1439, 4-13-2010)
4-2-4: BUSINESSES GENERALLY:
A. Unclassified Businesses; Fee Schedule: Every person engaged in a business not specifically mentioned or classified in this chapter shall pay a license
fee in accordance with the following schedule:
1. Employees: A basic fee of eighty eight dollars ($88.00) per year, which shall cover the first ten (10) employees and one hundred nine dollars
($109.00) per year for each employee in excess of ten (10) employees; and
2. Floor Area: In addition, each such person shall pay a fee of twenty one cents ($0.21) per square foot of floor area occupied for a business purpose in
excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet. A fee of nine cents ($0.09) per square foot shall be imposed on vacant space available for rent or lease
for business purposes, said fee to be payable by the person with the right to possession of the property; and
3. Additional Location: In addition, each such person shall pay nine dollars ($9.00) per year for each additional business location within the city. (Ord.
1439, 4-13-2010)
4. Tax Credit: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a credit shall be granted against the tax imposed by this section whenever a business subject to the tax
imposed by this chapter generates sales and/or use tax in the year immediately preceding the year in which the tax is due. The credit shall be
applied to the business registration tax due for the following year. The credit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) of the portion of the sales and/or
use tax generated which was awarded to the city during the twelve (12) month period ending on June 30 preceding the date the tax is due. However,
the amount of said credit shall under no circumstances be calculated to be greater than the total amount of tax due.
5. Credit For Sales And Use Tax Revenue: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a business which increases the amount of sales and use tax revenue
received by the city from the business or its activities above its "baseline", as defined hereunder, shall receive a credit to the business license tax
imposed under this chapter equal to the dollar amount of the increase above the baseline. The amount of business license tax credit shall be
determined annually and is subject to approval by the city manager. Said credit shall be applied to the business license tax owed in the next fiscal
year only; provided, that, in no event, shall the credit exceed the amount of business license tax owed.
a. Calculation Of Baseline: For the purposes of this subsection, the "baseline" for a business shall be calculated as follows:
(1) For the first fiscal year in which a credit is granted, the "baseline" shall equal the sum of sales and use tax received by the city from the
business and its activities and the business license tax imposed by the city in the prior fiscal year.
(2) For each subsequent fiscal year, the baseline amount established under subsection A5a(1) of this section shall be recalculated as follows: the
sales and use tax component of the baseline shall be adjusted to reflect any increase from the prior fiscal year in the consumer price index as
established in the report of consumer prices for all urban consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside standard metropolitan statistical
area. Said adjustment shall be based on the most recent month for which such price index figure is available on the date the adjustment is
calculated. The business license tax component of the baseline shall be recalculated to equal the amount of business license tax imposed on
the business under the fee schedule in effect at the time the recalculation is made, including any automatic increase established under this
code; provided, that, in no event, shall the amount of business license tax be less than the amount under subsection A5a(1) of this section.
b. Eligibility: A business is not eligible to receive any business license tax credits under this subsection A5 while the business is receiving a business
license tax credit under section 3-2-4 of this code.
c. Business Relation Program: The business license tax credit established under this subsection A5 shall be known as the business relation program
of the city.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 58/581
B. Employee Defined: For the purpose of this section, the term "employee" shall mean any person employed by the business and shall include an
independent contractor and persons employed by the independent contractor, unless the independent contractor and/or persons employed by the
independent contractor has a valid city business license as prescribed in chapter 1 of this title and this chapter.
C. Number Of Employees Determined: The total number of employees for each business for purposes of this section shall be determined by averaging the
total number of employees employed by each business during each of the four (4) calendar quarters preceding the date the tax is paid.
D. Floor Area Defined: For the purpose of this section, "floor area" means the total floor space in terms of square footage occupied by an owner, lessee or
renter in a building except:
1. Elevator shafts;
2. Stairwells;
3. Courts or atriums, uncovered and open to the sky;
4. Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment; and
5. Parking areas. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-5: NEW BUSINESSES:
A. Initial Tax: Any business not specifically mentioned or classified in this chapter which is locating, or doing business in the city for the first time shall,
before receiving a business license from the city, pay the tax imposed by section 4-2-4 of this chapter. The amount of said tax shall be calculated based
upon the taxpayer's best estimate of the average quarterly number of employees, square feet, and business locations which the business will have
within the city the remainder of that calendar year.
B. Adjustment: Each new business shall, upon renewal of its business license in the first full year following the year it began doing business in the city, be
subject to an adjustment. This adjustment shall be based upon the difference between the estimates of employees, and square feet occupied supplied
by the business to the city at its initial application, and the actual average quarterly number of employees, and square feet, and business locations
which the taxpayer had during its initial year of doing business in the city. The licensing authority shall recalculate this initial tax based upon these
actual figures and, if the resulting amount is greater than the actual tax paid by the taxpayer in the preceding year, shall impose a surcharge to be
collected at the same time, and in the same way as the renewal tax. If the actual tax is less than the initial tax, the licensing authority shall apply a
credit against the renewal tax in the amount of the difference. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
4-2-6: REFUND OF TAX ON PROPERTY AVAILABLE FOR RENT OR LEASE:
A. Any taxpayer who has paid the tax for property available for rent or lease imposed by subsection 4-2-4A2 of this chapter, who leases all or any part of
the property by June 30 of the year in which the tax was due and paid, and the new occupant has paid a square footage tax for its occupancy, shall be
entitled to a refund up to one hundred percent (100%).
B. If all or any part of the property is rented by December 31 of the year in which the tax is paid, and the new occupant has paid a square footage tax for
its occupancy, the taxpayer shall receive a refund up to fifty percent (50%).
C. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to apply for the refund authorized herein, and to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the licensing authority
that the prerequisites to receipt of the refund have been satisfied. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
4-2-7: ADVERTISING:
A. Billboards Or Signboards: Every person engaged in the business of contracting, maintaining, using, or leasing billboards or signboards, or posting,
sticking, tacking, or affixing or painting bills or signs, or both upon the same, shall pay a business license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum for
each such billboard or signboard.
B. Lights: Every person advertising by means of portable searchlights, or arc lights, or light producing apparatus or equipment, shall pay a business
license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00) per quarter. The license shall be subject to compliance with all requirements of the traffic ordinances and
regulations of the City.
C. Vehicle Signs: Every person advertising by means of portable signs mounted on vehicles, when not in connection with any business licensed under
subsection D of this Section, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year. The license shall be subject to
compliance with all requirements of the traffic ordinances and regulations of the City.
D. Sound Trucks: Every person advertising by means of sound trucks, portable loudspeakers, or sound-producing apparatus or equipment, shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year. The license shall be subject to compliance with all requirements of the traffic
ordinances and regulations of the City. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-8: AGENTS, SOLICITORS AND SALESMEN:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 59/581
Agents, solicitors, and salesmen selling or soliciting, or taking orders for the sale or furnishing of any paintings, pictures, portraits, photographs, orders for
advertising or for any goods, wares, merchandise, or service at retail not otherwise provided for herein, when not in connection with any fixed place of
business within the City licensed under this Title, shall pay a business license tax of sixty dollars ($60.00) per day, or two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
year for each agent, salesman, or solicitor. All such sales, solicitations and/or order taking are prohibited between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-9: AMUSEMENTS:
A. Amusement Center1:
1. Definition: An "amusement center" is defined as any place to which the public is admitted or invited, where eight (8) or more coin-operated
amusement machines are maintained, operated or available for operation.
2. Tax Amount: Every person operating an amusement center shall pay a business license tax of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year.
3. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct, or keep open any "amusement center", as defined in this Section,
within the corporate limits of the City without first having obtained a permit, in writing, from the licensing authority. In any application for an
amusement center, the licensing authority may require, in addition to other information, that the applicant furnish the information necessary to enable
the Chief of Police to make an investigation of any prior criminal activity of the applicant, or any operator of the amusement center.
4. Conditions For Approval: After an investigation by the Chief of Police, the licensing authority shall approve the application for the amusement center
permit, or renewal of such permit if he finds:
a. A completed written application form has therefor been filed; and
b. The required license fee has therefor been paid to the City Treasurer; and
c. As a result of his investigation, all applicable provisions of this subsection with regard to such permit application have been met; and
d. That the operation by the applicant will be carried on in a building, structure, and location which complies with and meets all of the health, zoning,
fire, building and safety requirements, and standards of the laws of the State and this Code applicable to such business operation; and
e. That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person connected, or associated with applicant as a partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate, or manager, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgment of an offense involving the maintenance of a
nuisance, in connection with the same or similar business operation; and
f. That the business is not a public nuisance, or has not been a public nuisance at any time within the last five (5) years; and
g. That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person connected, or associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate,
or manager, has not knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report
or record required to be filed with the Chief of Police; and
h. That the applicant has not had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant has shown a
material change in circumstances since the date of revocation.
B. Amusements Generally2: Every person operating a business where an admission, fare, or fee is charged or made, or a collection or contribution is
received (and which are not otherwise provided for in this Chapter) for entrance to amusements, such as exhibitions, shows, games, rides, tent
performances, merry-go-rounds, carousels, shoot-the-chutes, shooting galleries, Ferris wheels, pig slides, ball games, dart games, roller coasters,
grunt derbies, whip rides, scooter rides, sideshows, illusions and other amusements, or concessions similar in character to those, or any of those
hereinabove named, shall pay a business license tax of twenty dollars ($20.00) per day, or two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month, and shall obtain a
special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not
prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
4-2-10: APARTMENT HOUSES AND APARTMENT HOUSE COMPLEXES:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this Section, an "apartment house complex" is defined as two (2) or more individual buildings containing dwelling units
located upon the same property, or on contiguous property under the same ownership.
B. Tax Amount: Every person owning apartment houses, or apartment house complexes, shall pay a business license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00) per year
for up to the first three (3) dwelling units; and ten dollars ($10.00) per year for each additional dwelling unit; provided, however, that the dwelling units
used in computing the obligation to pay the business license tax shall be the dwelling units rented or leased, and the dwelling units held for rent or
lease shall not include a dwelling unit occupied by the owner. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-11: AUTOMOBILE AND TRUCK WRECKING OR DISMANTLING:
Every person engaging in the business of automobile, truck wrecking or dismantling, and/or operating an automobile, truck wrecking or dismantling yard,
and/or outdoor yard of similar character, shall pay a business license tax of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year, and shall obtain a special permit from
the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252,
4-9-1996)
4-2-12: BANKRUPT STOCK AND FIRE SALES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 60/581
Every person conducting bankrupt stock sales, fire sales, damaged goods sales, and sales of similar character (not at auction), shall pay a business
license tax of thirty six dollars ($36.00) per month, one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per quarter, or four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year, and shall
obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not
prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-13: BARBERSHOPS:
Every person operating a barbershop shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-14: BEAUTY PARLORS:
Every person operating a beauty parlor and similar businesses shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-15: BILLIARD AND POOLROOMS:
Every person operating a billiard room and/or poolroom shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year, which shall
include the right to sell cigars, tobacco, soft drinks, chewing gum, and confections, subject to first obtaining a special permit as provided by Sections 4-7-1
and 4-7-2 of this Title. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-16: BOWLING ALLEYS:
Every person operating a bowling academy, bowling alley, bowling center, or similar business shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars
($103.00) basic, plus four dollars ($4.00) per lane per year. A license granted under this Section shall include the right to sell bowling equipment,
paraphernalia, and bowling apparel, but shall not include the right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, or refreshment, or confectionery stand or
concession, or any other type of business, except as specifically authorized above. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-17: CHEMICAL, PETROLEUM, CEMENT OR CRYOGENIC PRODUCTS; SMELTERS OR REFINERIES:
Every person owning or operating a business engaged in the processing or manufacturing of chemical, petroleum, cement or cryogenic products; and
every person owning or operating a business engaged in smelting or refining shall pay a business license fee in accordance with the following schedule:
A. A basic fee of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year which shall cover the first ten (10) employees.
B. One hundred twenty seven dollars ($127.00) per year for each employee in excess of ten (10) employees.
C. One thousand five hundred thirty one dollars ($1,531.00) per year per square acre of space owned, leased or rented for the purpose of producing,
manufacturing or processing chemical, petroleum, cement or cryogenic products; or for the purpose of smelting or refining.
D. Thirty six dollars ($36.00) per year for each vehicle in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds (gross vehicle weight) owned or operated in the conduct of
the business.
E. Eleven dollars ($11.00) per year for each additional business location within the City.
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a credit shall be granted against the tax imposed by this Section whenever a business subject to the tax imposed by this
Chapter generates sales and/or use tax in the year immediately preceding the year in which the tax is due. The credit shall be applied to the business
registration tax due for the following year. The credit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) of the portion of the sales and/or use tax generated which was
awarded to the City during the twelve (12) month period ending on the June 30 preceding the date the tax is due. However, the amount of said credit
shall under no circumstances be calculated to be greater than the total amount of tax due.
G. Any person subject to this Section paying a delinquent utility user tax or a tax concerning which, in the opinion of the City Manager, a good faith dispute
exists may enter into a settlement agreement to be ratified by the City Council which entitles the taxpayer to a credit equal to seventy five percent
(75%) of the paid delinquent or disputed utility user tax (excluding penalties and interest). Said credit must be applied for within three (3) tax years from
the date of payment. The maximum credit to be applied against the business license tax in any year shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total credit
available hereunder. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-18: CHRISTMAS TREE SALES:
Every person engaged in the business of Christmas tree sales shall pay a business license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-19: CIRCUSES, WILD WEST SHOWS OR SIDESHOWS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 61/581
Every person operating a circus or wild west show, not including any sideshows, shall pay a business license tax for the first day of two hundred dollars
($200.00), and one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per day thereafter. A sideshow shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00)
per sideshow for the first day, and fifty dollars ($50.00) per sideshow per day for each day thereafter. Every such person shall obtain a special permit from
the City Council to operate such circus, wild west show, or sideshow, prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in
any manner not prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-20: COIN-OPERATED MACHINES OR DEVICES:
A. Vending Machines (Persons Not Primarily Engaged In Business Of Renting, Leasing Or Operating):
1. Every person not primarily engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or operating coin-operated vending machines for which a license is required
by subsection B of this Section, who places, maintains, and operates, or offers for operation, a vending machine or machines, or a vending device or
vending devices which vends or delivers merchandise of any character, or provides a service for which the coin or coins are inserted, shall pay a
business license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year per vending machine or vending device.
2. This Section shall not apply to subsections C, D and E of this Section.
B. Coin-Operated Devices (Persons Engaged In Business Of Renting, Leasing Or Operating):
1. Every person engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or operating coin-operated vending machines shall pay a business license tax of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
2. This Section shall not apply to subsections C, D and E of this Section.
C. Automatic Laundry And Dry Cleaning Establishments: Every person engaged in the laundry and dry cleaning business where coin-operated laundry
and dry cleaning machines are used in the operation of the business, and which are not preempted by section 16002.2 of the State Business and
Professions Code, shall pay a business license tax of two dollars ($2.00) per year per machine; provided, however, that the business license tax shall
not be less than one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year.
D. Automatic Washers And Dryers (Persons Not Primarily Engaged In Renting, Leasing Or Operating): Every person not primarily engaged in the business
of renting, leasing, or operating coin-operated automatic washers and dryers who places, maintains, and operates, or offers for operation automatic
washers and dryers for which coins are inserted, shall pay a business license tax of two dollars ($2.00) per year per machine.
E. Automatic Washers And Dryers (Persons Engaged In Business Of Renting, Leasing Or Operating): Every person renting, leasing, or operating coinoperated
automatic washers and dryers, whose business is limited exclusively to the renting, leasing, or operating of such machines shall pay a
business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year.
F. Devices With Amusement Features: Every person owning a coin, or token operated machine or device having an amusement or skill feature connected
therewith, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year per machine. Licenses granted under this Section shall be
revocable at any time, at the pleasure of the City Council for any reason which the City Council may deem appropriate.
G. Seal Affixed To Devices: Every person owning a machine or device, which is required to pay a business license tax under the provisions of this Title,
shall have conspicuously affixed thereto a legible and current official seal or sticker issued by the license collector of the City for such machine or
device licensed; the seal shall include the year of issuance, and the number of the license under which it is issued. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-21: CONCERT OR OPERA:
Every person operating a concert, opera, entertainment, or other show, exhibition or performance not exceeding two (2) performances during any one
calendar month shall pay a business license tax of four dollars ($4.00) per month, and shall obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to
engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-22: CONTRACTORS:
A. General, Electrical, Plumbing: Every person engaged in the business of contracting, in any of the following trades, shall pay a business license tax of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year: general building contractor, general building contractor (speculative), electrical contractor, and plumbing
contractor. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
B. Definitions; Provisions:
1. General Building Contractor Defined: A "general building contractor", as used in this Chapter, is a contractor or person whose principal contracting
business is in connection with any structure built, or to be built, for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind, requiring in its construction the use of two (2) or more unrelated building trades or crafts or to do or to superintend the whole or
any part thereof.
2. General Building Contractor (Speculative) Defined: A "general building contractor (speculative)", as used in this Chapter, is a contractor or person
who builds or constructs a building or structure on property owned, possessed or controlled by him for the purpose of selling or disposing of the
same during, or subsequent to, construction or erection thereof.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 62/581
3. Additional Fee: Nothing contained within this Chapter shall be construed to permit any general building contractor or any general building contractor
(speculative) to operate, in addition to his regular business of general building contracting or general building contracting (speculative) any one
specialized building trade business or subcontracting business, for which a sub or specialty contractor's license is required, without the payment of
an additional fee as prescribed for the business by subsection E of this Section.
4. Architect Or Engineer: Provided, further, that any architect or engineer who, in addition to his regular professional duties of designing and
superintending the design and erection of any building or structure, also acts in the capacity of a "general building contractor" or "general building
contractor (speculative)" as defined in this Section, or who subcontracts or employs labor to perform any or all of the work involved either acting for
himself or the owner of the building shall pay the same fee as a general building contractor or a general building contractor (speculative), as the case
may be.
5. Exclusion: The provisions of this Section do not include anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating them into or
consuming them in the performance of the work of a general building contractor or general building contractor (speculative).
6. Furnish Proof Of Type Of Employment: Every person who represents or claims that the work being done or performed by him is being done or
performed by the hour or by the day's work shall furnish to the license collector or his authorized deputy, if asked, an affidavit from his employer or
from the owner of the building or structure being erected or constructed stating the nature of the work, the wages, fee or commission being paid and
the location of the work. Any person holding a State contractor's license will be considered a contractor if he superintends or contracts for a fee the
erection or construction of any building or structure in the City and shall be required to pay the same license fee as a general building contractor.
(Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
C. Lathing And Plastering: Lathing and plastering contractors shall pay a business license tax of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per year.
D. Repairs And Alterations:
1. Fee Imposed: Exceptions: Every person engaged in the business of minor construction, alterations, improvements, or repair work, or every person
undertaking any project by one or more contracts, the aggregate contract price of which, for labor, materials, and all other items is less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), shall pay a business license tax of twenty four dollars ($24.00) per year. This type of license shall not be issued, or apply
in any case wherein the work of construction is only a part of a larger or major operation, whether undertaken by the same or a different contractor,
or in which a division of the operation is made on contracts of amounts less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the purpose of evading the
obtaining of a license, or the payment of a license tax under this Title or any of the provisions thereof.
2. Accidents Or Fire Damage: Wherein repairs to damages resulting from accident or fire do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) total
valuation, a general license covering the activities of all trades involved in repair work may be issued to the prime contractor for the one project for a
business license tax of forty eight dollars ($48.00).
E. Subcontractors Or Specialty Contractors:
1. Definition: A "subcontractor" or "specialty contractor", for the purposes of this Title, is defined as a person who performs construction work requiring
special skill, and whose principal contracting business involves the use of a specialized building trade or craft, not otherwise provided for herein.
2. Separate License; Fee: Every person commencing, or carrying on the work of a subcontractor, shall secure a separate City license, and shall pay for
the same a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-23: DANCES AND DANCE SCHOOLS:
A. Public Dances: Every person conducting public dances, where an admission fee or per dance fee is charged, shall pay a business license tax of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) per year, and shall obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council
may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by law.
B. Other Dances: Every person engaged in a business where any cafe, restaurant, or any similar establishment affords its patrons the privilege or
opportunity to dance, without charge for the dancing, shall pay a business license tax of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year, and shall obtain a
special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not
prohibited by law.
C. Dancing School Or Academy (Talent School): Every person conducting a dancing school or dancing academy, or talent school or talent academy, shall
pay a business license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-24: DELIVERY VEHICLES:
Every person engaged in a business not having a fixed place of business within the City which, in connection with said business, delivers any goods or
services within the City shall pay a business license tax of seventy two dollars ($72.00) per year per vehicle. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-25: DRIVE-IN THEATERS:
Every person operating a drive-in theater shall pay a business license tax of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year, but the license shall not include the
right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, lunch counter, refreshment or confectionery, or like stand or concession, or any other type of business. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-
1996)
4-2-26: FOOD CATERERS (VEHICLE):
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 63/581
Every person conducting sales of food from a vehicle shall pay a business license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per vehicle. (Ord. 1252, 4-
9-1996)
4-2-27: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Every person engaged in a "home occupation", as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City in Section 15-1-6 of this Code, shall pay a business license
tax of twenty four dollars ($24.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-28: HOTELS, MOTELS, AUTO COURTS AND LODGING HOUSES:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a hotel, motel, auto court, or lodging house shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three
dollars ($103.00) per year where the same has less than fifteen (15) rooms, two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year where the same has fifteen (15) or
more rooms, but not more than forty nine (49) rooms, and four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year where the same has fifty (50) rooms or more. (Ord.
1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-29: JUNK COLLECTORS:
Every person engaged in the business of junk collection shall pay a business license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for each vehicle used.
"Person engaged in the business of junk collection" as used herein, means a person engaged in the business of going from house to house, or from place
to place, gathering, collecting, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, or other articles commonly known as "junk";
provided, however, that any person licensed under the provisions of this Section shall not solicit for "free will offerings" of such materials as are above
enumerated, or referred to under the guise or representation that the same are being collected by or for any charitable, or other organization entitled to
obtain a free permit, as provided for under other provisions of this Title. Provided, however, that the provisions of this Title relating to junk collectors shall
not apply to official collectors of the City, or collectors specially authorized by the City Council to make the collections as a public service. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-
1996)
4-2-30: LAWN SERVICE AND WINDOW CLEANING:
Every person providing lawn service, gardening service, window cleaning service, and similar services, shall pay a business license tax of fifty dollars
($50.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-31: LOANS:
Every person engaged in the business of lending, financing, or money-lending shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per
year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-32: LUMBER AND BUILDING MATERIAL YARDS, JUNK YARDS AND NURSERIES:
Every person owning or operating a business engaged in the sale of lumber, building material, or operation of a building material wrecking yard,
secondhand building material yard, junk yard, or outdoor yard of similar character or wholesale or retail nursery shall pay a business license tax, in
accordance with the following schedule:
A. A basic fee of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year which shall cover the first ten (10) employees;
B. One hundred twenty seven dollars ($127.00) per year for each employee in excess of ten (10) employees;
C. One thousand five hundred thirty one dollars ($1,531.00) per year per square acre of space owned, leased, or rented for the purposes set forth above;
D. Thirty six dollars ($36.00) per year for each vehicle in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds (gross vehicle weight) owned or operated in the conduct of
business;
E. Eleven dollars ($11.00) per year for each additional business location within the City;
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a credit shall be granted against the tax imposed by this Section whenever a business subject to the tax imposed by this
Chapter generates sales and/or use tax in the year immediately preceding the year in which the tax is due. The credit shall be applied to the business
registration tax due for the following year. Credit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) of the portion of the sales and/or use tax generated which was
awarded to the City during the twelve (12) month period ending on June 30 preceding the date the tax is due. However, the amount of said credit shall
under no circumstances be calculated to be greater than the total amount of tax due. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-33: MOTION PICTURES OR TELEVISION (COMMERCIAL USE):
Every person engaged in the motion picture or television production business not operating from a fixed place of business in the City, using either public or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 64/581
private property, shall pay a business license application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus a license fee of one hundred three dollars ($103.00)
per day. Every person subject to this Section shall also obtain a permit pursuant to Chapter 11 of this Title. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-34: PARKING LOTS:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a parking lot for vehicles which is open to the public generally and which also provides shuttle service
from the parking lot to any other location shall pay a business license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) per parking stall per year. The business license tax
imposed by this Section shall not apply to the number of stalls, if any, occupied on a regular basis by employees of the business or by tenants of the
building which is serviced by the parking lot. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-35: PEDDLING:
A. Generally: Every person peddling services, not otherwise mentioned in this Chapter, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars
($103.00) per year, and shall obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition
such permit in any manner not prohibited by law.
B. Food: Every person peddling foods, foodstuffs, and food products, other than from catering food trucks, shall pay a business license tax of fifty dollars
($50.00) per year where the person is on foot, and one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year where the same is sold from a vehicle, and shall
obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not
prohibited by law.
C. Miscellaneous Merchandise: Every person peddling any goods, wares, magazines, or merchandise not otherwise provided for in this Chapter, shall pay
a business license tax of ten dollars ($10.00) per day where such person is on foot, and twenty dollars ($20.00) per day where the same is sold from a
vehicle, and shall obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit
in any manner not prohibited by law.
D. Popcorn, Souvenirs: Every person peddling popcorn, peanuts, gum, candy, confections, or toys, such as balloons, flags, pennants, banners, canes,
buttons, badges, horns, musical or noise making instruments, serpentines, souvenirs, and similar articles shall pay a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
per day where the same is sold from a vehicle, and shall obtain a special permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The
City Council may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by law. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-36: REST, CONVALESCENT, GUEST AND FAMILY CARE HOMES; CHILDCARE NURSERIES:
A. Fee Imposed; State And Local Approval: Every person operating rest, convalescent, guest homes, and childcare service shall pay a business license
tax of twenty four dollars ($24.00) per year. Every person operating a family care home shall pay a business license tax of twelve dollars ($12.00) per
year. No such license shall be issued without the written approval of:
1. The State Department of Social Services;
2. The County Health Officer;
3. The Chief of the Fire Department;
4. The Community, Economic and Development Services Director.
B. Inspection: All such establishments shall be subject to inspection by the City at any time. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; 2000 Code)
4-2-37: RUBBISH OR GARBAGE COLLECTION:
Every person engaged in the operation of rubbish or garbage collection shall pay a business license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for each
vehicle used in the City. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-38: SCHOOLS (PRIVATE):
Every person operating a private school shall pay a business license tax of twenty four dollars ($24.00) per year. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-39: STREET STANDS:
Every person operating street stands for the selling of any goods, wares, or merchandise on any portion of the public streets within the City shall pay a
business license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month; provided, that no license shall be issued for the stand until a permit has been obtained from the
City Council, and that the application for the permit shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or occupant of the premises abutting
immediately upon that portion of the street which the applicant desires to use; and further provided, that the City Council shall have the right to grant,
conditionally grant, or deny the permit under this Section in its discretion. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-40: TAXICAB OR AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 65/581
Every person engaged in the business of providing taxicabs or automobiles for hire shall obtain a special permit from the City Council prior to engaging in
such activities, and the City Council may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by law. Permittee shall pay an annual business license tax of:
a) one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year for each vehicle operated within the City limits; or b) a flat business license tax for the entire fleet of
taxicabs or automobiles for hire of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year; whichever is greater. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-41: THEATERS AND SHOWS:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a theater, motion picture show, playhouse, events, and all other shows or exhibitions (except those
conducted in the open or under canvas) not otherwise provided for in this Chapter, shall pay a business license tax of one hundred three dollars ($103.00)
per year. Any such license, however, shall not include the right to conduct a cafe, restaurant, or lunch counter. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-42: TRANSIENT VENDORS, MERCHANTS:
A. Transient Food Vendors: Every transient food vendor shall pay a business license tax of forty eight dollars ($48.00) per day, and shall obtain a special
permit from the City Council to do so prior to engaging in such activities. The City Council may condition such permit in any manner not prohibited by
law.
B. Transient Merchants: Every transient merchant, which shall include all such persons doing business at a fixed place of business for a period of less
than thirty (30) consecutive days, and who does not deal exclusively in food or foodstuffs for human consumption, shall pay a business license tax of
forty dollars ($40.00) per day.
C. Transient Merchant At Fairs: Notwithstanding subsection B of this Section, every transient merchant, which shall include any person doing business at
a fixed place of business for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days and who is participating in a charitable or a civic event such as a fair,
shall pay a business license tax of ten dollars ($10.00), which shall cover the period during which the charitable or civic event is open to the public.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-43: WAREHOUSES:
Every person engaged in the business of operating a warehouse or storage facility shall pay a license fee of one hundred three dollars ($103.00) per year
plus fourteen cents ($0.14) per square foot of space used for such purpose for each business location within the city. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-2-44: TAX REDUCTIONS AND SUSPENSIONS:
The city council may suspend or reduce tax rates imposed by this title by resolution. (Ord. 1439, 4-13-2010)
Chapter 3
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context that
a different meaning is intended:
ALARM BUSINESS: The business by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of: selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, replacing,
moving or installing any burglary and robbery alarm system or causing it to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or
installed in or on any building, structure, or facility; provided, however, that the provisions of this Section do not include the City which may be engaged in
the nonprofit installation and maintenance of tactical alarm systems and a firm which maintains an alarm terminal register within the El Segundo Police
Department; provided, further, that alarm business shall not include the sale of alarm systems or alarm system components where the seller does not
provide any installation or other service off of seller's premises.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is
activated.
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry
into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility or both, and which emits
a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, silent alarms, direct dial telephone devices,
audible and proprietor alarms, in guard shacks. Not included in this definition are auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company to protect telephone
company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal activated through subscriber negligence or for reasons not of an emergency nature or when activated due to malfunction
of any segment of the alarm system and which necessitates response by the El Segundo Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist.
PROPRIETOR ALARM: An alarm system which does not request public response when activated or is not reasonably expected to result in some public
response.
SILENT ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises which does not generate an audible sound on the premises when
it is activated but transmits a signal directly to the Police Department or alarm business. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 66/581
4-3-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Alarm Business: No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm business without first applying for and receiving an alarm business permit
therefor. This permit shall be in addition to all other licenses or permits required by the City. Provided, however, that any person holding a business
license on the effective date of this Chapter may continue to operate an alarm business without the permit hereinabove required for the first ninety (90)
days following the effective date of this Chapter. (Ord. 927, 4-19-1977; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Alarm System: No person shall have installed on any premises under his control an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm
system permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977; amd. 2000 Code)
4-3-3: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to products of combustion detection systems, water flow alarm systems, proprietor alarms, audible
alarms affixed to motor vehicles, or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California
Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 927, 4-19-1977)
4-3-4: APPLICATIONS REQUIRED; FEE:
Applications for all permits required hereunder shall be filed with the licensing authority and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. The fee is
established to cover part of the cost of investigating and processing the applications and permits and is not refundable. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977; amd. Ord.
1127, 11-15-1988)
4-3-5: INVESTIGATION:
Every application for an alarm business permit shall require the fingerprints of the applicant or, if the applicant is not a natural person, the fingerprints of
the agent applying on behalf of the applicant. The licensing authority shall refer each application for a permit or renewal of such permit to the Chief of
Police, who upon receipt thereof shall conduct an investigation to determine whether said permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. The Chief of Police may require additional information of applicants which he deems necessary to conduct the investigation. The Chief of Police
may dispense with the investigation upon being furnished an authenticated copy of a current permit issued by another governmental agency located in the
County of Los Angeles. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-3-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS; NOTIFICATION:
Upon completion of the investigation required by Section 4-3-5 of this Chapter, the Chief of Police shall issue all permits described in this Chapter and
shall forward the permit to the licensing authority. The licensing authority shall notify the permittee of the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977;
amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-3-7: ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
Any application for any alarm business permit may be denied if:
A. The investigation required in Section 4-3-5 of this Chapter concludes that the character, reputation or moral integrity of the applicant is inimical to the
safety or general welfare of the community; or
B. The applicant knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in an application for a permit or in any report or record
required to be filed with the City; or
C. The applicant has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving theft or embezzlement; or
D. The applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant can show a material change in
circumstances since the date of revocation. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-8: PERMIT FEES:
A. Alarm Business: An annual permit fee for an alarm business permit shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00), and shall be due and payable on the date of
application and on the anniversary date of such in each subsequent year for each alarm business. Said permit fee shall not be prorated. (Ord. 921, 2-
15-1977)
B. Alarm System: The fee for an alarm system permit shall be a one time fee. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-3-9: POLICE DEPARTMENT RESPONSE SERVICE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 67/581
A. Permittee Of Silent Alarms: A service fee shall be paid to the City by each subscriber of an alarm system, or permittee of a silent alarm not exempt, for
each response made by the Police Department to the location of a false alarm after the first three (3) responses are made during the same fiscal year.
B. Billing: The licensing authority shall cause to be issued a monthly bill for the unpaid service fees accrued during the billing period and any prior periods.
Such bill shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days after the billing date. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-3-10: NOTICE OF DECISION:
Notice of decision of the Chief of Police with reference to a permit application under this Chapter shall be made to the applicant or to any other person
requesting such notice within forty five (45) days after receipt of application for a permit or renewal of such permit. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-11: APPEAL PROCEDURE; FILING FEE:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police with reference to the approval or denial of an application for a permit, or renewal of such
permit or suspension of a permit, shall have the right of appeal. An appeal must be perfected within fifteen (15) days after notice of the decision or order of
suspension by filing with the City Clerk a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal, together with a filing and processing fee in the
sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-12: WAIVER:
Failure to file a letter of appeal within said fifteen (15) days shall constitute a waiver of appellant's right to a hearing but the City Council in its discretion
may nevertheless grant such a hearing. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-13: PUBLIC HEARING:
A. Notice Of Hearing: The City Clerk shall fix the time and place of the hearing at a date no more than twenty five (25) days after receipt of the letter of
appeal. The City Clerk shall give the appealing party and any other person requesting the same at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place of
such hearing. The notice shall be substantially in the following form but may include other information:
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held at , on , at the hour of , at which time you may show cause why the appeal which you have filed
should be sustained.
B. Conduct Of Hearing; Burden Of Proof: At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal from the decision of the Chief of Police, the City
Council shall give the appealing party, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the
determination of the Chief of Police should not be upheld. In all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no
substantial evidence to support the action taken by the Chief of Police. The determination of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 921, 2-
15-1977)
4-3-14: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Alarm Business: The following shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of any alarm business permit:
1. The violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; or
2. Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by an alarm business permittee, his employee or agent or at the direction of an alarm business
permittee, his employee or agent in a situation where no burglary or robbery is actually in progress; or
3. Where the permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading statement of a material fact in the application for a license or
in any report to be filed with the City agency; or
4. Where the permittee has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant can show a material
change in circumstances since the date of revocation; or
5. Where any alarm business permittee is convicted of a felony or any crime involving theft, embezzlement or where the character, reputation or moral
integrity of the permit holder or his employee is determined by the Chief of Police to be inimical to public safety or the general welfare of the
community.
B. Alarm System: The following shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of any alarm system permit:
1. The violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; or
2. Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by a subscriber, his employee or agent or at the direction of a subscriber, his employee or agent in a
situation where no burglary or robbery is actually in progress; or
3. Where the permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading statement of a material fact in the application for a license or
in any report to be filed with the City agency; or
4. Where the permittee has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant can show a material
change in circumstances since the date of revocation; or (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 68/581
5. Where an alarm system activates more than seven (7) alarms during any fiscal year; provided, however, that a permit shall not be suspended or
revoked pursuant to this subsection B5 until after the Chief of Police has given fifteen (15) days' written notice to the permittee of his intention to
suspend or revoke the permit. During such fifteen (15) day period the permittee may show cause to the Chief of Police why the permit should not be
revoked or suspended; or
6. Where the permittee fails to pay the service charges billed. (Ord. 993, 10-7-1980)
C. Order Of Suspension:
1. Any permit issued hereunder may be suspended by the Chief of Police pursuant to the above grounds. The Chief of Police, in the case of such
suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for such suspension. The order shall be
effective immediately if personally served, or seventy two (72) hours after the same has been deposited in the course of transmission in said United
States Postal Service.
2. Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the permittee shall cease all operations under such permit, and shall surrender said permit to
the Chief of Police. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-15: FILING OF APPEAL; COUNCIL DETERMINATION:
A. The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee files an appeal of the
order of suspension in the manner set forth in Sections 4-3-11 through 4-3-13 of this Chapter.
B. Where an appeal is filed, the order shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the City Council which shall act upon the same at a meeting of
the City Council fixed by the City Clerk, in the manner set forth in Sections 4-3-11 through 4-3-13 of this Chapter. Such suspension shall become a
revocation if the City Council upholds the suspension. The determination of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-16: REINSTATEMENT:
A permit may be considered for reinstatement by the Chief of Police two (2) months after revocation of said permit if the applicant can show a material
change in the circumstances resulting in the revocation. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-17: AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS:
A. Provide Names And Phone Numbers: Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall provide the Chief of Police with the names and telephone
numbers of the persons to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour of the day or night that the alarm system is
activated. It is the responsibility of every person maintaining an alarm system to assure that the names and telephone numbers recorded with the
Police Department are kept current.
B. Alarm Sounds: No person shall install an audible alarm system which creates a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense
warning system.
C. Time Limit On Sound Emission: No person shall install an audible alarm system which does not automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound
within one-half (1/2) hour after it is activated. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-18: FALSE ALARMS:
A person shall not knowingly turn in a false alarm. This Section does not prohibit a test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the Chief of Police.
Activation of audible alarm systems for one second or less shall not be considered as a false alarm. (Ord. 921, 2-15-1977)
4-3-19: MALFUNCTION REPAIR:
After any false alarm caused by a malfunction of the alarm system, an alarm system permittee shall cause the alarm system to be repaired so as to
eliminate such malfunction before reactivating the alarm. A person shall not reactivate such alarm until such repairs have been made. (Ord. 921, 2-15-
1977)
Chapter 4
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this Section:
AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE OR VEHICLE FOR HIRE: Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle of private appearance, not equipped with a taximeter,
used for the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the City and not over a defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 69/581
beyond the boundary limits of the City, at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week or per month, and the vehicle is routed under the direction of
the passenger or the person hiring the same.
DRIVER: Includes every person in charge of, driving or operating any passenger carrying or motor propelled vehicle, either as agent, employee or
otherwise.
SIGHTSEEING AUTOMOBILE: Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the City,
and not necessarily over a defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the City, for the purpose of
sightseeing or showing points of interest, and charging a fee or compensation therefor.
STREET: Any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel.
STREET STAND: A portion of a street designated by either the City Council or by the traffic authority for the use, while awaiting employment of any
passenger carrying or motor propelled vehicle.
TAXICAB: Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle of a distinctive color or where the driver's seat is separated from the passenger's compartment by
a glass partition, or of public appearance, such as is in common usage in this country for taxicabs, or equipped with a taximeter, used for the transportation
of passengers for hire over the public streets of the City, and not over a defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary
limits of the City, at rates for distance traveled or for waiting time, or for both, and the vehicle is routed under the direction of the passenger or of the
person hiring the same.
TAXIMETER: A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a passenger carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for
distance traveled or for waiting time, or for both, and upon which the charges shall be indicated by means of figures.
TRAFFIC AUTHORITY: The Chief of Police. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-2: PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY, DETERMINATION:
The City Council, in determining whether or not public convenience and necessity exists in the case of any application for the permit required by Section 4-
4-9 of this Chapter, may take into consideration any and all facts and conditions which the Council may deem pertinent or proper, including, but not limited
to, a consideration of:
A. The financial responsibility of the applicant;
B. The effect of the granting of the permit applied for on the businesses and operations of prior permittees, then operating;
C. Whether or not prior permittees, then operating are: 1) under efficient management earning a fair and reasonable return on their capital devoted to the
service; and 2) under normal conditions adequately serving the public;
D. The applicant complies with the minimum standards as prescribed by the City Council, and other information as the traffic authority may require. (Ord.
826, 12-4-1973)
4-4-3: COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO GRANT OR DENY PERMITS:
The City Council shall have the power to grant or deny any or all the permits required or authorized by this Chapter when, in the exercise of reasonable
discretion, it has determined that the applicant has or has not complied with all the provisions of this Chapter relating to the granting of the permits. (Ord.
283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-4: PERMIT AND LICENSE REGULATIONS:
The permit required by Section 4-4-9 of this Chapter shall entitle the holder thereof to obtain a license to engage in the business described in the permit
from the City Council upon the payment of the license fee therefor. The licensing authority shall issue to the holder of the permit a license setting forth the
kind of transportation for which the license is issued and the year when issued. The permit shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973; amd.
Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-4-5: DURATION OF PERMIT:
All permits issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be for a period not to exceed one year. All these permits shall expire upon December 31 of
each year at midnight, with the exception of the operation permit which shall remain in effect until revoked or suspended by the City Council; provided,
however, that all permits issued for street stands, except those issued upon the written consent of a person operating a hotel which may be renewed
yearly, shall remain in full force and effect until the same shall be cancelled, either by the City Council or traffic authority, or upon the request of the
permittee, or the person who has given the written consent to use the stand has notified the City Council that the permission has been withdrawn. (Ord.
826, 12-4-1973)
4-4-6: PERMIT ISSUANCE; PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
At the time of the issuance of any permit under this Chapter to operate within the City any of the vehicles defined in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter, the
permittee shall pay the license fee required by Section 4-2-40 of this Title. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945; amd. Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 70/581
4-4-7: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Evidence Of Insurance: Before any permit required by Section 4-4-9 of this Chapter is issued for any vehicle defined in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter,
the owner shall be required to file with the City and thereafter keep in full force and effect evidence of insurance. Evidence of insurance shall consist of
one of the following:
1. A policy of insurance or a certificate of insurance in such form as the City Attorney may deem proper, and executed by an insurance company
approved by the City Manager, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of the
vehicles; provided, that the minimum amount of recovery in the policy of insurance specified shall be not less than the following sums:
Personal injury - $100,000.00 each person and $300,000.00 each occurrence
Property damage - $50,000.00 each occurrence
2. File with the City Council a policy of insurance or a certificate of insurance or other document different from the document required in subsection A1
of this Section, but which document the City Council approves as providing adequate protection to the public.
3. A certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State pursuant to section 16053 of the State Vehicle Code together
with such financial statements and certificates of insurance that are necessary to establish to the City Council's satisfaction reasonable ability to
respond to the minimum recoveries heretofore required for permittee to carry insurance. Such certificates and financial statements when approved
by the City Council shall constitute compliance with the requirements of this Section.
4. File with the Police Chief a document or documents which establishes to the satisfaction of the Police Chief that the permittee is licensed in another
jurisdiction and that said other jurisdiction's requirements will assure that the permittee is adequately insured.
B. Compliance Required: It is unlawful for any permittee to operate or cause to be operated any vehicle without providing one of the protections required
by subsections A1 through A4 of this Section. (Ord. 1043, 1-4-1983)
4-4-8: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City Council and also the traffic authority shall have the authority to adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
service and safety of the operation of the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-9: OPERATION PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any of the vehicles defined in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter without having first obtained a
permit from the City Council in writing so to do as provided in this Chapter; provided, however, that no such permit shall be required for the operation of
any vehicle which is being operated in accordance with the terms and conditions of a franchise granted by the City Council to the operator of the vehicle.
(Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
4-4-10: DRIVER'S PERMIT:
A. Required: No person shall drive any of the vehicles defined in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter and operated from a station within the City without having
first obtained a written driver's permit from the traffic authority of the City, and no person shall drive any such vehicle operated from a station outside
the City without having in his possession a written driver's permit from the traffic authority of the City from which the vehicle is dispatched. (Ord. 652, 5-
16-1966)
B. Application: Applicants for the permit to drive any of the vehicles defined in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter shall file with the traffic authority an application
upon forms furnished by the City containing the information required to meet the minimum standards as prescribed by the City Council, and other
information as the traffic authority may require. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
C. Qualifications: A driver's permit shall be issued by the traffic authority only after the applicant has been fingerprinted and investigation has failed to
disclose him to be an unfit or improper person to operate an automobile for hire. A permit shall not be issued to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years; nor shall a permit be issued except to a citizen of the United States or to one who has declared his intention to become a citizen. (Ord. 652,
5-16-1966)
D. Issuance: Application for a driver's permit shall be processed upon payment to the City of a processing fee for the first application by any applicant and
for each application for renewal. Each successful applicant shall be issued an identification card which he shall have in his immediate possession while
in charge of or driving a taxicab. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
E. Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A, B and D of this Section, the Chief of Police may waive the requirements for a driver's
permit in the City, provided he finds that the permittee is duly licensed by another city in the County of Los Angeles and that the requirements of such
other city are adequate to ensure that no unfit or improper person is licensed to operate an automobile for hire. The Chief of Police may prescribe an
annual fee for such waiver which said fee shall be paid to the City. (Ord. 1024, 6-1-1982)
4-4-11: VEHICLE PERMIT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 71/581
A. Permit Required: No vehicle, as defined by Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter, shall be operated within the City limits without a vehicle permit. This permit
shall be issued annually upon completion of the inspection of the vehicle and shall be nontransferable to any new or replacement vehicle. This permit
shall be issued by the traffic authority.
B. Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A, C and D of this Section, the Chief of Police may waive the requirements for a vehicle
permit in the City, provided he finds that the vehicle is duly licensed by another city in the County of Los Angeles and that the inspection procedure of
such other city is adequate to ensure the safety of the vehicle being operated in the City. The Chief of Police may prescribe an annual fee for such
waiver which said fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
C. Application: Applicants for a vehicle permit shall file with the traffic authority an application upon forms furnished by the City, containing the information
prescribed by the City Council, and other information as the traffic authority may require. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
D. Issuance: Application for a vehicle permit shall be processed upon payment to the City of an annual inspection fee. Each applicant shall be issued a
vehicle permit upon successful completion of an inspection of the vehicle. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the rear bumper,
driver's side of the vehicle. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-4-12: UNIFORM COLOR SCHEME AND INSIGNIA ON VEHICLE:
A. Adoption: No taxicab permit shall be issued to any person until a standard, distinctive and uniform color scheme, name, monogram or insignia has been
adopted by the applicant and approved by the City Council or traffic authority, which designates the owner of the vehicle.
B. Conflict Or Imitation: No permit shall be issued to any person whose color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used on such cars shall be in
conflict with, or imitate any color scheme, monogram, name or insignia used by another concern operating within the City in such a manner as to be
misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. (Ord. 406, 5-14-1952)
4-4-13: TAXIMETERS:
A. Required; Exception: Unless the owner or operator is permitted in writing by the City Council or traffic authority to post a schedule of fares in lieu of a
taximeter, it is unlawful for any owner operating any taxicab or vehicle for hire under the provisions of this Chapter to operate the vehicle, unless it is
equipped with a taximeter of such type and design as may be approved by the City Council or traffic authority.
B. Accuracy Requirements: It shall be the duty of every owner using any taximeter to at all times keep the meter accurate. The meter shall be subject to
inspection from time to time, and the City Council or any inspector of the traffic authority or peace officer is authorized at his instance, or upon the
complaint of any person, to investigate the taximeter, and upon the discovery of an inaccuracy of the taximeter, to remove or cause to be removed any
such vehicle equipped with the taximeter from the streets of the City, until the taximeter has been correctly adjusted.
C. Charges: All taxicabs and vehicles required to have taximeters under the provisions of this Chapter must base their charges on taximeters. All
taximeters shall be placed so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible by the passenger
riding in the taxicab.
D. Operation: It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab or vehicle for hire while carrying passengers to display the flag attached to the taximeter in such a
position as to denote that the taxicab or vehicle is not employed, or to throw the flag of the taximeter in a recording position when such cab or vehicle is
not actually employed, or to fail to throw the flag of the taximeter in a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. (Ord. 283, 8-
16-1945)
4-4-14: PAYMENT OF FARES:
A. Issuance Of Receipt Upon Request: It is unlawful for the operator of any taxicab or vehicle for hire upon receiving full payment for a fare as indicated by
the taximeter or schedule of fares, when the schedule is permitted in lieu of taximeter, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any passenger
making the payment.
B. Failure To Pay Fare: It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter after having hired the
same. Any person who shall hire the vehicle with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 283, 8-
16-1945)
4-4-15: CLASSIFICATION TRANSFER:
It is unlawful for the owner, driver or operator of a vehicle operating under one classification as defined in this Chapter to transfer the same to or use the
same in another classification, unless and until the public convenience and necessity shall have been established so to do as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-16: OPERATION BY OWNER OR EMPLOYEE:
No vehicle as described in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter for which a permit has been issued shall be operated by anyone but the owner thereof or an
employee of the owner. It is unlawful for the owner or any driver of the vehicles to enter into any contract, agreement or understanding between
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 72/581
themselves, by the terms of which the driver pays to or for the account of the owner a fixed or determinable sum for the use of the vehicles. (Ord. 283, 8-
16-1945)
4-4-17: STREET STAND OCCUPATION PERMIT:
A. Application: The permit authorized by subsection B of this Section shall not be granted except upon the written application of the person desiring a
street stand, filed with the traffic authority, to include the minimum standards as prescribed by the City Council, and other information as the traffic
authority may require. (Ord. 826, 12-4-1973)
B. Issuance: Permits may be issued as provided in this Section by the City Council or traffic authority to the owners of the vehicles defined in Section 4-4-1
of this Chapter, allowing any such vehicles while awaiting employment to stand at certain designated places upon the streets of the City; provided,
however, that nothing contained in this Section shall authorize the establishing of a stand at any place in the City where the standing of vehicles is
prohibited by law. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-18: STREET STAND USE REGULATIONS:
A. Operation From Stand Required: It is unlawful for an automobile for hire, vehicle for hire, sightseeing automobile or a taxicab to be operated from any
place except a stand granted by the City Council or traffic authority in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, or from a private or public garage
or parking space on private property.
B. Hotel Stands: In front of any building used for hotel purposes containing more than one hundred (100) guest rooms, stand permits may be issued on the
basis of one vehicle for every one hundred (100) guest rooms, or a major fraction thereof; provided, however, that none of such vehicles shall be
permitted to stand within a distance of fifteen feet (15') on either side of a line drawn from the center of the entrance of the building and at right angles
to the street upon which the entrance is located.
C. Block Stands: Except as otherwise provided in this Section, not more than three (3) vehicles shall be permitted to stand on any one side of a street
within the limits of any one block having a frontage of five hundred feet (500') or more, nor shall more than two (2) such vehicles be permitted to stand
upon any one side of the street within the block having a frontage of less than five hundred feet (500'); provided, however, that no permit shall be
issued for any stand to be located within fifty feet (50') of another such stand on the same side of any street; provided, further, however, that the City
Council or traffic authority may, after exercising reasonable discretion, grant from time to time renewals or extensions of permits for stands existing
upon the effective date hereof.
D. Stand Near Public Transportation System: In addition to the number of cabs that may be permitted to stand upon the street within the limits of any block
as provided in subsection A of this Section, the City Council or traffic authority may grant permission to a cab owner or company who has a stand upon
the public street at the station of any steam, interurban or bus transportation system, for additional cabs at the stand located in front of or along the side
of the steam, interurban or bus transportation system as may be necessary to meet the needs of the traveling public; provided, however, that the
consent of the owner or operator of the steam, interurban or bus transportation system is first obtained by the cab company for the additional cabs.
E. Assigned Stand: It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any of the vehicles defined in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter to stand or cause or permit the
vehicle to stand while awaiting employment at any place other than a stand designated by the City Council or traffic authority and assigned to the
owner of the vehicle.
F. Period Of Occupancy: All stands may be occupied for the full period of twenty four (24) hours.
G. Leaving Vehicle Unattended In Stand: It is unlawful for the owner or driver of any of the vehicles defined in Section 4-4-1 of this Chapter to leave the
vehicles unattended in a stand for a period of time longer than three (3) minutes. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-19: DISPLAY OF SIGNS:
A. Sign Display: Every vehicle used for carrying passengers for hire while standing upon any street in the City awaiting employment may display a sign
with the words thereon "For Hire". The sign shall be of metal or other material approved by the traffic authority, and of a uniform size of six inches by
nine inches (6" x 9"). Every vehicle used for carrying passengers for sightseeing purposes while standing upon any street in the City awaiting
employment may display a sign with the words thereon "Sightseeing Bus," giving route, points visited or destination. Every such sign shall be of metal
or of other material approved by the traffic authority and of a uniform size of eight inches by twenty four inches (8" x 24"). The outer surface of all signs
specified in this Section shall be painted, printed or enameled a dark color and the letters and figures appearing thereon shall be white.
B. Information Card Display: Every taxicab and vehicle for hire used for carrying passengers for hire shall display in the rear of the driver's seat and in the
passenger's compartment and in full view of the passengers a card not less than two inches by four inches (2" x 4"), nor more than two and one-half
inches by five inches (21/2" x 5"), which shall have printed thereon the owner's name or the corporate or fictitious name under which the owner
operates and the business address and telephone number of the owner, together with the rates to be charged for the vehicle.
C. Identification Display: Every taxicab or vehicle for hire shall have conspicuously displayed thereon at one or more locations on the outside thereof the
name of the owner or the corporate or fictitious name under which the owner operates, together with the company's telephone number and the cab or
vehicle number.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 73/581
D. Electrically Lighted Vacant Signs: Every taxicab or vehicle for hire may display an electrically lighted vacant sign attached to the top of the cab. Every
such sign shall not be more than two and one-half inches high by nine inches (21/2" x 9") in length.
E. Prohibited Sign Display: It is unlawful to display any signs other than those provided in this Chapter on any taxicab, vehicle for hire or a vehicle carrying
passengers for sightseeing purposes, without first obtaining the written permission of the City Council or traffic authority. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-20: ROUTE REQUIREMENTS:
Any driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely, lawfully and
expeditiously to their destination. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-21: EXCLUSIVE OCCUPANCY:
When a taxicab or vehicle for hire is engaged, the occupants shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment, and it is
unlawful for the owner or driver of the taxicab to solicit or carry additional passengers therein. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-22: MISREPRESENTATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any owner, driver or agent soliciting patronage for any of the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter to misrepresent by word, sign, hat band,
insignia or badge the true identity of the vehicle for which the patronage is sought. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
4-4-23: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. From the time of the revocation or during the suspension of any permit granted under the provisions of this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person whose
permit is suspended or revoked to drive, operate or to be in charge of any of the vehicles mentioned in this Chapter, or to cause or to permit the
vehicles on which the permit has been suspended or revoked to engage in the several classes of business mentioned in this Chapter, or to allow the
vehicle to stand while awaiting employment at a location designated in the suspended or revoked permit or at any other location within the City, until a
new permit has been procured or until the period of suspension has expired.
B. Provided, however, that the traffic authority may, and he is hereby authorized to suspend any of the permits mentioned in this Chapter when the
permittee has not complied with the provisions of this Chapter, or has been arrested for, or convicted of, the commission of a felony, or has been
arrested for, or convicted of, reckless driving, pandering, or use, sale, possession, furnishing information regarding or transportation of narcotics or
intoxicating liquors, or for assault or battery, or has charged rates other than those which the permittee has on file with the City Council, or violated any
of the rules and regulations of the City Council or traffic authority pertaining to the operation of, and the extent, character and quality of the services of
taxicabs, automobiles for hire and sightseeing automobiles. The action of the traffic authority in suspending any of the permits is to be subject to the
ratification and approval of the City Council at any of its meetings held subsequent to the action of the traffic authority, but not later than twenty one (21)
days thereafter. (Ord. 283, 8-16-1945)
Chapter 5
AUCTIONS AND AUCTION HOUSES
4-5-1: LICENSE FEE FOR AUCTION HOUSES:
A. Fees Imposed:
1. Auction Houses And Employees: A license fee for an auction house and for each employee thereof, in excess of ten (10) employees, shall be
required.
2. Square Feet: In addition, each auction house shall pay a fee per square foot of floor area occupied for the business purpose in excess of five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
3. Additional Business Location: In addition, each auction house shall pay a fee for each additional business location within the City.
B. Determination Of Number Of Employees:
1. For the purpose of determining the number of employees of the business subject to this Section, the term "employee" shall mean any person
employed by the business; and shall include an independent contractor, and persons employed by the independent contractor, unless the
independent contractor and/or persons employed by the independent contractor has a valid City business license as prescribed in Chapters 1 and 2
of this Title.
2. The total number of employees for the business for purposes of this Section shall be determined by averaging the total number of employees
employed by the business during each of the four (4) calendar quarters preceding the date the tax is payable.
C. Floor Area Defined: For the purpose of this Section, "floor area" means the total floor space in terms of square footage occupied by an owner, lessee or
renter in a building except: 1) elevator shafts; 2) stairwells; 3) courts or atriums uncovered and open to the sky; 4) rooms exclusively housing building
operating equipment; and 5) parking area. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 74/581
4-5-2: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE FEE:
Any person commencing or conducting the business of an auctioneer, auctioning real estate, goods, wares, merchandise or property or conducting any
public auction sale within the City as the auctioneer shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day, or two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year. (Ord.
1070, 2-19-1985)
4-5-3: INSPECTION OF INVENTORY:
Not later than seventy two (72) hours before conducting any auction sale under any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the
licensee must make available for inspection by the Chief of Police, or his authorized representative, the entire inventory of all items of personal property to
be offered for sale at the auction sale. (Ord. 1029, 8-17-1982)
Chapter 6
SECONDHAND STORES AND JUNK SHOPS
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words when used in this Chapter shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
AUTO WRECKER: A person who buys or receives any motor vehicle, as the term "motor vehicle" is defined in the California State Vehicle Code, for the
purpose of dismantling or disassembling, or who dismantles or disassembles, the motor vehicle for the purpose of reconditioning any other vehicle, or for
the purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in the materials or parts of the vehicle or vehicles.
BUY-FORM: The form furnished by the Chief of Police to the licensee for the purpose of the recording and furnishing by the licensee to the Chief of Police
of the required information relative to purchases, pledges or consignments.
CHIEF OF POLICE: Means and designates the Chief of Police of the City.
JUNK COLLECTOR: A person not having a fixed place of business in the City who goes from house to house, or from place to place, gathering, collecting,
buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal or other articles commonly known as junk.
JUNK DEALER: A person (not an auto wrecker) having a fixed place of business in the City and engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or retail, any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal or other articles known as
junk.
PAWNBROKER: A person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroking; or the business of lending money upon personal
property, pawns or pledges; or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling, or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or
their assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the times of such purchase.
PAWNSHOP: Any room, store, building or other place in which any such business of a pawnbroker is engaged in, carried on or conducted.
SECONDHAND DEALER: A person (other than a used car dealer or a dealer in secondhand books or magazines) engaged in conducting, managing or
carrying on a business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
Before engaging in any of the businesses hereinabove defined or referred to in Section 4-6-1 of this Chapter, the licensee shall obtain the required
business license so to do, and in addition thereto the licensee shall be subject to each and all of the terms, conditions and provisions of this Chapter. A
nonrefundable fee shall be established to cover the cost of investigation and processing and the amount therefor shall be fixed from time to time by City
Council resolution. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-6-3: BUY-FORMS:
A. Distribution: The Chief of Police shall cause to be prepared from time to time such numbers of the "buy-form" as may be necessary in order to enable
the respective licensees to execute and file the same, and shall furnish the forms free for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Chapter Copy: A copy of this Chapter, together with any amendment or amendments, shall be furnished each new licensee upon the first delivery to the
licensee of the buy-form and the licensee shall be furnished with a copy of any subsequent amendment to this Chapter that affects the type of business
of the licensee. A reasonable number of additional copies of this Chapter and amendments thereof may be procured from the Chief of Police by any
licensee upon request.
C. Procurance: Every licensee shall, and it is hereby made the duty of the licensee to, obtain from the Chief of Police and to fill out and complete in
quadruplicate an appropriate buy-form covering each day's transactions except those transactions enumerated in subsection H of this Section. Within
three (3) hours after the close of business of any business day, each such licensee shall mail or deliver to the Chief of Police the original buy-form,
together with two (2) duplicate copies thereof, covering the business transacted on that day.
D. Information: The buy-forms shall contain a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares and merchandise or things received on deposit, consigned,
pledged or purchased during the day covered by such forms, and shall also contain such other information as may be required by the Chief of Police
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 75/581
and which, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, considering the type of business of the licensee, may assist in the detection of stolen property. Every
licensee shall enter upon the buy-form positive identification furnished by the seller, pledgemaker or consignor, such as driver's license number, work
badge number, auto or truck license number and junk collector's business license number in addition to the true name and address of the seller,
pledgemaker or consignor. In lieu of the positive identification mentioned above, the licensee shall require the seller, pledgemaker or consignor to
furnish a plain impression print of his right index finger upon the face side of the original sheet of the buy-form.
E. Preserve Records:
1. Every licensee shall preserve for a period of at least two (2) years the fourth or quadruplicate copy of the buy-form provided for that purpose,
containing a carbon copy record thereon of the original writing made by the licensee. Every such record shall be produced by the licensee for
inspection by any peace officer within the two (2) year period, and any property pledged, purchased or received by the licensee which is described in
the buy-form shall likewise be produced for inspection by any peace officer upon request, if the request is made within the period during which the
licensee is required hereunder to hold the property.
2. The Chief of Police shall also maintain a file consisting of the originals of all buy-forms for a period of at least two (2) years after receipt thereof, and
the file shall be open to inspection by any peace officer.
F. Language And Signature:
1. Every such buy-form report or record made by or through the licensee as required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be written or printed entirely
in the English language in a clear and legible manner.
2. Every person making out any buy-form report shall sign his true name and give the true name and correct address of the licensee. No person shall
write or subscribe the name of any other person as a signature to any buy-form report, as all such buy-forms shall bear as signatures only the true
names of the persons so subscribing the same.
G. Identification Information: Every person who sells, pledges, or consigns any property to any licensee in the course of business covered by the license of
the licensee shall furnish on the buy-form report true positive identification to the licensee by which the person can be located by the Chief of Police.
The person shall also sign his true name and write or print his true address upon the buy-form in the space provided for same at the time the business
is transacted.
H. Exceptions To Filing Buy-Forms: The provisions of this Chapter requiring withholding and the making and filing of buy-forms shall not be deemed to
apply:
1. Certain Purchases By Junk Dealers Or Collectors: To the purchase or sale by junk dealers or junk collectors of rags, bottles (other than milk or
cream bottles), secondhand sacks, barrels, cans, scrap metal, shoes, lamps, stoves or household furniture (with the exception of sewing machines
and all musical instruments or any item or items to which the manufacturer thereof has assigned a serial number); or
2. Household Furniture: To the purchase or sale by secondhand dealers of household furniture (with the exception of sewing machines, all musical
instruments, typewriters, or any other item or items to which the manufacturer thereof has assigned a serial number); or
3. Secondhand Articles Traded On New Articles: To the receipt or sale of a secondhand article by any person who received the secondhand article as
part payment of a new article, if the person is the authorized representative or agent of the manufacturer of the new article sold. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-4: REPAIRABLE MACHINERY RETENTION:
A foundry or junk dealer shall not melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of any metal purchased or received by the dealer which is, or by economically
feasible repair can be made, usable for the purpose for which it was originally designed, except as provided in subsection 4-6-5E of this Chapter until at
least twenty one (21) days after making a report to the Chief of Police that the metal has been received by the foundry or junk dealer. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-5: MERCHANDISE DISPOSAL:
A. Generally: No person shall melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of any article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing obtained or used in any business
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, except those exempt by subsection 4-6-3H of this Chapter until at least fourteen (14) days after making the
report to the Chief of Police that the article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing has been purchased or received by the person, except that metal
products must be retained at least twenty one (21) days as required by Section 4-6-4 of this Chapter.
B. Hold Order: The Chief of Police may place a hold order upon any property acquired by the licensee in the course of any business subject to the
provisions of this Chapter for a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days, and in this case the licensee shall retain the property for the prescribed period
and shall not dispose of the same in the meantime unless upon written release of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may also require the licensee
to keep a true record of property and to ascertain and report therewith the true name and address of the person to whom the property was sold,
transferred, or otherwise disposed of.
C. Inspection; Release: The Chief of Police in his discretion may, in writing, release any property covered by this Chapter which he has inspected, either
personally or through his authorized officers, if after the inspection he is satisfied that the property is in the lawful possession of the licensee.
D. Licensee Transfer: Goods, wares and merchandise covered by duly executed and filed buy-forms and with respect to which any waiting periods
provided for herein are being observed, may be sold or conveyed by the licensee possessing the same to any other licensee in the City engaged in the
same or a similar business who is complying with the provisions of this Chapter without the necessity of executing and delivering new buy-forms
therefor; provided, however, that both the seller and the buyer in such case shall notify the Chief of Police, in writing, of the transfer at or before the
time the same is actually made, and provided that the transferee shall observe all unexpired withholding periods with reference to any such goods,
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 76/581
wares or merchandise. This does not apply to purchases made by junk dealers and junk collectors or to transfers of property between such dealers and
collectors.
E. Exceptions To Section 4-6-4: The waiting period required by Section 4-6-4 of this Chapter does not apply to property purchased on a bill of sale or
invoice from a regularly established place of business. As used in this subsection, an "established place of business" means a place of business within
the County of Los Angeles which has been dealing in the type of articles purchased at the same location for not less than two (2) years.
F. Alteration: Until any articles, goods, wares, merchandise or thing pledged or consigned to, or purchased by, any licensee subject to the provisions of this
Chapter are held for the time required or released by the Chief of Police, the licensee shall not clean, alter, repair, paint or otherwise change the
appearance of the articles, goods, wares, merchandise or things. At all times during business hours the licensee shall expose the same to public view.
G. Inspection: A licensee subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall not export from the City any goods, wares, merchandise, or things pledged or
consigned to or received by such licensee in his capacity as the licensee until the Chief of Police has inspected and released the property. (Ord. 537, 2-
9-1959)
4-6-6: HOURS OF OPERATION FOR AUTO WRECKING BUSINESS:
No person shall transact the business of an auto wrecker within the City for the purpose of buying or selling wrecked or used automobiles or vehicles or
any parts or accessories therefor, between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following day. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959;
amd. 2000 Code)
4-6-7: MISDEMEANORS:
A. Signing Fictitious Name: Every person required by this Chapter to sign any paper or form who signs a fictitious name or any other than his or her true
name and every person who gives any address other than his or her true and correct address is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Failure To Submit Buy-Form: Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who fails, refuses or neglects to submit the buy-forms to the Chief of Police within
the time required by, and in full compliance with, the provisions of this Chapter, if the forms have not been so submitted by some other person, and if
the person is:
1. A person required by this Chapter to obtain a license; or
2. A person in charge of the business of the person required by this Chapter to obtain a license; or
3. An agent or employee of the person required by this Chapter to obtain a license; and the duties of the agent or employee include the submission of
the buy-form. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-8: CHAPTER COMPLIANCE:
It is unlawful for any person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on any business affected by, or to which this Chapter relates, to fail, refuse or
neglect to make or file any buy-form, statement or report required hereunder, in the form, in the manner, at the time and in all respects as required by and
in full conformity with the requirements of this Chapter; or to fail, refuse or neglect to keep the records herein required in the form and in the manner
required by this Chapter; or to fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to the Chief of Police or to any police officer of the City, or other duly authorized person
immediately upon demand for the privilege of the inspection, any record or any goods, wares or merchandise in his, its, or their possession, or control.
(Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
4-6-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR VIOLATION:
Any license issued to carry on any of the businesses defined in Section 4-6-1 of this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council upon evidence
satisfactory to the City Council of any fraud, false advertising, unfair business practice, wilful breach of contract, or other misdealing by the licensee in the
conduct of the business. (Ord. 537, 2-9-1959)
Chapter 7
POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS
4-7-1: DEFINITION:
A "poolroom" or "billiard room" is any commercial premises which has available for the use of its patrons three (3) or more pool and/or billiard tables, or
which utilizes more than thirty percent (30%) of total floor area for the play of pool or billiards. (Ord. 1223, 6-7-1994)
4-7-2: APPLICATION AND PERMIT; FEES:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, carry on, operate or maintain in the City, any public poolroom or billiard room without a written application for
permit or renewal of such permit therefor granted by the City Council. The permit shall be required in addition to any license required by any ordinance of
the City. The permit shall be granted or refused by the City Council, in its discretion, upon formal written application, therefor by the person, and the
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 77/581
application shall specify the name of the person applying for the permit and the location of the premises where it is proposed to conduct the poolroom or
billiard room, and that the applicant is the only person to be in any manner connected with the management and control of the poolroom or billiard room.
The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee which is established to cover the cost of the investigation and processing of applications.
(Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-7-3: POSTING OF CHAPTER COPY:
A copy of this Chapter furnished by the City Clerk shall be conspicuously posted and at all times kept posted in each room of every pool or billiard
establishment in the City by the person conducting the same, and the failure to post and keep posted such copy of this Chapter shall be deemed a
violation of this Chapter by the person, and printed copies of this Chapter shall be furnished every person by the City Clerk upon application. (Ord. 8, 2-28-
1917)
4-7-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No pool or billiard room shall be kept open on any day between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1223, 6-7-1994)
4-7-5: MINORS:
A. Allowing In Poolroom Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person conducting any public poolroom or billiard room in the City or any servant or employee of
the person to permit, suffer or allow any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years unaccompanied by his parent or guardian to enter, visit or remain in
any public poolroom or billiard room conducted by or in charge of the person or any servant or employee thereof.
B. Entering Poolroom Prohibited: It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years unaccompanied by his parent or guardian, to enter or
remain in any public poolroom or billiard room in the City.
C. Age Misrepresentation: It is unlawful for any person, for the purpose of gaining entrance to any such public poolroom or billiard room in this City, to
misrepresent his age. (Ord. 627, 10-15-1964)
4-7-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Notice Of Violation And Hearing: Any poolroom or billiard room permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked by the City Council for cause,
which would include, but not be limited to, a public nuisance, an action which is intrusive to adjacent residential areas, a violation of any provision of
this Chapter, the City Code, or any other law. Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the City by giving the permittee at least five (5) days' prior
notice in writing of the grounds for the revocation of his or her permit and the time and place of a hearing before the City Council and shall require him
to show cause why his permit shall not be revoked. The service of such grounds and notice of the hearing shall be done by depositing the same in the
United States mail, addressed to the applicant at his address given in the application.
B. Defense Presented: At any such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and defend himself and he may call witnesses on his
behalf.
C. Council Decision: After conducting such hearing, the City Council may revoke, suspend or further condition any permit held by such permittee. The City
shall notify the permittee thereof in writing within three (3) days after the decision.
D. Continuing Violation; Suspension: If the violation which forms the grounds for the proposed revocation continues after the original notification of such
violation to the permittee, the City Manager may suspend the permit until the time of the hearing. Such suspension shall be effective immediately upon
giving written notice thereof to the applicant or the person in charge at the poolroom or billiard room. During such suspension, no person shall be
allowed to play pool or billiards on the permittee's premises. (Ord. 1223, 6-7-1994)
Chapter 8
ENTERTAINMENT REGULATIONS
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth rules and regulations governing entertainment at certain premises within the territorial limits of the city and
require a permit therefor. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that
a different meaning is intended:
APPELLANT: A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
APPLICANT: A person, firm, or corporation who, or which files an application for a new or renewal permit as provided herein.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 78/581
DAY: A calendar day.
ENTERTAINMENT:
A. Any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, dance, act, or song and dance act, performed by one or more persons, whether or not such person or
persons are compensated for such performances; or
B. Any form of dancing upon the premises by patrons thereof; or
C. Any fashion or style show, except when the same is conducted by a person as a part of a commercial business which primarily involves the sale or
manufacture of clothing or wearing apparel.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any religious, governmental or nonprofit association or institution exempt from real property taxation under either article
XIII of the constitution or the Revenue And Taxation Code of the state.
NOTICE: Written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or, given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be
notified at his last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, or upon the placing of the same in the
custody of United States postal service.
PERFORMER: Any person who performs any entertainment.
PERMITTEE: Any person, firm, or corporation who, or which shall be granted a permit as provided herein, and his or its agents and representatives.
PERSON: Natural person, firm, corporation, or association. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Requirement: It shall be unlawful for any person conducting, operating, owning, or in control of any premises open to the public, or private club within
the city to allow any entertainment including dancing, upon the premises, or in or upon any adjoining room or premises, unless there has been granted
to such person a valid permit therefor, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Exemptions:
1. Nonprofit Organizations: An entertainment permit shall not be required of any bona fide nonprofit organization.
2. City Property: An entertainment permit shall not be required of any person in connection with the use of city property, unless such property is leased
for a period which exceeds seven (7) consecutive days. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-4: WRITTEN APPLICATIONS REQUIRED; FEES:
A. Filing Of Application; Payment Of Fee: An application for an entertainment permit or renewal of such permit must be filed in writing, filed with the city, on
forms provided by the city and be accompanied by an application fee established by city council resolution.
B. Fee Nonrefundable; Verification Of Application: The application fee required by this section is established to cover part of the cost of the investigation
and processing of applications and is not refundable. (Ord. 1475, 1-15-2013)
4-8-5: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Each application shall contain:
A. A complete identification of the applicant.
B. Names, residence and business addresses of any copartners, including limited partners; or, if the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation
shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the date and place of incorporation, the names and residence addresses
of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If one or more of the
partners is a corporation, the provisions of this Section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.
C. The names, residences and business addresses of the managers and person to be in charge.
D. The name, residence and business address and written consent of the owner of the premises, who shall indicate his consent by signing the application
in the space provided.
E. The address and the particular room or rooms for which the permit is required, the square foot area thereof to be used for dancing or entertainment, and
the seating capacity for service of meals.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 79/581
F. The exact nature of the proposed business for which the permit is requested, and the name under which it is to be operated.
G. Whether or not any person referred to in subsections A, B, C, or D of this Section has had a permit for the same or any similar business suspended or
revoked anywhere, and, if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation. The suspension or cancellation of a liquor license shall be
considered as being included within the purpose of this subsection. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
H. Whether or not any person mentioned in subsections A, B, C, or D of this Section has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony offense; and if
so, the details of the conviction, the nature of the charge and its disposition. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. 2000 Code)
I. A statement in detail of the kind of entertainment which is to be conducted on the premises.
J. The hours of operation. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
K. Such other related information as the licensing authority may require. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-6: NOTICE OF CHANGE:
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by Section 4-8-5 of this Chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give notification
of such change to the licensing authority within twenty (20) days after such change or at any hearing conducted under this Chapter if such hearing is
conducted before the above notification has been given. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-7: INVESTIGATION, IDENTIFICATION AND INSPECTION:
The licensing authority shall refer each application for a permit or renewal of such permit to the Chief of Police, who upon receipt thereof, shall conduct an
appropriate investigation to determine whether said permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter as hereinafter set forth. The
Chief of Police may request the assistance of any City department for the purpose of such investigation and he shall consider any relevant factual material
relating to such application. The City may cause the fingerprints to be taken of any person referred to in subsections 4-8-5A, B, C, or D of this Chapter.
(Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-8: IDENTIFICATION CARDS; FEE:
A. Requirement: The Chief of Police may require permittees, their employees or their performers to carry identification cards issued by the Police
Department.
B. Issuance: The Chief of Police may require and issue identification cards to permittees, their employees, or performers in such form as the Police
Department deems necessary to identify the permittee, employee or performer.
C. Surrender Of Card: Each permittee shall immediately surrender to the Police Department any identification card issued by the Police Department upon
the revocation, suspension or cancellation of his permit. Each permittee shall immediately surrender to the Police Department any identification card
issued to an employee or performer of the permittee by the Police Department when any such employee leaves the permittee's employ or when such
permittee's permit is revoked, suspended, cancelled or at the expiration of such permit without renewal.
D. Violation: No person shall carry or use any identification card issued to him pursuant to this Section after his permit or his employer's permit has been
revoked, suspended, cancelled or expires without renewal. No person shall use the identification card issued to another person.
E. Term Of Validation: The identification card shall be valid for a period of one year, after which time it can be renewed. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
F. Fee: Permittee shall pay a fee for any such identification card required by this Chapter. (Ord. 1252, 4-9-1996)
4-8-9: INSPECTION:
The Police Department, in addition to its other duties, shall inspect any and all establishments licensed pursuant to this Chapter. Police officers and any
official inspectors while on official business shall be allowed by every permittee to enter such establishment free of charge for the purpose of inspection.
(Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-10: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
After an investigation, the licensing authority shall approve the application for the entertainment permit or renewal of such permit if he finds:
A. A completed written application form therefor has been filed.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 80/581
B. The required application fee therefor has been paid to the City Treasurer.
C. As a result of his investigation all applicable provisions of this Chapter, with regard to such permit application, have been, or will be, met.
D. That the operation by the applicant will be carried on in a building, structure and location which complies with and meets all of the heath, zoning, fire,
building and safety requirements and standards of the laws of the State and this Code applicable to such business operation.
E. That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or
manager:
1. Has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgment, of:
a. An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or performance of an obscene production, motion picture or play; or
b. An offense involving lewd conduct; or
c. An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another; or
d. An offense involving misconduct with children; or
e. An offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the same or similar business operation.
2. Has not committed within the last five (5) years any offense described in subsections E1a through E1e of this Section.
3. Has not allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct to be committed within prior business operations.
F. That the business is not a public nuisance or has not been a public nuisance at any time within the last five (5) years.
G. That the applicant, his employee, agent, or any person connected or associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate, or
manager has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or
record required to be filed with the licensing authority.
H. That the applicant has not had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant has shown a material
change in circumstances since the date of revocation. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-11: NOTICE OF DECISION:
Notice of decision of the licensing authority with reference to a permit application under this Chapter shall be made to the applicant or to any other person
requesting such notice within forty five (45) days after receipt of application for a permit or renewal of such permit. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127,
11-15-1988)
4-8-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A. Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the licensing authority with reference to the approval or denial of an application for a permit or
renewal of such permit or suspension of a permit, shall have the right of appeal. An appeal must be perfected within fifteen (15) days after notice of the
decision or order of suspension by filing with the City Clerk a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal, together with a filing and
processing fee in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
B. Adoption Of Resolution: Procedures for appeals and hearings under this Chapter may be adopted by a resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 782, 3-13-
1972)
4-8-13: WAIVER:
Failure to file a letter of appeal within said fifteen (15) days shall constitute a waiver of appellant's right to a hearing but the City Council in its discretion
may nevertheless grant such a hearing. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-14: PUBLIC HEARING:
A. Notice Of Hearing: The City Clerk shall fix the time and place of the hearing at a date no more than twenty five (25) days after receipt of the letter of
appeal. The City Clerk shall give the appealing party and any other person requesting the same at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place of
such hearing. The notice shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information:
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held at , on , at the hour of , at which time you may show cause why the appeal which you have filed
should be sustained.
(Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 81/581
B. Hearing Before Council: At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal from the decision of the licensing authority, the City Council shall give
the appealing party, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the licensing
authority should not be upheld. In all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial evidence to
support the action taken by the licensing authority. The determination of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972; amd. Ord.
1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-15: ISSUANCE AND LIMITATIONS OF PERMIT:
If the application for a permit or renewal of such permit is approved, the licensing authority shall issue the permit, and shall strictly limit such permits to the
terms of the application. (Ord. 782, 3-3-1972; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-8-16: DURATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance; provided, however, that permits issued after October 31
of any year shall expire on December 31 of the next succeeding year. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-17: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Every person holding a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall keep the same posted in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises in open and
clear view. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-18: ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT PROHIBITED:
The assignment or attempt to assign any permit issued hereunder is unlawful and any such assignment or attempt to assign a permit shall render the
permit null and void. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-19: RULES AND REGULATIONS; POSTING:
Every person holding a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall keep the rules and regulations contained in Sections 4-8-20 through 4-8-22 of this
Chapter and such supplemental rules and regulations as may be recommended by the City Manager and adopted by resolution of the City Council, posted
immediately adjacent to the permit in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises in open and clear view of customers. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-20: SOLICITATION OF DRINKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person employed in any establishment for which a permit is required under this Chapter to solicit or accept drinks of alcoholic
beverages from any customer while so employed. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-21: HOURS OF ENTERTAINMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, show, stage, perform, produce, or permit any entertainment between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in any establishment for which a permit is required under this Chapter except by specific prior written authorization of the Chief
of Police and under the conditions therein set forth. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-22: CONDUCT UPON PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the following rules and regulations:
A. Dancing:
1. Hours: Dancing is prohibited between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day.
2. Remuneration Prohibited: No person shall pay or receive any fee or remuneration to be a dancing partner with any other person. This provision shall
not apply to professional paid entertainers when performing as such.
B. Lighting: The room, hall or other place where dining and dancing are permitted shall be kept well and adequately lighted with uniform intensity at all
times and with a minimum light of three (3) foot-candles thirty inches (30") from the floor. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-23: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Any business establishment providing entertainment maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be, and the same hereby is declared to be,
unlawful, and a public nuisance and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal action taken hereunder, commence an action or
proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief to abate or remove such establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment
where entertainment is provided contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 82/581
4-8-24: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; PROCEDURE:
A. Findings: The Chief of Police shall suspend any permit issued hereunder, if he finds:
1. That the operation, as conducted by the applicant, does not comply with all the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards
of the laws of California and this Code applicable to such business operation.
2. That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or
manager:
a. Has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment of:
(1) An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or performance of an obscene production, motion picture, or play; or
(2) An offense involving lewd conduct; or
(3) An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another; or
(4) An offense involving misconduct with children; or
(5) An offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the same or similar business operation.
b. Has committed within the last five (5) years any offense described in subsections A2a(1) through A2a(5) of this Section.
c. Has allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct to be committed within business operations.
3. That the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate, or
manager has knowingly made false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in a report or record
required to be filed with any City agency.
4. That the business is a public nuisance or has been a public nuisance at any time within the last five (5) years.
5. That the applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause and has not shown a material change in circumstances since the
date of revocation.
B. Police Chief Determination Appealable: The determination of the Chief of Police with regard to matters of suspension shall be appealable in the time
and manner set forth in Sections 4-8-12 through 4-8-14 of this Chapter.
C. Order Of Suspension:
1. The Chief of Police, in the case of such suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the reasons for
such suspension. The said order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or forty eight (48) hours after the same has been deposited in
the course of transmission in said United States Postal Service.
2. Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the permittee shall cease all operations under such permit. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
4-8-25: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL:
A. Filing Appeal: The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee files an
appeal of the order of suspension in the manner set forth in Sections 4-8-12 through 4-8-14 of this Chapter.
B. Order Stayed Pending Determination: Where an appeal is filed, the order shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the City Council which
shall act upon the same at a meeting of the City Council fixed by the City Clerk, in the manner set forth in Sections 4-8-12 through 4-8-14 of this
Chapter. Such suspension shall become a revocation if the City Council upholds the suspension. The determination of the City Council shall be final
and conclusive. (Ord. 782, 3-13-1972)
Chapter 9
FORTUNETELLING
4-9-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
A. The practice of "fortunetelling", as defined in this Chapter, has historically been subject to abuse by certain unscrupulous practitioners using the practice
to commit fraud and larceny upon clients.
B. It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate the practice of fortunetelling in such a manner as to reduce the risk of fraud and larceny to clients while
allowing fortunetellers to provide their services to clients with only minimal restrictions.
C. The provisions of this Chapter requiring a permit, posting of fees, providing receipts and allowing client recordation of the consultation, will make it more
difficult for an unscrupulous fortuneteller to commit fraud or larceny, and yet, as informational regulations, will not affect the nature of the information
conveyed by the fortuneteller nor the manner in which it is conveyed. These regulations require only minimal expense and effort on the part of the
fortuneteller and will not, therefore, impose any undue burden on their practices.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 83/581
D. "Fortunetelling" for entertainment purposes, as defined in this Chapter, does not create the same risk of fraud and larceny by an unscrupulous
practitioner as would the practice with an individual client because it is done with a group at a public place for the purpose of entertaining and not to
deal with the private concerns of an individual.
E. For these and other reasons, the provisions of this Chapter are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-
1986)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
FOR PAY: For a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.
FORTUNETELLING: Means and includes telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the
ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to, clairvoyance, clairaudience,
cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading,
telepathy, or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic, of any kind or
nature. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice fortunetelling or cause the same to be done for pay without having first obtained a
permit therefor. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every natural person who, for pay, conducts, engages in, carries on, or practices fortunetelling shall file a separate verified application for a permit with the
licensing authority. The application shall contain: (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
A. The name, home and business address, and home and business telephone number of the applicant;
B. The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations;
C. The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the Police Department;
D. The address, City and state, and the approximate dates where and when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with
others; and
E. A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by Council resolution. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-5: INVESTIGATION:
Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred to the Police Department for investigation, report and recommendation. The investigation shall be
conducted to verify the facts contained in the application and any supporting data. The investigation shall be completed and a report and recommendation
made in writing to the licensing authority within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the application, unless the applicant requests or consents to an
extension of the time period. If the report recommends denial of the permit to the applicant, the grounds for the recommended denial shall be set forth
therein. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
4-9-6: HEARING AND DECISION BY LICENSING AUTHORITY:
The licensing authority shall consider the application and the Police Department report and recommendation at a hearing held not less than seven (7) nor
more than fourteen (14) days following receipt of the Police Department report described in Section 4-9-5 of this Chapter. Notice of the time and place of
the hearing and a copy of the Police Department report shall be given to the applicant personally or by certified mail by the licensing authority at least five
(5) days prior to the hearing. Any interested party shall be heard at the hearing. City shall have the burden of proof to show the permit should be denied.
The decision of the licensing authority to approve, deny or conditionally approve the permit shall be in writing, and if adverse to the applicant, shall contain
findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented. Unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time, the licensing authority shall
make his or her decision approving, denying, or conditionally approving the permit within twenty four (24) hours after completion of the hearing on the
application for a permit and shall notify the applicant of his or her action by personal service or certified mail. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
4-9-7: APPROVAL OF PERMIT:
The licensing authority shall approve or conditionally approve the permit if he or she makes all the following findings:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 84/581
A. All the information contained in the application and supporting data is true;
B. The applicant has not, within one year from the date of the application, been convicted of any violation of this Chapter or crimes involving prediction of
future events by the occult arts, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude;
C. The applicant has paid the required business license fee; and
D. The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions of the permit and applicable laws. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
4-9-8: TERM OF PERMIT:
The term of the permit shall be for no more than the term of the business license. A renewal application shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days prior to
the expiration of the permit and shall be processed in the same manner as a new application. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-9: BUSINESS LICENSE FEES:
A. Fees Established: Every person engaged in operating a fortunetelling business "for pay", as defined in Section 4-9-2 of this Chapter, shall pay a license
fee in accordance with the following schedule:
1. Basic Fee; Employees: A basic fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year and sixty dollars ($60.00) per year for each employee.
2. Square Feet: In addition, each such person shall pay a fee of five cents ($0.05) per square foot of floor area occupied for such business purpose;
and
3. Additional Locations: In addition, each such person shall pay ten dollars ($10.00) per year for each additional business location within the City.
B. Determination Of Number Of Employees:
1. For the purpose of determining the number of employees in any business subject to this Section, the term "employee" shall mean any person
employed in a full-time, part-time, or temporary capacity and working in said business for a wage, salary, commission, fee or board and room.
2. The number of employees of the said business, for the purposes of this Section, shall be determined by totaling the number of hours worked by all
employees (as defined herein) during the license period, and thereafter dividing that number by forty (40), and the result thereof by fifty two (52), or a
number less than fifty two (52) which reflects the number of weeks the business operated during the license period.
C. Floor Area Defined: For the purpose of this Section, "floor area" means the total floor space in terms of square footage occupied by an owner, lessee or
renter in a building except:
1. Elevator shafts;
2. Stairwells;
3. Courts or atriums uncovered and open to the sky;
4. Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment; and,
5. Parking areas. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-10: POSTING OF INFORMATION AND FEES:
A. Requirement; Information: Each person required to obtain a permit pursuant to Section 4-9-3 of this Chapter shall post on his or her business premises
a sign containing the following information:
1. The true name of the fortunetelling practitioner;
2. Each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner;
3. The fees charged for each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner; and
4. The statement: By law, this business is prohibited from charging or soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration beyond these established rates.
B. Visibility Of Sign: The sign required by this Section shall be prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a point near the entry and
shall be conspicuously visible to every person seeking the services of the fortuneteller. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter at
least one-half inch (1/2") in height.
C. Other Location: If the fortunetelling service is provided at a location other than the fortuneteller's permanent place of business, the fortuneteller shall
provide the information required by this Section on eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") paper and legibly printed or typewritten. The
paper shall also include the name and permanent address of the person providing the fortunetelling services. A true, correct and complete copy of such
paper shall be given to each client prior to providing any fortunetelling services.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 85/581
D. Fee Charged To Comply With Sign: No person shall charge any fee, payment, remuneration, or item of value for fortunetelling services in excess of the
fees set forth on the sign or paper required by this Section. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-11: RECEIPTS:
Prior to the acceptance of any money or specific item of value from a client, other than the acceptance of a gratuitous tip given voluntarily by the client, the
fortuneteller shall issue a written receipt to the client, clearly showing:
A. Date;
B. Name of client;
C. Amount of money received or specific description of item of value received; and
D. Purpose for which the money or item of value was received. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-12: CLIENT'S RECORD OF CONSULTATION:
No person engaging in fortunetelling services shall prohibit a client from making an audio recording or taking written notes of the information conveyed by
the fortuneteller. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
4-9-13: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Entertainment: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any person engaged solely in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations
of fortunetelling at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of all other persons in attendance, and at which no questions are
answered as part of such entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.
B. Religious Practice: The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to any person conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service
when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, clairvoyant, or similar position (hereinafter collectively
referred to as minister) from any bona fide church or religious association having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches
of like faith which provides for fortunetelling; provided, that:
1. Except as provided in subsection B3 of this Section, the minister's fees, gratuities, emoluments, and profits shall be regularly accounted for and paid
solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this Section; (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986)
2. The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this Section, shall file with the
licensing authority a certified copy of the minister's certificate of ordination and the minister's name, age, street address, and telephone number in
this City where the activity set forth in this Section is to be conducted; and
3. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this Section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church or religious association and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and
transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association. (Ord. 1080, 2-4-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 10
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
4-10-1: PURPOSE:
A. This chapter establishes new permitting standards intended to comply with California law and establish zoning, business licensing, and health and
safety guidelines for massage establishments.
B. This chapter is not intended to be exclusive and compliance will not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly
applied to other professional or personal services businesses including, without limitation, all zoning applications; business license regulations;
building, fire, electrical, and plumbing codes; and health and safety code laws and regulations applicable to professional or personal services
businesses.
C. This chapter establishes a local regulatory system that allows only state certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate within the
city. This chapter is also intended to allow the city to exercise broad control over land use in regulating massage establishments and to impose and
enforce reasonable and necessary fees and regulations, in keeping with the requirements of existing law, while being mindful of the need to protect
legitimate business owners and massage professionals. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 86/581
chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning set forth elsewhere in this code, the Business And Professions Code, or
Government Code.
CALIFORNIA MASSAGE THERAPY COUNCIL (CAMTC): The California massage therapy council created pursuant to Business And Professions Code
section 4600 et seq.
CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: A person who is currently certified as a massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for
compensation.
CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person who is currently certified as a massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for
compensation.
CITY: The city of El Segundo.
DIRECTOR: The planning manager or such other person designated by the city manager.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of
the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any massage establishment, parlor, or any room, place or institution where massage is given or
administered by a massage technician as the primary service of the business establishment.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN: Any person, who gives, performs or administers to another person a massage for any form of consideration.
PERSON: Means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or other forms of business organization or group.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes all of the following:
A. Fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas;
B. Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
C. Masturbation; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any specified sexual activity listed in this definition. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The director is authorized to administer this chapter and to promulgate administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013)
4-10-4: CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
A. Massage Establishment: It is unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a massage establishment unless all massage technicians employed
by the massage establishment hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist.
B. Massage Technician: It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on the business or activities of a massage technician without a certification from
the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist.
C. Off Premises Massage Service: It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, or maintain an off premises massage service in the city unless all
massage technicians employed by the off premises massage service hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage
practitioner or certified massage therapist. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013)
4-10-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every person conducting, managing, operating, owning or in control of a massage establishment or any other place that is open to the public or is a private
club, where facial massages, fomentations, massages, electric or magnetic treatments, or alcohol rubs are administered or given, or any public bathing
place, which has in connection therewith a steam room, dry or hot room plunge, swimming pool, shower, bath, or sleeping accommodations, must obtain a
conditional use permit. A conditional use permit issued pursuant to this section must include, as a condition of approval, a requirement that the permittee
notify the city of any change in ownership. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-6: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Before operating any massage establishment or becoming engaged in the occupation of a massage practitioner or massage technician, the individual
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 87/581
proposing to conduct the business must obtain the required business license to do so and, in addition, unless otherwise specified, is subject to each and
all of the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter. A business license is not transferable. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-7: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT OWNER BACKGROUND CHECK REQUIRED:
A. Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to operate a massage establishment, that will own five percent (5%) or more of the
massage establishment, and that is not a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist, must make an application to the director for an
investigation of the applicant's background and history. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount set by resolution, must accompany the submission of each
application to defray the cost of investigation, inspection and enforcement of this chapter. An annual nonrefundable renewal fee will also be charged to
defray associated costs of investigation, inspection and enforcement.
B. Each applicant for a background check must submit the following information:
1. The full true name and any other names used by the applicant.
2. The present address and telephone number of the applicant.
3. Driver's license number and social security number.
4. The proposed address of the massage establishment.
5. Each residence and business address of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive
dates for such address.
6. Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
7. Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair.
8. Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the application.
9. Applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application.
10. The business license or permit history of the applicant, including whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency
or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended and the
reason(s) for the revocation.
11. All criminal convictions for any of the offenses set forth in this chapter, and a statement of the dates and places of such convictions.
12. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation must be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or charter, together
with the state and date of incorporation and names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder
holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application must set forth the names and
residence addresses of each of the partners, including the limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it must furnish a copy of its
certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to
corporate applicants will apply. The applicant corporation or partnership must designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its
responsible managing officer. Such person must complete and sign all application forms required of any individual applicant under this chapter, but
only one application fee will be charged.
13. The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the massage establishment is to be operated, and a copy of
the lease or rental agreement. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that
a massage establishment will be located on his or her property is required for each massage establishment permit location.
14. The full true names and other names used, the present addresses and telephone numbers, driver's license numbers, and social security numbers,
and state certificates from the CAMTC or transitional licenses for all massage technicians who will be working as employees or independent
contractors at each massage establishment permit location. The applicant must provide the director with any changes in the massage technicians
that work at the massage establishment during the permit period within ten (10) working days of each change.
15. The director may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of verifying identification.
16. Such other identification and information as may be required by the director in order to verify the information to be included in the application.
C. The city is allowed a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, in which to investigate the information on the application. During the investigation
of the background information, a city representative including, without limitation, a member of the police department, fire department, building and
safety department, planning department, or any authorized representative thereof, may inspect, with or without notice during regular business hours,
the proposed place of business to determine whether it conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of the inspection, the city
representative must inform the director in writing of the findings of the inspection.
D. Background clearance will be issued, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, to any applicant who has furnished all of the information
required by this section in the application for such license, provided:
1. The applicant has not made a material false statement in the application and that all massage technicians who will be working as employees or
independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location possesses certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or
massage therapist;
2. The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant which is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, holders of five percent
(5%) or more of the corporation's stock, has not, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application been convicted in
a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following offenses: Penal Code sections 243.4; 261; 266a through 266j; 267; 314 to 316; 318; or 647(a,
b, d); any offense requiring registration under Penal Code section 290 or Health And Safety Code section 11590; or any felony offense involving the
possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health And Safety Code
sections 11054 to 11058, as amended; or any offense in another state which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or more
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 88/581
of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft,
embezzlement or moral turpitude;
3. The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; and
4. The applicant has not had a massage technician, massage establishment, escort service, nude entertainment, nude photo studio or similar type of
license or permit suspended within one year or revoked within three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, unless
the applicant can show a material change in circumstances or that mitigating circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension. (Ord. 1476, 2-
5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-8: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Before operating a massage establishment in the city, massage establishment owners must comply with all applicable codes adopted by the city, including,
without limitation, the building, electrical, and plumbing codes. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-9: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Any owner of a massage establishment or off premises massage service must display the CAMTC certificates for all massage technicians prominently in a
conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by customers or city representatives, at every location where massage is performed or conducted, and carry
photo identification card while on the premises of the massage establishment and/or performing massage services. For off premises massage services,
massage workers must also carry a copy of their CAMTC certificate and photo identification card and display it to customers upon request. Any advertising
for a massage technician must include the name under which he or she is certified and his or her certificate number. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord.
1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-10: MASSAGE TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off site massage services to allow any person to perform massage that is not a certified massage
therapist or certified massage practitioner. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-11: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off premises massage services, or massage technicians, to conduct or allow any of the following
activities:
A. It is unlawful for any massage technician or any other employee working in a massage establishment or for an off premises massage service, or
customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in any specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage
establishment or the off premises massage location.
B. It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of a massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of any
patron, customer, or guest.
C. In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for any massage technician or other massage establishment employee to make intentional
physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron or guest. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-12: FACILITIES AND OPERATIONS:
It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless the massage establishment premises and operation comply with the following minimum
requirements:
A. Signs: A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however, that all such
signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this code.
B. Lighting: Minimum lighting must be provided in accordance with the California building code, as adopted by this code, and, in addition, at least one
unobstructed artificial light of not less than nine hundred (900) lumens must be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are
being performed on a patron.
C. Ventilation: Minimum ventilation must be provided in accordance with the California building code, as adopted by this code.
D. Disinfection Of Instruments: Instruments used for massage must be disinfected before each use. Where instruments for massage are employed,
adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available during all hours of operation.
E. Water: Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times.
F. Linen Storage: Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage of clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and stored in a
separate container until laundered.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 89/581
G. Sanitary Conditions: All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and vapor rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be kept in
good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
H. Clean Linen: Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be provided for patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens is
permitted.
I. Compliance With Laws: The premises to be used must at all times comply with all applicable state and local laws and regulations.
J. Use Of Massage Rooms: Any room in which a massage establishment provides massage services may not be used for residential sleeping purposes.
K. Register Of Technicians; Business License: A register of all individuals employed as massage technicians, and copies of their current CAMTC
certifications and the massage establishment owner's business license, must be maintained and available for inspection at all times during regular
business hours.
L. Certified Employee Only Areas: Each person present in any area of the massage establishment outside the waiting area or other areas open to any
member of the public must be a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist or the massage establishment owner.
M. Display Of Permits And Certifications: The permits and certifications required by this chapter must be displayed in an open and conspicuous public
place on the premises. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-13: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no CAMTC certification is required of such persons, while engaged in the
performance of the duties of their respective professions:
A. Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in the state of California.
B. Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists with respect to scalp, feet, hands, and face massages, who are duly permitted pursuant to Business And
Professions Code section 7301 et seq., in accordance with the limitations of their permits.
C. Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the state of California.
D. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in the state of
California, or provide professional services in lawful compliance with Corporations Code section 13401(a). (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-
2015)
4-10-14: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city
attorney is authorized, in addition to or in lieu of any other legal or criminal proceedings, to commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or
enjoinment of such massage establishment in the manner provided by law. The city attorney may seek a court order to grant such relief to abate or remove
such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-15: REVOCATION:
A. Grounds For Revocation: The director or city attorney may revoke approvals issued under this chapter for one or more of the following grounds:
1. Fraud Or Deceit: That the applicant practiced fraud or deceit in obtaining an approval under this chapter;
2. Violation Of Chapter: That the massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee, agent, independent contractor or other
representative violated a provision or provisions of this chapter;
3. Criminal Conviction: That the massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee, agent, independent contractor or other
representative has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense described in this chapter;
4. Improperly Maintained Facilities: That the facilities and operations of the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this chapter, and
that the owner or operator has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency of which they have been notified. For purposes of this subsection, "notice"
means notice given personally or by leaving notice at the massage establishment premises, or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address
designated by the massage technician or establishment in accordance with this chapter;
5. Employment Of Uncertified Technicians: That the massage establishment has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to perform
massage in the massage establishment;
6. Error: That the approval was issued in error;
7. Civil Penalties: Assessment of three (3) or more civil penalties as provided by this chapter during any six (6) month period; or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 90/581
8. Prohibited Conduct: A massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee, agent, independent contractor or other
representative has been found to have engaged in prohibited conduct in violation of this chapter.
B. Notice Of Revocation: Upon a determination on the grounds to revoke an approval under this chapter, the director or city attorney must cause a notice
of revocation to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the address designated by the massage technician or establishment pursuant to this
chapter.
C. Suspension Or Revocation Of Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit issued to a massage establishment may be suspended or revoked
pursuant to title 15, chapter 23 of this code. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-16: CIVIL LIABILITY AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney for an amount up to five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per violation. Such person is also liable for reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred by the city attorney in any civil proceeding filed to enforce this
chapter.
B. Enforcing this chapter through civil action may be filed as an alternative to criminal enforcement. Civil enforcement does not require the violation to be
knowing or wilful. A civil action cannot be filed if the person is being criminally prosecuted.
C. Each violation of this chapter is a separate offense subject to the civil penalty.
D. The city attorney may settle any civil enforcement before or after the filing of a civil action by imposing a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding the
potential civil liability, including attorney fees, set forth in this section. If such civil penalty is paid in full, the city attorney can agree not to file civil or
criminal actions or, if action has already been filed, may dismiss such action. Imposition of all civil penalties is public record.
E. All civil fines must be deposited into the general fund. (Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
4-10-17: APPEAL:
Any person denied an approval under this chapter or a massage establishment owner or operator whose approval has been revoked may appeal the
denial or revocation in writing pursuant to the appeal procedures provided by section 1-2A-15 et seq., of this code. Such appeal must be in writing and
must be filed with the city clerk not more than fifteen (15) days following the director's deposit into the mail of the notice of denial or revocation sent to the
applicant or massage establishment owner or operator to the address listed by the applicant or massage establishment owner or operator pursuant to this
chapter. Any successful appeal will result in approval or reinstatement of an approval and refund of any fines collected by the city. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any appeal of a suspension or revocation of a conditional use permit issued to a massage establishment must comply with title 15, chapter 23 of
this code. (Ord. 1504, 2-17-2015)
Chapter 11
MOTION PICTURE, RADIO AND TELEVISION PRODUCTION REGULATIONS
4-11-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers for the purpose of establishing a permit system to regulate motion picture and television
production in the city of El Segundo. Application of this chapter is intended to protect community health, safety, welfare, and property rights by ensuring
that motion picture and television production within the city has minimal impact upon businesses and residents. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of words and phrases used in this
chapter:
ADMINISTRATOR: The city manager or designee.
APPLICANT: A person seeking a filming permit pursuant to this chapter.
CURRENT NEWS: Regularly scheduled news programs (excluding documentary programs) and special news programs which are not preplanned and are
broadcast within seventy two (72) hours after filming.
FILMING: Includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, video shows, programs, or commercials, and commercially
prepared radio broadcasts. Filming also includes any noncommercial filming that obstructs, delays, disrupts, or otherwise interferes with the ordinary use
of city streets, parking facilities, sidewalks or other public rights of way, including, without limitation, on street parking and vehicle traffic within
neighborhoods.
FILMING SITE: The location designated by a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter for filming and all ancillary uses including, without limitation,
catering, storage, and parking.
LOW IMPACT FILMING: Filming where: a) the filming site involves limited use of the public right of way, is in nonresidential areas, or experiences little or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 91/581
no vehicle traffic; or b) the filming does not include lighting, noise, or special effects.
NEIGHBORS: Persons residing at residential dwelling units, including all residents in multi-tenant buildings, or operating at business addresses within a
proximity zone.
NO IMPACT FILMING: Filming that occurs pursuant to the terms of a valid permit that is conducted in a manner where light, sound, smell, or vibrations
resulting from the filming, or activities ancillary to filming, is imperceptible from properties other than the property on which the filming is being conducted.
PERMITTEE: Any natural person, entity, or combinations thereof possessing a film permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
PROXIMITY ZONE: The area within a two hundred seventy five foot (275') radius surrounding a filming site which is presumed to be affected by filming
and activities ancillary to filming. It is presumed that residential areas beyond the proximity zone are not impacted by filming.
STILL PHOTOGRAPHY: Means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial still photographs. Still photography does not require a
permit if it involves only hand carried equipment (tripod, interchangeable lenses, flash), and does not involve product or service advertisement, or use of
models, props or sets. Normally this type of photography involves less than ten (10) people and is completed in less than four (4) hours. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-
2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
4-11-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Required: Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on filming or commercial still photography on any
public or private property, facility, or residence without a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. Issued: A permit is not deemed issued until the administrator receives the applicant's written acceptance in accordance with this chapter.
C. Exemptions:
1. Current News: This chapter does not apply to or affect reporters, photographers, or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio
broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in broadcasting current news concerning those persons, scenes, or occurrences which are in the
news and of general public interest.
2. Studios: This chapter does not apply to or affect a motion picture, television, or radio broadcasting studio operating within its physical confines at an
established or fixed place of business in the city.
3. Charitable Purposes: A permit fee is not required for any permit issued for filming when the administrator determines, based upon reasonable
evidence, that filming is conducted or carried on wholly for a charitable or nonprofit purpose either directly or indirectly, by any individual.
4. Educational Purposes: A permit fee is not required for any permit issued for filming when the administrator determines, based upon reasonable
evidence, that filming is conducted or carried on wholly for student and class photographs, sports pictures, Independent Student Media film class
activities, photography class activities and student cable filming. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-4: ADDITIONAL AGREEMENTS:
In addition to, or in lieu of, a permit required by this chapter, use of any public facility within the city may require a rental or use agreement. (Ord. 1424, 10-
7-2008)
4-11-5: ADMINISTRATION:
The administrator is authorized to receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise implement this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS:
A. Information Required: The following information must be included in the application:
1. The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the person who will be present during, and responsible for, the filming;
2. The address or place at which the activity is to be conducted;
3. The specific location(s) at such address or place;
4. The inclusive times and dates such activity will transpire;
5. A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed activity;
6. The number of personnel to be involved;
7. Anticipated use of any animals, pyrotechnics, fire, or explosives;
8. The food servicing arrangements;
9. Requests for special assistance at the location, including, without limitation, street closure, traffic control, and emergency services;
10. Whether the activity to be filmed includes vehicle chases or other activities dangerous to the participants or to the public, with a description of the
activity to be filmed;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 92/581
11. The amount and type of equipment to be involved including, without limitation, the number and size of vehicles, location of all vehicles and ancillary
equipment, and the name of the person responsible for keeping the filming site clear and clean; (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
12. A declaration regarding notification of residences and businesses within the proximity zone as required by this chapter; and (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008;
amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
13. Such other information as the administrator deems appropriate.
B. Compliance With Regulations: In addition to the provisions of this chapter, any applicant engaging in activity that requires compliance with federal, state,
or local regulations, including additional licenses or permits, must present evidence of satisfactory compliance with those requirements. (Ord. 1424, 10-
7-2008)
4-11-7: APPLICATION AND PERMIT FEES:
A. Motion Picture, Radio, Or Television Productions:
1. A nonrefundable application fee for motion picture, radio or television productions as set by resolution of the city council must be paid.
2. A permit fee set by city council resolution must be paid whenever the permittee uses any portion of any public street, road, right of way or building,
other than a building located in a public park, owned or controlled by the city.
3. The use of public parks and buildings located in public parks to the exclusion of the general public is discouraged; however, when such permit is
granted, the permit fee will be fixed by city council resolution.
B. Still Photography:
1. A nonrefundable application fee for still photography commercial advertising as set by resolution of the city council must be paid.
2. A permit fee set by city council resolution must be paid whenever the permittee uses any portion of any public street, road, right of way or building,
other than a building located in a public park, owned or controlled by the city.
3. The use of public parks and buildings located in public parks to the exclusion of the general public is discouraged; however, when such permit is
granted, the permit fee will be fixed by city council resolution. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-8: DIRECT OVERHEAD EXPENSES:
In addition to the fees and charges established, the permittee must pay all costs and direct overhead of the city for supervising, controlling, and managing
permittee's operation. This includes, without limitation, all personnel costs, all material and supply costs, and all other direct costs and expenses of the city.
These costs and expenses will be computed at the conclusion of the project and be deducted from the deposit required. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-9: CASH DEPOSIT FOR FEES AND SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A. Cash Deposit: After the application fee is paid and the application approved and before any permit is issued, permittee must deposit with the city a cash
deposit computed as follows: Twice the amount determined by the city to be the total cost to the city plus a sum equal to all permit and license fees.
B. Conditions For Refund Of Security Deposit: At the conclusion of the project, the total of the deposit will be applied to the city's permit and license fees
and to the city's costs and direct overhead of administering and supervising the permit; and the balance, if any, will be deemed a security deposit. The
security deposit must be refunded by the city to the permittee if the permittee has fully complied with all of the conditions of the permit and all
requirements of law. If the permittee has not complied with all conditions of the permit and all requirements of law, the security deposit will be retained
by the city. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-10: SECURITY DEPOSIT RETENTION; APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the administrator's determination concerning the amount of the deposit or the amount of any refund may file a written appeal as
provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-11: REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS:
A. After a film permit application is filed, the administrator must forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively "reviewing officers"), whose
departments are affected by the proposed event for their recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without limitation:
1. The fire chief;
2. The police chief;
3. The recreation and parks director; and/or
4. The public works director;
5. The El Segundo Unified School District superintendent when filming will occur along a route or at a location adjacent to a school or classroom.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 93/581
B. Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers must consider the application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide the administrator
with written recommendations regarding:
1. Any special conditions for a permit;
2. Whether, based on the scope of the proposed filming, a prefilming operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be necessary, the
administrator will notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting within a reasonable time before filming; and
3. Any additional recommendations.
C. The reviewing officers must complete their review before the administrator can make a decision on the application. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-12: TIME REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, completed applications for a film permit must be filed in the administrator's office at least:
1. Three (3) business days before the filming date for a permit that does not require city services and is low impact filming; or
2. Five (5) business days before the filming date for filming involving stunts or traffic control; or
3. Ten (10) business days before the filming date for filming involving closure of public streets or rights of way, or use of pyrotechnics, fire, or explosives
for special effects, except that an application may be filed pursuant to subsection A1 of this section if special effects are limited to the use of "squibs"
as defined in title 19, section 980 of the California Code of Regulations, or any successor regulation, and the fire department determined the
pyrotechnic operator's license to be in good standing within the previous twelve (12) months.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, completed applications for a film permit must be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the
administrator within the applicable time periods established by subsections A1 through A3 of this section. Following his/her decision, the administrator
will promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally and in writing.
C. Unless otherwise provided, the applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval must be received by the administrator before the filming
date. Failure to accept the decision or failure to file a request for appeal constitutes a withdrawal of the application. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-13: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A. The administrator must issue a permit if:
1. The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
2. There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
3. Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in writing.
B. Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special permit
conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the administrator to protect public safety and/or welfare. Such special conditions may include, without
limitation, conditions for controlling pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic, for protecting public and/or private property, and/or for protecting public health and
safety. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-14: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT DENIAL:
A. A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
1. The application is incomplete;
2. The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application information requested by the administrator;
3. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
4. Applicant seeks approval for filming that is so close in time and location to another event scheduled for the same date as to cause unreasonable
traffic congestion and/or to overextend public safety and/or emergency services;
5. Filming time and/or methodology will unreasonably interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the filming site;
6. The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles at the filming prevents public safety and/or emergency services from reaching areas at or
contiguous to the event;
7. The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles at the filming on or adjacent to public institutions or schools prevents normal egress and
ingress into the facility;
8. The size of filming will overextend public safety and/or emergency services to the extent that the safety of filming participants, attendees, and/or the
remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized; provided, however, that nothing authorizes denial of a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 94/581
9. The filming location will substantially interfere with construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along the city street,
parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of way to be occupied by the event;
10. The filming will occur along a route or location adjacent to a hospital or extended care facility, and the noise created by the filming would
substantially disrupt the operation of the hospital or extended care facility or disturb the patients within;
11. The filming will occur at a location adjacent to a library and the noise created by the filming will substantially disrupt the library's operation or disturb
a library's patrons;
12. The application is not timely submitted and there is insufficient time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the time lines in this
chapter; (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
13. The application fails to include a declaration regarding notification of residences and businesses within the proximity zone as required by this
chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
B. The administrator must consult with the city attorney before denying a filming permit. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-15: ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER:
If the administrator denies a film permit that would be acceptable by changing filming time, place, or manner, then the administrator may inform the
applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the alternative time, place, or manner then the administrator will issue a permit in accordance
with this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-16: ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate administrative policies and procedures governing the form, time, and location within the city to
implement this chapter. The rules and regulations can be based upon the following criteria:
A. Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city;
B. The written consent of all property owners or occupants in possession of property within the proximity zone, as determined by the administrator and in
accordance with this chapter;
C. The safety and convenience of all persons;
D. The disruption of normal activities of all persons at particular locations within the city;
E. The safety of property within the city;
F. Whether particular types of equipment are required for certain film sites to reduce the impact on neighbors. Such equipment may include, without
limitation, tow plant generators; and
G. Whether a film monitor is required to oversee filming at certain filming sites. If a film monitor is required, permittees must also abide with a filming code
of conduct identified by the administrator. The cost of a monitor must be borne by permittees. (Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
4-11-17: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FILMING DAYS ALLOWED:
A. Except as otherwise provided, no permit can be issued if it will result in any address being located within a proximity zone for more than twenty five (25)
days during a calendar year.
B. For filming proposed east of Sepulveda Boulevard and south of El Segundo Boulevard, no permit can be issued if it will result in any address being
located within a proximity zone for more than eighty (80) days during a calendar year.
C. The administrator may increase the twenty five (25) day maximum if there are no neighbor protests from within the proximity zone of the filming site.
D. There are no maximum filming days for no impact filming. (Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
4-11-18: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city which, in part, indemnifies the city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any
liability arising from permittees' filming in a form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-19: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; LIABILITY INSURANCE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 95/581
A. Insurance Requirements: Permittee must obtain public liability insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of California
and having a financial rating in "Best's Insurance Guide" of not less than "A VII". Such insurance must provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities
for death, personal injury, or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with filming. Such insurance shall be based upon the size and
nature of filming, the risks foreseeably involved, and must be in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limit, and
name the city and the city's officers, employees, agents, and volunteers as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. The city's risk manager
may increase this minimum limit depending on the risk involved with the proposed filming. In addition, such insurance must be primary and
noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to the city and include a severability of interest (cross liability) clause. If alcoholic
beverages are sold or served during filming, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability in an amount not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00).
B. Certificates Of Insurance: A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the city's risk
manager, must be filed with the administrator not less than five (5) business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before filming unless
the administrator for good cause waives the filing deadline.
C. Bonds: A bond/cash deposit may be required for purposes of repairing any damage and restoring city facilities to original condition. The amount will be
determined by the administrator. In the event of such damage, city will provide written notice to the permittee specifying the damage to be repaired
and/or city facilities to be restored. If, after providing permittee with such written notice, the requested repairs and/or restoration of city facilities have
not been commenced and/or completed within seven (7) days, city may draw upon the bond/cash deposit to effect said repairs and/or restoration of city
facilities. In the event of damage requiring emergency repairs and/or restoration of city facilities by the city, the permittee is required to reimburse the
city in full for all costs incurred within thirty (30) days of receipt of invoice from city. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-20: NOTICE TO RESIDENCES AND BUSINESSES; GENERALLY:
Before the administrator issues a filming permit, an applicant must notify neighbors within a proximity zone as follows:
A. The applicant must make every reasonable effort to notify neighbors within the proximity zones, by any reasonable means specified by the
administrator, regarding the filming's nature, date, and time. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
B. Notifications must include applicant's name, address, telephone number, date(s), and time(s) of filming. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
C. The applicant must submit a declaration, signed under penalty of perjury, with a permit application stating that reasonable notice was provided to every
neighbor within the proximity zone.
D. The administrator may, at the applicant's cost, prepare documentation showing the neighbors within a proximity zone. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord.
1436, 12-1-2009)
4-11-21: PROXIMITY ZONE PROTESTS:
A. The neighbors within the proximity zone are entitled to one protest per address. All protests must be received by the administrator at least two (2)
business days before the filming date. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
B. The administrator cannot issue a filming permit if: (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
1. More than fifty percent (50%) of neighbors within the proximity zone submit protests against low impact filming. The administrator may, but is not
required to, require a lower percentage of protests based upon the time, place, or manner of the proposed filming and its consequent impact on
surrounding businesses or residences;
2. If the administrator receives at least one protest from a neighbor within the proximity zone for filming that requires street closures; or
3. More than ten percent (10%) of neighbors within the proximity zone for all other filming sites submit protests.
C. A rebuttable presumption of one hundred percent (100%) approval from neighbors within a proximity zone is established if the administrator does not
receive any protests from within a proximity zone. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 1436, 12-1-2009)
D. Neighbors may submit protests for all filming located within three hundred feet (300') of their property with the administrator. The administrator will keep
a record of such protests until the end of each calendar year and apply such protests when determining the protest percentages established by this
section. Protests must be resubmitted at the beginning of each calendar year to be effective. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-22: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; SPECIAL EFFECTS; FIRE PERMIT:
An applicant must obtain a permit from the city fire department for filming that includes pyrotechnics, fires, or explosives. During filming the permittee must,
at its own expense, use city fire personnel deemed necessary by the city fire department. All city fire permits must be obtained at least seventy two (72)
hours before filming. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-23: GENERAL PERMIT CONDITIONS; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 96/581
A. The permit, in its entirety, must be in the possession of the permittee at all times while filming.
B. A permittee must conduct operations in an orderly fashion. The area used must be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion and before leaving the
filming site(s). A deposit to assure that a permittee removes all trash and debris from the filming site(s) may be required. This requirement and the
amount may be determined by the administrator.
C. Vehicle parking for all filming related activities must be in accordance with the administrator's directions.
D. All camera cars must have a police escort. The administrator may determine how many police officers will be required to escort camera cars.
E. All filming and ancillary activities must commence not earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and cease not later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Filming
and ancillary activities east of Sepulveda Boulevard and south of El Segundo Boulevard must commence and cease at the times indicated by a valid
permit, except for filming and ancillary activities occurring within two hundred seventy five feet (275') of hotels which must commence not earlier than
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and cease at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
F. Permittees must protect any neighbors within a proximity zone from glare caused by lighting used for filming after sunset.
G. Production companies cannot place equipment or vehicles on private property without the private property resident's written consent. (Ord. 1436, 12-1-
2009)
4-11-24: SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS:
A. Grounds For Subsequent Conditions: The administrator may condition previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts not previously
disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
B. Notice Of Subsequent Conditions: Should subsequent conditions be required, the administrator will serve written notice on the permittee of this
decision. When acting upon information obtained twenty four (24) hours before filming, the administrator may orally inform the permittee, and city
personnel overseeing filming, of the new conditions. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-25: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF FILMING:
The city manager, administrator, and/or any sworn public safety officer may temporarily suspend filming whenever there is an emergency that requires
such action to protect public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and filming participants must immediately comply with the suspending officer's
instructions. The administrator will immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and notify the applicant in writing, within twenty four (24) hours after
the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the suspension. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-26: LAND USE AND PARKING REGULATIONS INAPPLICABLE:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or the terms and conditions of a permit issued under this chapter, those provisions of this code regulating
land use and parking do not apply to a permittee. All other provisions of this code are applicable to the permittee's conduct except as specifically provided
in the permit. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-27: CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR FILMING SITE:
The administrator, or designee, is authorized and directed to establish traffic and/or crowd control devices on or within the city's streets, parking facilities,
sidewalks, or other public rights of way, and to undertake other actions necessary to cordon off the filming site. In addition, the administrator, can, when
appropriate, cause the filming site to be posted as a no parking zone for the duration of filming and sufficiently in advance thereof as may be necessary to
prevent vehicles from parking along the route or at the filming location. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-28: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING FILMING:
A. Interference With Filming: It is unlawful for any person to physically obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any filming authorized by a
permit or with any person, animal or vehicle participating or used in filming.
B. Driving Through The Filming Site: It is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons authorized by a film permit when such
vehicles or persons are in motion.
C. Prohibited Parking: It is unlawful for any person to park along or within any portion of the route or filming site, when the filming site is designated as a no
parking zone by the administrator in the manner authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-29: PROHIBITIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 97/581
It is unlawful for any person to engage in filming that would constitute a hazard to public safety or interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of
residents and other occupants of property to the quiet, peaceful, unmolested enjoyment of their property. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-30: MISREPRESENTATION:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring the permit
provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-31: PERMIT MODIFICATION:
A. If, due to inclement weather or other, similar, unforeseen circumstances, it is necessary to change the filming date and/or time, the administrator may,
upon permittee's request, issue a film permit addendum authorizing filming at the same location for new times and dates. Permittee must comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter, including notification, and pay any reasonable administrative fee that permit reissuance may cost.
B. If there is any substantial change in the filming from that described in the permit application, an applicant must pay the permit application fee and obtain
an amended permit before the filming date. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-32: PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A. Facts Not Previously Disclosed: The administrator can revoke a film permit upon learning or discovering facts requiring permit denial not previously
disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
B. Violation Of Permit Terms: The administrator may revoke a film permit when the permittee and/or filming violates the permit's terms and conditions, or
when filming participants violate applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that this subsection does not authorize revoking a permit because
of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that the administrator cannot revoke a permit without warning the
permittee and allowing him/her to correct the violation(s) within a reasonable time.
C. Notice Of Revocation: If the administrator revokes a permit before the filming date, the administrator must immediately serve written notice of revocation
on the permittee and provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged with carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If the
administrator revokes a permit on the day of filming after learning of facts justifying revocation less than twenty four (24) hours before the filming
commenced, the administrator must announce such action to the filming participants, city officers and employees monitoring or controlling traffic during
the filming, and the person in charge of the filming, if such person can be located at the filming location. Written notice must be delivered after such
action to the permittee.
D. Hearing: An applicant is entitled to an administrative hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city manager provided:
1. The applicant appeals the administrator's decision within twenty four (24) hours of receiving notice of such conditions;
2. Filming is scheduled at least forty eight (48) hours after the hearing time;
3. The hearing will be at the administrator's office at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed upon. The
hearing officer will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and also notify the applicant and the administrator in writing of the hearing
officer's decision;
4. Any notification of action, whether oral or written, must describe with particularity the facts and the reasons for the decision.
E. Consultation With City Attorney: The administrator must consult with the city attorney before revoking a filming permit.
F. Appeals To Council: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the administrator may appeal to the council in the manner provided by this chapter.
G. Failure To Appeal: In the event no appeal is taken by the permittee, the decision of the administrator revoking or suspending such permit becomes final
and conclusive on the expiration of the time fixed for the appeal as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
4-11-33: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
A. Procedures: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the administrator or of any other officer of the city made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may appeal to the council within fifteen (15) days after notice thereof by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal, briefly stating in such notice
the grounds relied upon for appeal. If such appeal is made within the time prescribed, the city clerk will schedule a hearing before the council within
thirty (30) days after the date of the receipt of such notice of appeal, giving the appellant not less than ten (10) days' notice in writing of the time and
place of the hearing. The findings and determinations of the council at such hearing are final and conclusive and within three (3) days after such
findings and determinations are made, the city clerk will give notice thereof to the appellant.
B. Council Determination: For appeals relating to the suspension or revocation of permits issued pursuant to this chapter, the council's determination
becomes effective on the second day after the city clerk gives notice thereof to the appellant, unless otherwise provided by the council. (Ord. 1424, 10-
7-2008)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 98/581
4-11-34: EXPEDITED REVIEW:
Pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8(c), and any successor statute or regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated
for expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8, or any successor statute or
regulation. (Ord. 1424, 10-7-2008)
Chapter 12
FIREARMS SALES, LICENSING AUTHORITY
4-12-1: LICENSING AUTHORITY:
A. Designation: The licensing authority is designated the duly authorized licensing authority of the City for the sale of pistols, revolvers and other firearms
capable of being concealed upon the person.
B. Compliance With State Law: The licensing authority is directed to comply with the provisions of section 12071 of the State Penal Code. (Ord. 876, 7-15-
1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-12-2: APPLICATION:
An application shall be filed in writing with the licensing authority on forms provided by the City. (Ord. 876, 7-15-1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-12-3: INVESTIGATION:
A. Conduct Of Investigation; Factors: The licensing authority shall refer each application for a permit, or renewal of such permit, to the Chief of Police, who,
upon receipt thereof, shall conduct an appropriate investigation. Such investigation shall include, at a minimum, the following factors:
1. The security of the premises on which the business is conducted;
2. The criminal record or lack thereof of the applicant;
3. Compliance with all applicable sections of United States and California law governing the sale of firearms.
B. Fingerprinting Required: The Chief of Police may cause the fingerprints to be taken of any person who files an application pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 876, 7-15-1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-12-4: PERMIT ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL:
After investigation, the licensing authority may issue or renew the permit if he finds:
A. The applicant, his employee, agent or any person associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager has not
been convicted of a felony;
B. The premises in which the business will be carried on provides secure protection against theft, loss or misplacement of concealable firearms, and
complies with and meets all health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements;
C. That the applicant will comply with all applicable provisions of law concerning the sale of firearms. (Ord. 876, 7-15-1975; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
Chapter 13
BINGO GAMES FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES
4-13-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which
conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-2: ORGANIZATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR CITY LICENSE:
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporations tax by section 23701 et seq., of the state Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile
home park associations and senior citizens' organizations, are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the
provisions of section 326.5 of the state Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that the receipts of such games are used only for
charitable purposes. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984; amd. 2000 Code)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 99/581
4-13-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application in writing therefor with the licensing
authority on a form to be provided by the city. The issuing authority shall be the licensing authority upon authorization of the city council. The license
issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to a renewal and an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus an additional fee of
one percent (1%) of the monthly gross receipts collected in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). If an application for a license is denied, one-half
(1/2) of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
4-13-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT:
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under section 4-13-2 of this chapter and its application
conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-5: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION; FEE:
A. Contents: Said application for a license shall contain the following:
1. The name of the applicant's organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under section 4-13-2 of this chapter.
2. The name and signature of at least two (2) officers of the applicant organization.
3. The particular property within the city, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for
performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, together with the occupancy capacity of such place. Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.
4. Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games.
5. That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as
they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon violation of
any of such provisions.
B. Signature Required: The applicant under penalty of perjury shall sign said application.
C. Annual Fee: The annual license or renewal fee shall be set by a resolution of the city council and shall accompany the application.
D. Certificate Of Exemption: Where applicant shall also submit, with its application, a certificate or determination of exemption under section 23701 et seq.,
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the franchise tax board in Sacramento showing
exemption under one of the eligible Revenue and Taxation Code sections. (Ord. 1334, 4-17-2001)
4-13-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the licensing authority shall refer the same to interested departments of the city including, but not
limited to, the city manager, city attorney, police department, fire department, community, economic and development services department for investigation
as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it
qualifies, as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions. A period of not less than
thirty (30) days shall be allowed for the purpose of conducting said investigation. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988; Ord. 1315, 1-18-
2000)
4-13-7: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; POSTING:
A. Contents: Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the City, upon authorization by the City Council
the licensing authority shall issue a license to said applicant, which shall contain the following information:
1. The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued.
2. The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977; amd. Ord. 1127, 11-15-1988)
3. The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted as set forth on the certificate of occupancy and/or posting or room
capacity as specified in the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the City. A description of where the room is located at the address, room site,
number of exits, type of seating that will be provided participants and other pertinent information shall be listed.
4. The date of the expiration of such license.
5. Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Posting: The licensee shall cause the license to be visibly posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where bingo games are authorized to be
conducted, and shall immediately produce such license for inspection upon demand of any police officer. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-8: SUMMARY SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 100/581
A. Authority Of Police Chief: Whenever it appears to the Chief of Police that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and operation of any bingo game.
B. Continuing To Conduct Bingo After Suspension: Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-2-1 of this Code.
C. Hearing Request: The summary suspension shall include the notification of the licensee that it shall have ten (10) days from the date of such
suspension to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the City Council
within said ten (10) day period, shall result in a revocation of the license. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977; amd. 2000 Code)
D. Notice Of Hearing: Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has been summarily suspended, for a hearing to determine whether such license
shall be revoked, the City Council shall provide such hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of such request by the City, or at a time thereafter
agreed upon, at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the City Council for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license
should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this Section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at
least five (5) days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said suspended licensee at the address given
in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.
E. Council Action: Any organization whose license is revoked under this Section shall not conduct any bingo game in the City until such time as the City
Council makes a determination as to whether the license shall be reinstated. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final. (Ord.
929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE:
A. Revocation; Hearing: Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered, under Section 4-13-8 of this Chapter,
the license may be revoked; provided, however, the licensee may appear before the City Council at the time fixed by the City Manager, for the purpose
of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this Section unless written notice shall have first been
given at least five (5) days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said licensee at the address given in
the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the revocation.
B. Reinstatement: Any organization whose license is revoked under this Section shall not conduct any bingo game in the City until such time as the City
Council, on an appeal, makes a determination as to whether the license shall be reinstated. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall
be final. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-10: APPEAL OF REVOCATION TO CITY COUNCIL:
Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this Chapter shall have the right, within ten (10) days after receiving notice in writing of the
revocation, to file a written appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The City Council
shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days after its receipt by the City, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be
given at least ten (10) days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present
evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 929, 4-
19-1977)
4-13-11: MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PRIZE:
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for
each separate game which is held. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
4-13-12: PROCEEDS KEPT IN SEPARATE FUND OR ACCOUNT:
A. Disposition Of Proceeds: All proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other
fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:
1. Such proceeds may be used for prizes. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
2. A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses,
security equipment and security personnel. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
B. Records Of Income And Expenses: The licensee shall keep by separate books full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and
described in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision or any other phase of bingo games authorized by this Chapter. The City, by
and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time and licensee shall fully cooperate
with the City by making such records available. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
4-13-13: FINANCIAL INTEREST IN LICENSEE ONLY:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 101/581
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 929,
4-19-1977)
4-13-14: EXCLUSIVE OPERATION BY LICENSEE:
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from
any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. Security
personnel may be paid from proceeds of a bingo game if not members of the licensee organization. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977; amd. Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-15: BINGO GAMES OPEN TO PUBLIC:
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
4-13-16: ATTENDANCE LIMITED TO OCCUPANCY CAPACITY:
Bingo games shall be conducted only within structures approved for public assembly as such is defined in the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the
City and as evidenced by a valid certificate of occupancy as set forth in the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City. Bingo games shall be permitted
only in the interior of such structures and licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-17: BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED ONLY ON LICENSEE'S PROPERTY:
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, for ninety (90) or
more days prior to date of application and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the
organization is organized. The license issued under this Chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the
address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the
purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization,
upon application under this Chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the
organization is organized. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977; amd. Ord. 1069, 2-19-1984)
4-13-18: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages: The serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in the room where bingo games are being
conducted.
B. Minors: No persons under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.
C. Intoxicated Persons: No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Ord. 929, 4-19-1977)
D. Participant Must Be Present: No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in
which the bingo game is being conducted.
E. Interference With Inspection: No person shall interfere with, prevent, or refuse to permit a police officer to make an inspection or examination of any
premises where bingo games are authorized to be conducted, for the purpose of determining whether the licensee is complying with the provisions of
section 326.5 of the State Penal Code and the provisions of this Chapter.
F. Receipt Of Profit: It is a misdemeanor under section 326.5(b) of the State Penal Code for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage, or salary from any
bingo game authorized under this Chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall
be deposited in the General Fund of the City. (Ord. 943, 11-1-1977)
Chapter 14
MARIJUANA
4-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY: The cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
transportation, distribution, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products.
CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing, cultivating, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of marijuana.
DELIVERY: The commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer or independently licensed under this title that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial
transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 102/581
MARIJUANA: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include:
A. Industrial hemp, as defined in Health And Safety Code section 11018.5; or
B. The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES: Any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into
the human body.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY: An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to
marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT: A marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana
store.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY: An entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana
products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to
consumers.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS: Marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but
not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
MARIJUANA STORAGE FACILITY: Any entity or premises used for the storage of marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana accessories.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY: An entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar habitable dwelling.
RETAIL MARIJUANA STORE: Any entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from
marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers; or any premises, whether licensed or unlicensed,
where marijuana, marijuana products, or devices for the use of marijuana or marijuana products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for
retail sale, including an establishment that delivers marijuana and marijuana products as part of a retail sale. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
4-14-2: COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY PROHIBITED:
No license can be issued for, nor shall any person operate, a marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana testing
facility, marijuana delivery business, marijuana storage facility, retail marijuana store, marijuana establishment, or any commercial marijuana activity in the
city of El Segundo. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
4-14-3: CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA FOR PERSONAL USE:
A. Outdoor Cultivation: Cultivation of marijuana outdoors is prohibited, except for the personal cultivation of marijuana conducted in accordance with
Health And Safety Code section 11362.2, subd. (a).
B. Indoor Cultivation: Cultivation of marijuana indoors is prohibited, except for the personal cultivation of not more than six (6) plants at one time within a
single private residence pursuant to Health And Safety Code section 11362.2, subd. (a). (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
4-14-4: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or
portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter,
or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
4-14-5: INTERPRETATION:
The intent of this chapter is to prohibit commercial marijuana activities and the personal cultivation of marijuana, whether medical or recreational in nature,
to the maximum extent allowed under state law. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as allowing behavior otherwise prohibited by state law and
nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as prohibiting conduct that the city is expressly preempted from prohibiting under state law. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-
2016)
Title 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 103/581
Chapter 1
HEALTH CODE
5-1-1: ADOPTION OF COUNTY HEALTH CODE:
The "Public Health Code (Ordinance 7583) County Of Los Angeles", adopted by the County Board of Supervisors, August 25, 1959 and in effect
September 25, 1959, as amended, is hereby adopted with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full. One copy of said "public health code"
is on file, and open to public inspection, in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 634, 3-22-1965; amd. 2000 Code)
5-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
The following rules shall govern the interpretation of said public health code:
A. Whenever the word "County" or any abbreviation thereof appears in said public health code, it shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the word "City".
B. Whenever the words "Los Angeles" or any abbreviation thereof, appear in said public health code, they shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the
words "City of El Segundo".
C. Whenever there is a conflict between any of the provisions of said public health code and other ordinances of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted
relating specifically to the same subject matter, then the latter shall prevail.
D. The definition or regulation of any activity, condition, or structure in said public health code shall not be interpreted or deemed to permit or allow the
conduct of any such activity or the construction or maintenance of any such condition or structure as may be otherwise prohibited or restricted by any
other ordinances of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted. (Ord. 634, 3-22-1965)
5-1-3: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS; ADOPTION OF COUNTY REGULATIONS:
Pursuant to its authority and State Government Code section 50022.1 et seq., the following sections of the Los Angeles County Code are incorporated by
reference into the El Segundo City Code with the same force and effect as though set out herein in full: (Ord. 1289, 11-4-1998; amd. 2000 Code)
8.04.165 Food Official Inspection Report
8.04.225 Grading And Letter Grade Card
8.04.275 Inspection Score Card
8.04.337 Notice Of Closure
8.04.405 Routine Inspection
8.04.752 Posting Requirements - Penalty For Non-Compliance - Documents Available For Public Review
8.04.755 Letter Grade Card And Inspection Score Care - Period Of Validity
8.04.943 Public Health Permit Suspension Or Revocation - Notice Of Closure
11.11.010 Definitions
11.11.020 Application And Effect
11.11.030 Procedure For Obtaining A Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.040 Food Handler's Training Course
11.11.050 Multiple Food Service Operations
11.11.060 Exemptions
11.11.070 Display Of Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.080 Change Of Certified Food Handler
11.11.090 List Of Certified Food Handlers
11.11.100 Expiration
11.11.110 Duplicate Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.120 Revocation Of Food Handler's Training Certificate
11.11.130 Right To Appeal Following Revocation
(Ord. 1289, 11-4-1998)
5-1-4: ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO COUNTY HEALTH CODE:
Section 308 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 308. Itinerant restaurant defined. "Itinerant restaurant" means any restaurant operating for a temporary period of time, not to exceed thirty (30)
days at any one location on any one premises and shall include any stand or facility which is portable and used for the preparation and service of
foods, other than a "Temporary refreshment stand". Itinerant restaurant may include a vehicle, provided it is maintained in a mobile condition and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 104/581
currently registered by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.
Section 309 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 309. Temporary refreshment stand. "Temporary refreshment stand" means any food preparation or dispensing operation conducted in connection
with a fair, circus, or public exhibition or gathering offering food for sale or gift to the general public for a temporary period of time in one location.
Section 370 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 370. Lunch service dating and labeling requirements.
(a) Every box lunch or sandwich prepared for sale, gift or distribution, at a place other than on the premises where prepared, shall be securely
wrapped, labeled and dated at the place where prepared. The container of every box lunch and the wrapper of every sandwich to be sold or
offered for sale, must have printed thereon, or stamped, fastened, or otherwise affixed thereto, so as to be readily visible and legible from the top
and outside thereof, in dimensions not smaller than ten-point, bold face, upper case letters, the name of the day, or abbreviation thereof as set
forth in subsection (c), following the day on which the box lunch or sandwich was prepared, which shall be known as "day prepared for" and the
name and address of the establishment preparing the box lunch or sandwich.
(b) Exemptions: Box lunches and sandwiches need not be dated, as required herein under the following circumstances:
1. When sold from a fixed location where they are held until sold in a frozen condition in a refrigerator;
2. When kept in and sold from a refrigerated unit, other than a vending machine, in a fixed location in which the food is kept at a temperature below
fifty degrees Fahrenheit;
3. When sold from a vending machine with refrigeration facilities meeting requirements for the machines which maintain temperatures below fifty
degrees Fahrenheit. However, when the sandwich is not dated as required herein it shall be code dated in such a manner as will clearly indicate
to the health officer or to officially concerned vending machine operators the "day prepared for". The code dating shall be as approved by the
health officer. The health officer may adopt rules and regulations specifying the maximum numbers of days after the "day prepared for" that
various types of code dated sandwiches may be sold. No such code dated sandwich shall be kept for sale from the vending machine after the
date established by the health officer's rules and regulations.
(c) The phrase "day prepared for" shall appear in legible print in dimensions not smaller than six-point type, bold-face, upper case letters immediately
above the name of the day or the abbreviation thereof. The name of the day shall be written out or abbreviated Sun., Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs.,
Fri., Sat. in legible print not smaller than six point type or abbreviated by putting the first letter of all of the days of the week consecutively as
follows: S M T W T F S in not smaller than ten-point type. If abbreviated, S M T W T F S, the letter signifying the "day prepared for" shall be
punched, perforated or otherwise marked as approved by the health officer, at the time of preparation, to clearly show the one "day prepared for".
(d) Packaged foods intended to be heated and sold hot from an industrial catering vehicle, including: meat pies, stews, T.V. dinners and similar
foods, shall be dated in a manner approved by the health officer, prior to being placed in a heating or warming device, to show the name of the day
when placed in the warming unit. The day shall be known as the "day prepared for".
(e) No foods or components of foods whose packages or containers are required by this section to be dated shall be rewrapped or reused for
human consumption; nor shall the packages or containers be dated for more than one day; nor shall the date placed thereon be removed or
obliterated.
(f) No food whose packages or containers are required by this section to be dated shall, except as provided in paragraph (b), be in any way
disposed of for human consumption on any day other than the day on which prepared or on the day originally inscribed upon the container or
package.
Section 383 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 383. Equipment standards. The health officer may adopt rules and regulations interpreting health and sanitation requirements for equipment to be
installed in restaurants, itinerant restaurants and food establishments and for vending machines, and in doing so shall consider and may adopt
nationally recognized standards. When the health officer requires that equipment shall comply with the specified standards, no person shall install or
use newly installed equipment which does not comply with the standards, or their equivalent.
Section 384 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 384. Food equipment and installation - New construction and remodeling. The health officer may require from the owner or operator submission of
the following data pertaining to construction, remodeling, or installation of new equipment in restaurants, itinerant restaurants and food
establishments:
(a) Two copies of a scale drawing or dimensioned sketch showing the location of all fixed food storage, preparation and processing equipment,
furnishings and machinery, and the location of floor drains and floor sinks.
(b) Such specifications, forms, data, drawings and sketches, in duplicate, as are necessary to indicate that the design, materials, method of
construction, and installation of equipment for food processing, preparation, storage or utensil washing meet applicable sanitation standards and
requirements.
When the health officer requires submission of plans and data concerning food equipment, no person shall install or use any equipment in a new
or reconstructed establishment until the plans and specifications have been approved in writing by the health officer. All the equipment and its
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 105/581
installation shall be in accordance with the approved plans and specifications unless modifications and changes therefrom have been approved by
the health officer, in which case the equipment and its installation shall be in accordance with the approved modified plans and specifications.
Section 385 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 385. Itinerant restaurant and temporary refreshment stand time limit and place of operation. An itinerant restaurant or temporary refreshment
stand shall not be operated at any location on any one premise for more than thirty (30) days in any one year unless it complies with all of the
provisions of this code applicable to restaurants. Except for itinerant restaurants or temporary refreshment stands operating from vehicles which do
not do business at any location for over thirty (30) minutes at any one time and during any one day, all the businesses shall be provided with
adequate, convenient toilet facilities, as approved by the health officer. No such business shall be conducted except at temporary events, such as
carnivals, festivals, circuses, special temporary attractions or events, or on park property when authorized by a public agency in charge of the park.
No such business shall be operated on any property where the operation or business is prohibited by any other applicable code or regulation. The
person responsible for the business which is to be operated at any location for more than thirty (30) minutes at any one time shall not commence or
continue the operation until he has received written authorization from the health officer for the specific location where the business is to be
conducted.
Section 386 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 386. Itinerant restaurant special requirements. Itinerant restaurants shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter except toilet room
and dressing rooms, or when specifically exempted by the health officer.
Section 387 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 387. Temporary refreshment stand special requirements. The health officer shall make an investigation of the premises, equipment and facilities to
be used in the operation of the temporary refreshment stand, and shall, when he deems it necessary for the protection of public health, restrict the
operation to the preparation and servicing of those foods which in his opinion would not be injurious to public health when prepared and served with
such facilities as the operator intends to use.
Section 504.1 is amended to read:
Sec. 504.1. Water well defined. "Water well" means any drilled, excavated, jetted, or otherwise constructed excavation which is used or intended to be
used to extract water from or eject water into the underground for any purpose, or to observe or test underground waters. This definition shall not
include: (a) salt water wells; (b) wells under the jurisdiction of the State of California, Division of Oil and Gas, except those wells converted to use as
water wells; or (c) wells used for the purpose of: (1) dewatering excavation during construction, or (2) stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.
Section 504.2 is amended to read:
Sec. 504.2 Electrode well defined. "Electrode well" means any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet deep constructed by any method for the
purpose of installing electrodes or electrical conductors including, but not limited to, cathodic protection wells and grounding rod wells.
Section 504.3 is amended to read:
Sec. 504.3. Abandoned water well defined. "Abandoned water well" is a nonoperating well which is not maintained in conformity with Section 519 of
this chapter.
Section 504.4 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 504.4. Nonactive water well defined. "Nonactive water well" is one which is not in active use but which is maintained in conformance with the
provisions of Section 519 of this chapter.
Section 504.5 is added to read:
Sec. 504.5. Nonconforming electrode well defined. "Nonconforming electrode well" is one which, at the effective date of this ordinance, has not been
constructed in conformance with Section 520.1, or is not maintained in conformance with Section 519 of this chapter.
Section 509 is amended to read:
Sec. 509. Pipe line treatment. Every new water main and every repaired section of an existing water main must be cleared of coliform bacteria by the
proper application of chlorine in sufficient quantities to give a minimum of fifty (50) parts per million of available chlorine. The new or repaired pipe
shall be thoroughly flushed before and after chlorination. If the first application of chlorine is not sufficient, the procedure shall be repeated until the
water will meet the standards set forth in the United States Public Health Service Drinking Water Standards. Means or methods providing equivalent
treatment may be used if approved by the health officer.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 106/581
Section 513 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 513. Wells and water supplies to be protected. All domestic water wells and springs shall be sealed with concrete or other impervious material, so
as to protect against surface or subsurface contamination or pollution.
Section 514 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 514. Reservoirs and tanks to be covered. Durable protection and substantial covers shall be provided and maintained for each reservoir, tank,
cistern, standpipe or other structure used for distribution or storage of domestic water. Covers shall be watertight and shall be constructed so as to
provide drainage away from the structure. All openings for ventilation shall be screened with corrosion resistant screen not coarser than one-fourth
inch mesh to exclude rodents and birds or with sixteen mesh screen when the screen is necessary to control mosquito or insect breeding in the
reservoir. All manholes shall be constructed with curbs raised above the surrounding surface and installed in a manner to prevent roof or surface
drainage from entering the structure. When it is determined by the health officer that it is impractical due to size, shape or other unusual conditions,
to provide and maintain a cover as provided for in this section, adequate treatment and protection of the water shall be provided as required and
approved by the health officer.
Any reservoir, standpipe, cistern, forebay, tank, weir box, receptacle, or any other form of installation used for the production, distribution or storage
of any domestic water supply or water used for human consumption shall be securely protected against pollution or contamination.
Section 515 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 515. Log of water well. Any person who has drilled, dug, excavated, or bored a water well shall, within thirty days after completion of the drilling,
digging, excavating, or boring of the water well, furnish the health officer with a complete log of the water well. This log shall include the type of
casing, the depth of the well, the number and location of the perforations in the casing and any other data required by the health officer. A copy of the
log providing the information submitted to state agencies satisfies this requirement.
Section 516 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 516. General location of water wells. It is unlawful for any person to drill, dig, excavate, or bore any water well in any location in which sources of
pollution or contamination are known to exist at the location whereby water may become contaminated or polluted when the well is properly
constructed and maintained.
Section 517 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 517. Distance of water wells from sewage disposal systems, animals and fowl. It is unlawful for a person to drill, dig, excavate, or bore a water
well within one hundred feet (100') of a seepage pit or cesspool, within fifty feet (50') of a sewage disposal field, a private or public sewer, privy, or
place where animals or fowl are kept. Where special hazards are involved, the distance required may be increased or special construction required
as may be directed by the health officer.
Where perforations or screens are located at or over one hundred feet below the ground surface and where sealed and maintained in accordance
with Section 519 of this chapter or in such other circumstances as he determines lesser distances will not subject the water to contamination or
pollution, the health officer may authorize lesser distances than those specified in this section.
Section 519 is amended to read:
Sec. 519. Well sealing. All water wells and electrode wells shall be kept sealed and maintained in a manner that will prevent the entrance of pump
leakage, surface drainage, or any other contamination or pollution into the well or the aquifer, except that nonconforming electrode wells need not
comply with this section until such time as the electrode is expended, or the well is reconstructed, or the well is no longer being used for its intended
purpose, unless, in the judgment of the health officer, such exception constitutes a threat to the quality of an aquifer.
Section 520 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 520. Construction of water wells.
(a) All water wells hereafter drilled, dug, or bored shall have a durable, watertight casing which shall extend to a depth that will exclude contamination
or pollution by surface drainage and undesirable ground water and extend at least eighteen inches (18") above the surrounding natural ground
level at the well site after drilling and until the pump is permanently mounted.
(b) All gravel packed wells shall have an outside water tight casing meeting the requirements of subsection (a) hereof. The top of the space
between the outer and inner casings shall be closed or sealed to exclude surface drainage. The space between the outer casing and the drill hole
shall be sealed as required by Section 513 of this chapter. When an additional pipe is provided for a "gravel chute", the top thereof shall extend
above the floor or ground level and be fitted with a tight cap or lid unless in a locked room or an enclosure which is locked, bolted or screwed on
tightly.
Section 520.1 is added to read:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 107/581
Sec. 520.1. Construction of electrode wells. All electrode wells hereafter constructed shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the health officer in such
a manner as to exclude contamination or pollution of any useable underground water.
Section 521 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 521. Construction of water wells, slab, curtain, and pedestal. All water wells hereafter drilled, dug, excavated, or bored shall be provided with:
(a) A water tight reinforced concrete slab of a minimum thickness of six inches (6") shall extend horizontally at least three feet (3') from the well
casing in all directions. The concrete slab shall adequately slope so as to drain water away from the well casing. The top surface of the slab at its
outer edge shall be at least four inches (4") above the surrounding ground level. This slab need not be provided, or the size and method of
construction thereof may be modified when the protection intended by this requirement or the exception of subsection (d) hereof is provided by an
alternate method approved by the health officer.
(b) For pumps or pump motors installed above the well casing, the pump or motor shall be mounted on a concrete pedestal constructed around the
well casing and sealed thereto, the top of which is at least eight inches (8") above the finished grade at the well site and at least four inches (4")
above the slab surrounding the well.
(c) The pedestal, slab (and curtain wall, if required to protect an existing well) shall be poured monolithically or otherwise constructed as approved
by the health officer to effectively prevent leakage between the pedestal and the slab.
(d) Exemptions: Means or methods other than those specified in (b) and (c) hereof may be used to provide the required protection when the health
officer determines the alternates are necessary and that they provide equivalent protection. A submersible type pump may be installed with
subsurface discharge and access when all subsurface entrances to the well or casing, other than into the aquifer, are effectively sealed, the
enclosure is designed and constructed to exclude surface water or drainage, the area around the casing is provided with effective drainage and
other protective features are provided which the health officer determines will effectively prevent contamination or pollution from entering the well
or the aquifer.
Section 522 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 522. Water well sanitization pipe. All domestic water wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means through which chlorine or other
disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the well. The pipe, if provided, shall be extended to a height equal to the pump pedestal or at least
eight inches (8") above the finished grade, shall be kept sealed and shall be provided with a threaded or equivalently secure cap. Equivalent
protection for excluding contamination from the well shall be provided for subsurface pump discharge installations. If an air relief vent is used, it shall
terminate downward and be screened and protected against the possibility of contaminating material entering the vent.
Section 523 is amended as follows:
Sec. 523. Wells - drilling and destroying. No person shall drill, dig, bore, deepen or excavate any well, or destroy an existing well, without first making
application and securing a permit from the health officer.
The application shall be made on a form prepared by the health officer which shall include the location of the proposed or existing well, the type of
casing, the manner of sealing and any other data required by the health officer.
Section 523.1 is amended to read:
Sec. 523.1. Reconstruction or conversion of existing well for domestic use. Any person intending to convert any industrial, oil or irrigation well for use
as a domestic water well, shall first apply and secure a permit from the health officer.
The application shall be made on a form prepared by the health officer which shall include the location of the well, the type of casing, the manner of
sealing and any other data required by the health officer.
Section 523.2 is amended to read:
Sec. 523.2. Processing of application for well drilling. Upon receipt of an application the health officer shall make an investigation. If the applicant has
complied with all applicable laws and regulations and the proposed well location will comply with this chapter, and the drilling, digging, boring,
deepening, excavating, converting, destruction or design of the well will not create a condition which in the opinion of the health officer can pollute or
contaminate the underground water or the water produced by the well, the health officer shall issue the permit.
Section 523.3 is amended to read:
Sec. 523.3. Validity of permit for well drilling. A permit shall be valid only for the location described on the permit. Construction, reconstruction or
destruction of a well shall be carried out in compliance with all applicable regulations and requirements of the health officer and with all ordinances
and laws of the County of Los Angeles and of the State of California and shall comply with the terms and conditions specified in the permit. If any of
such conditions, regulations, ordinances or laws are not complied with, the health officer may suspend or revoke the permit by mailing or personally
serving written notice of suspension or revocation upon the applicant.
Section 523.4 is added to read:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 108/581
Sec. 523.4. Hearings. Any person whose application for a permit has been denied, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked, may petition the
health officer for a hearing. Such petition shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall set forth in detail the facts and reasons upon which his
petition is based. The time limit within which the petition must be filed is twenty (20) business days following the date on which the notice of denial,
suspension or revocation was mailed to the applicant. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant not less than five (5)
business days prior to such hearing, either by registered mail or in the manner required for the service of summons in civil actions. At the time and
place set for the hearing, the health officer will give the applicant and other interested persons an adequate opportunity to present any relevant facts.
The health officer may place any person involved in the matter, including the applicant, under oath. The health officer may, when he deems it
necessary, continue any hearing by setting a new time and place and by giving notice to the applicant of such action. At the close of the hearing, or
at any time within ten (10) days thereafter, the health officer will order such disposition of the application or permit as he has determined to be proper
and will make such disposition known to the applicant.
Section 524 is amended to read:
Sec. 524. Destruction of water wells. All water wells, unless made to comply with Sec. 513 and 519 hereof, shall be destroyed to the satisfaction of the
health officer by filling with cement grout, puddled clay or similar impervious material, as approved by the health officer, to thoroughly seal the well
including all voids, annular spaces, gravel envelopes or other spaces, as necessary to protect the aquifer.
Section 524.1 is added to read:
Sec. 524.1. Destruction of electrode wells. All electrode wells, unless in compliance with Section 519 of this chapter, shall be destroyed to the
satisfaction of the health officer in such a manner as to exclude contamination or pollution of any usable underground water.
Section 525 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 525. Construction features for existing or converted water wells. All water wells used to supply domestic water shall conform to the requirements
of a new water well except the health officer may accept substitute methods when he finds it is impractical to fully meet the requirements and if he
determines the substitute methods satisfactorily accomplish the intended purpose.
Existing wells shall meet requirements for new wells regarding protection from flooding or contamination or such protection which the health officer
determines to be equivalent.
Section 525.1 is amended to read:
Sec. 525.1. Disinfection and bacteriological quality of domestic water wells. Every new, repaired or reconstructed domestic water well, after completion
of construction, repair or reconstruction, and before being placed in service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign substances. The well, including
the gravel used in gravel-packed wells, the pump, and all portions of equipment coming in contact with well water shall be disinfected with a solution
containing at least fifty (50) parts per million available chlorine, which shall remain in the well for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours, or by an
equivalent method of disinfection satisfactory to the health officer, and such procedure shall be repeated, as necessary, to produce water meeting
bacteriological standards as set forth in the United States Public Health Service Drinking Water Standards. No well water from a new or
reconstructed well shall be used for domestic purposes until the water meets such bacteriological requirements.
Section 552 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 552. Public swimming area defined. "Public swimming area" means any portion of a body of water owned, operated or under the control of any
person which is permitted to be used for swimming and bathing except:
(a) A swimming pool;
(b) A wading pool;
(c) Any portion of the Pacific Ocean;
(d) Swimming areas owned and controlled by a single family and used only by that family and its guests.
If a body of water other than described in (a),(b),(c), or (d), above is of such size, shape and depth that it can be used for swimming or recreative
bathing, it shall be presumed that such is permitted therein unless it is clearly and plainly posted, in a manner acceptable to the health officer,
warning that swimming or recreative bathing is prohibited.
Section 561 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 561. Swimming pool equipment review, approval and fees. (8588, eff. 5-8-1964) All recirculation and purification equipment shall be subject to
review and approval by the health officer before installation in connection with a swimming pool.
It is unlawful for any person to install any recirculation and purification equipment related to a swimming pool unless the equipment has first been
reviewed and approved by the health officer.
Any person desiring to have recirculation or purification equipment reviewed shall submit the equipment to the health officer and pay the following
fees which are payable to the county tax collector prior to the time of submission of each piece of equipment:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 109/581
(a) Filters
(1) First basic individual unit of each manufacturer or of each series of similar design - $50.00
(2) Each additional unit of the same make of different filter area in a series for which the fee required in (a) was paid - $10.00
(b) Chlorinators - for each make unit of the same general design regardless of capacity - $30.00
(c) Hypochlorinators - for each type unit of each manufacturer - $20.00
(d) Surface skimmers - for each type unit of each manufacturer - $50.00
(e) Rate of flow indicators for each series of similar units of each manufacturer - $45.00
(f) Test kits for chlorine or other approved disinfectant and pH - $20.00
(g) Pumps
(1) First basic individual unit of each series of each manufacturer - $25.00
(2) Each additional unit of same series but different horsepower - $5.00
(h) Separation Tanks
(1) First basic individual unit of each series of each manufacturer - $20.00
(2) Each additional unit of the same design but different volume - $5.00
Section 561.1 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 561.1. Exemption from swimming pool equipment review fees. Any swimming pool equipment which has been approved by the National
Sanitation Foundation or other national testing agency found by the health officer to apply equivalent standards, which is currently listed by the
foundation or agency as equipment permitted to carry its seal of approval or equivalent and which conforms to all applicable state and local
requirements, shall be exempt from payment of the above fees.
Section 561.2 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 561.2. Swimming pool equipment approval period. Swimming pool equipment which the health officer determines to acceptably perform the
function for which intended shall be approved for a period not to exceed three (3) years after which it shall be submitted for re-examination. The fees
for the re-examinations shall be fifty percent (50%) of the above listed fees. Upon the expiration of the approval period granted for any device, it is
unlawful to install any such device in a swimming pool until after an application has been submitted, the device has been found acceptable and a
new period of approval has been established by the health officer.
Periods of approval shall be subject to review by the health officer at any time should there be evidence of failure or inadequate performance of the
device; if after investigation and hearing it is found that the unit is unsatisfactory to perform the function for which intended, approval may be
immediately withdrawn.
Section 562 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 562. Accredited lifeguard defined. "Accredited Lifeguard" means a person who holds a current American Red Cross Senior Lifesaving Certificate
or equivalent and a current American Red Cross Standard First Aid Certificate or equivalent. In addition, he shall have had satisfactory experience as
a beach lifeguard for at least one swimming season or an equivalent record of performance.
Section 563 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 563. Lifeguard in training defined. A "lifeguard in training" is a person who performs lifeguard duty under the direct supervision of an accredited
lifeguard during a training program, preparatory to becoming an accredited lifeguard.
Section 564 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 564. Lifeguards - Public swimming area. One or more accredited lifeguards, having no other duty to perform at the time than to superintend the
safety of the bathers, shall be on lifeguard duty at each public swimming area as defined above when it is open or in use.
All lifeguards shall show their lifesaving certificates and first aid certificates to the health officer, upon his request.
Section 565 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 565. Lifesaving equipment and first aid kit - Public swimming area.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 110/581
(a) Every public swimming area shall be provided with a minimum of one approved life ring, buoy or equivalent approximately fifteen inches (15") in
diameter, and where so required, one rescue pole at least twelve feet (12') long with hook. The life rings, buoys or equivalent and rescue hook
shall be readily accessible to each lifeguard, the location and spacing thereof to be determined by consideration of the area to be covered,
configuration of water area and related factors and approved by the health officer. The life rings, buoys or equivalent shall have attached to them,
seventy five feet (75') of sound three-sixteenth inch (3/16") line which shall be stored, when not in use, in such a way as to prevent kinking or
fouling.
(b) When, in the opinion of the health officer, any public swimming area is of such size that unaided swimming rescues by lifeguards does not, in
his opinion, offer sufficient protection to swimmers, one or more square sterned boats equipped with oars, oarlocks, life rings, or hollow type
paddle boards, as the health officer approves, shall be provided.
(c) A standard twenty-four (24) unit or larger first aid kit shall be provided and properly maintained and kept readily available at all public areas.
Section 566 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 566. Water supply public swimming areas, wading pools and spray pools.
(a) All water supplied to a wading pool or spray pool shall be from a source approved by the health officer.
(b) The water supply for all showers, toilets, lavatories, and drinking facilities, provided or maintained in connection with public swimming areas,
spray pools and wading pools shall be adequate in quantity and shall meet the health officer's requirements for drinking water.
Section 567 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 567. Toilet requirements - public swimming areas.
(a) Adequate toilets for each sex shall be provided and maintained not over three hundred feet (300') distant from any portion of public swimming
areas.
(b) All toilet facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, well lighted and ventilated, and shall be kept supplied with toilet paper at all times.
(c) The type and location for the existing toilets shall be acceptable to the health officer and plans for new toilet facilities shall be approved by the
health officer prior to construction.
Section 568 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 568. Dressing room - If provided for public swimming areas. If dressing rooms are provided at a public swimming area, they shall comply with the
following:
(a) Public swimming areas used simultaneously by both sexes shall be provided with separate dressing rooms with separate entrances to and exits
from the dressing rooms.
(b) All dressing room walls and partitions shall have smooth surfaces which are impervious to moisture and free from cracks or open joints. Walls
of compartments within a dressing room shall be constructed in such a manner that there is a clear, intervening space of not less than eight inches
(8") between the bottom of the partition and the floor unless otherwise approved by the health officer.
(c) Floors in the dressing rooms, toilet rooms, and shower rooms shall be impervious and rough enough (but not abrasive to the feet) so as to be
non skid, similar to a "rough rotary, raised rubber, or wood float", finish and shall be free from cracks or open joints. Floors shall pitch not less than
one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot to floor drains or surface water disposal areas. All junctures of floors with walls and partitions shall be coved. Wood
floors or wooden slats over concrete floors shall not be permitted.
(d) When lockers are provided, they shall be kept clean and free from vermin, properly ventilated, and shall be fastened firmly to concrete islands
or shall be installed with at least a six-inch (6") high clear space beneath to permit flushing of the floor.
(e) All dressing rooms, shower rooms, toilet and lavatory rooms, and all other rooms in a bathhouse shall be adequately ventilated and lighted. A
minimum light intensity of three (3) foot-candles shall be provided in all parts of the rooms.
(f) Toilets shall be provided in close proximity to any dressing rooms in addition to requirements specified in Section 567.
Section 569 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 569. Drinking fountains, public swimming areas and wading pools. At least one approved drinking fountain shall be installed and maintained in
each wading pool area and each public swimming area, for the use of the persons using the public swimming area or wading pool.
Section 570 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 570. Health requisites public swimming areas and wading pools. No person having a communicable disease shall be employed in any capacity at
any wading pool or public swimming area.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 111/581
All persons known to be, or suspected by the health officer or the management of being afflicted with an infectious disease, or suffering from a
cough, cold, fever, sores, or wearing bands or bandages, shall be excluded from the public swimming area or the wading pool except on presentation
of a written statement, from a physician, of current date acceptable to the health officer.
Section 1000 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1000. Registration and certification requirements. (8588, eff. 5-8-1964) No person may engage either in the business or in the occupation of
treating swimming pool waters, or of cleaning filters used or useable in connection therewith, or of maintaining swimming pools or facilities or
appurtenances thereof unless he is certified or registered according to the terms hereof, or unless he is expressly excused from the requirement by
Section 1010 hereof.
Persons registered or certified hereunder may lawfully engage in the business or occupation only to the extent permitted pursuant to the registration
or certification.
Every person required to be registered or certified by the terms hereof and before engaging in the business or activity shall make application therefor
and shall, within time limitations established by rules of the health officer, become registered or certified.
Section 1000.1 is added to read as follows:
Sec. 1000.1. Actions. The tax collector shall, in the name of the County of Los Angeles as plaintiff, bring suit for the recovery of registration or
certification fees against any swimming pool service company or against any person required to have this registration or certification who carries on
or attempts to carry on such business or activity without first being certified or registered.
Section 1003 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1003. Registration as a swimming pool service company. (8588, eff. 5-8-1964) Every person who engages in the business of maintaining or
servicing swimming pools shall be registered hereunder as a swimming pool service company.
Exemption: A swimming pool service technician who operates alone and who does not employ any swimming pool service technician, apprentice or
applicant for certification shall be exempt from paying a registration fee as a swimming pool service company.
Section 1004 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1004. Application for registration as a swimming pool service company. Every person desiring to be registered as a swimming pool service
company shall file an application with the health officer and shall then pay an application fee to the tax collector of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which
is charged to cover the cost of processing the application. No part of the fee is refundable. The applicant shall pay a penalty equal to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the fee if application is not made within thirty-one (31) days after commencement of the business.
The applicant shall designate upon his application by address the principal office of the applicant which is located within the County of Los Angeles,
State of California and if the applicant has no office within the County of Los Angeles, then he shall designate upon his application his principal office
wherever located.
Section 1011 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1011. Application for certification as a swimming pool service technician or as a swimming pool service technician apprentice. Every person
desiring certification as a swimming pool service technician or as a swimming pool service technician apprentice shall file with the health officer an
application for certification, and shall then pay an application fee to the tax collector of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a swimming pool service technician
or ten dollars ($10.00) for a swimming pool service technician apprentice to cover the cost of giving the examination and processing the application.
No portion of the fee is refundable. The applicant shall pay a penalty equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the fee if application is not made within
thirty-one (31) days after commencement of the activity.
The applicant shall designate upon his application by address the principal office of the applicant which is located within the County of Los Angeles,
State of California, and if the applicant has no office within the County of Los Angeles, then he shall designate upon his application his principal office
wherever located.
Section 1018 is amended to read as follows:
Sec. 1018. Effective period of registration or certification; renewal of registration and certification. Registration as a swimming pool service company,
certification as a swimming pool service technician and certification as a swimming pool service technician apprentice are each effective to
December 31 of the year in which the registration or certification was received. Every person desiring to renew the registration or certification shall
pay a renewal fee to the tax collector for renewal before December 31 in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for each registration or certification for
the following calendar year. A penalty equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the renewal fee shall be submitted on or after January 1 for the renewal
of the annual registration or certification.
(Ord. 691, 6-24-1968; amd. Ord. 750, 12-14-1970)
Chapter 2
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 112/581
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set out, unless it is apparent from the
context that they have a different meaning:
BUSINESS: A commercial or public entity, including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint stock company, corporation, or association
that is organized as a for profit or nonprofit entity.
CIVIC WASTE: All types of solid waste, recyclables and organics generated by the City, including: solid waste, recyclables, and organics placed in
receptacles located in public areas, including but not limited to City public parks, parking lots, and right-of-ways, for collection of waste generated by the
public; solid waste, recyclables and organics generated at City-owned facilities including but not limited to City Hall, the City Yard, fire stations, police
station, library, recreation centers, etc.; and solid waste, recyclables and organics generated at City events.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Any commercial, industrial, or office enterprise that generates solid waste, green waste, organics, or recyclable materials.
Commercial premises does not include civic waste or any State run school system.
ORGANICS: Food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food
waste.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: Public Works Director or his/her designee.
RECYCLABLES: Material that can be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture and includes paper,
newsprint, printed matter, pasteboard, paper containers, cardboard, glass, aluminum, PET and other plastics, beverage containers, compostable
materials, phone books, used motor oil and such other materials designated by the Public Works Director, or designated as recyclables by the California
Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle), or other agency with jurisdiction.
SOLID WASTE: All solid waste as defined in Public Resources Code section 40191 as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-2: EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS OF CITY; CITY RESPONSIBILITY:
The City maintains exclusive authority to manage and regulate solid waste, including but not limited to regulations regarding the storage, collection,
transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste. Such authority includes the right to determine the methods by which such regulation occurs, for
example, through contract, permit, franchise, or another method. The City may enter into exclusive or non-exclusive contracts or franchises for the
collection and transportation of solid waste including recyclables and organics. No person, entity, organization or firm is authorized to collect such solid
waste, organics or recyclables without authorization or permission from the City. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-3: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION; COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF ORGANICS AND RECYCLABLES - RESIDENTIAL:
A. Mandatory Arrangements For Collection And Removal: The owner or occupant of each residential premises is required to contract with the City's
franchisee for removal of all solid waste, organics, and recyclables accumulated on such premises and must pay for such removal at the rates
established by the City Council. In the event the owner elects to have the occupant of its premises take responsibility for contracting with the franchisee
for collection service and the occupant fails to make arrangements for collection or fails to pay for collection services provided by the franchisee, the
responsibility to contract and pay for collection services shall become the owner's responsibility. No owner or occupant of a residential premises shall
employ another, other than the franchisee, to collect solid waste, organics or recyclables generated on the residential premises. For purposes of this
section, "residential premises" refers to one- and two-family dwelling units. If a property contains both commercial and residential premises, the owner
or occupant of the residential component of the premises must independently contract with the franchisee for the collection and removal of solid waste,
organics, and recyclables in accordance with this chapter.
B. Exceptions: An exception to the mandatory requirement of subsection A of this section can be granted if the owner or occupant meets one of the
following criteria:
1. The owner or occupant of the residential premises obtains a self-haul permit in accordance with this chapter and continually remains in compliance
with its terms and conditions.
2. The owner or occupant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director or his/her designee that no solid waste of any kind is being
generated on the premises. The occupant must consent to an on-site inspection of the premises by the Public Works Director in order to verify that
no solid waste of any kind is being generated. If the circumstances that allowed the exception should change, the owner or occupant must
immediately initiate regular solid waste, organics, and recyclables collection in accordance with this section. The Public Works Director may require
reauthorization of the exception periodically.
C. Compost And Recyclables: Nothing in this chapter limits the right of any owner or occupant of a residential premises to compost green waste or to
donate or sell recyclables generated in or on their residential premises or to transport those recyclables to a recycling facility. A self-haul permit is not
required for a generator to transport his or her recyclables to a recycling facility.
D. Ownership Of Materials: Upon the placement of solid waste, organics or recyclables in a container for collection by the franchisee at the collection point,
said materials become the property of franchisee.
E. Unlawful Disposal And Collection Of Solid Waste, Organics Or Recyclables:
1. No person may deposit solid waste or containers upon any street, alley, gutter or parkway, or upon any lot or vacant area or other public place or
way other than as provided in this chapter.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 113/581
2. No person shall tamper with, modify, scavenge from or deposit solid waste, organics, or recyclables in any solid waste, organics or recyclables
container which has not been provided for his or her use, without the permission of the occupant of the premises where the container is located.
3. Except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, no person shall collect solid waste, organics or recyclables from residential premises within the City.
F. Obstruction Of Franchisee Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person, their agents or employees to hinder, threaten, impede, or obstruct the franchisee
in the performance of its duties. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-4: COLLECTION CARTS:
A. Solid Waste Carts: Occupants of residential premises receiving individual collection services must place solid waste in the solid waste carts provided by
the franchisee.
B. Recyclables Carts: Occupants of residential premises shall separate recyclables from solid waste and organics and place recyclables in the recyclables
carts provided by the franchisee. In the case where the occupant of the premises is not the owner, the owner is responsible to instruct the occupant in
proper separation and placement of recyclable materials from solid waste and organics.
C. Organics Carts: Occupants of residential premises shall separate organics from solid waste and recyclables and place organics in the organics carts
provided by the franchisee. In the case where the occupant of the premises is not the owner, the owner is responsible to instruct the occupant in proper
separation and placement of organics from solid waste and recyclables.
D. Filling Of Carts And Containers: No occupant of either residential or commercial premises shall fill any cart or container with solid waste, organics or
recyclables above the top of the cart or container so as to permit the contents of any container to be blown or otherwise strewn about.
E. Proper Placement Of Carts For Collection: Carts used at any residential premises for the purpose of collection of solid waste, organics or recyclables
shall be placed on the street against the curb in front of the premises occupied by the person depositing the same as directed by the franchisee, unless
the owner or occupant has contracted with the franchisee for backyard service or roll-out service. Where no street curb exists, the carts shall be placed
not more than two feet (2') from the outside edge of the street nearest the property's entrance. When the premises are adjacent to a paved alley of
sufficient width to allow easy passage of the collection trucks, the containers may be placed within two feet (2') of the property line of the premises and
must be readily accessible for collection from the alley.
F. Timing Of Placement And Removal Of Carts: Occupants shall not place carts at the curb for collection by franchisee at any time other than the days
established by the franchisee for the collection of such solid waste, organics or recyclables, or earlier than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day preceding
the day designated by the franchisee for collection. All carts shall be removed from the place of collection prior to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of the day the
carts have been emptied and, whenever possible, stored in a location screened from public view.
G. Supervision And Cleaning Of Carts: Each occupant of a residential premises shall maintain supervision over carts on their premises. Occupants shall
maintain carts in a reasonably clean, sanitary condition.
H. Unauthorized Tampering And Removal Of Contents: No person, other than the waste generator or any waste generator employee, or an officer or
employee of the franchisee, or any person holding a City-issued permit for the collection or disposal of solid waste, shall tamper or meddle with any
cart or container or the contents thereof, or remove the contents of the cart or container, or remove the cart or container from the location where the
same shall have been placed by the waste generator. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-5: COLLECTION BY FRANCHISEE:
Collection and removal of solid waste, organics and recyclables from residential premises by the franchisee shall be made in accordance with the terms
and conditions of this chapter and the agreement between the City and the franchisee. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-6: UNLAWFUL COLLECTION:
A. Except as expressly provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to collect or transport solid waste or organics within the City unless such
person is a franchisee or holds a valid commercial/multi-family solid waste collection and transportation permit issued by the City. Additionally, it is
unlawful for any person to collect or transport recyclables within the City unless such person is a franchisee, the holder of a valid commercial/multifamily
solid waste collection and transportation permit issued by the City, or the recyclables collected are exempt under this section. If recyclables are
hauled by other than the franchisee or a permittee, the City may require the generator to provide an affidavit demonstrating that no additional fees
relating to the collection of recyclables have been charged.
B. It is unlawful for any person to permit, allow or enter into any agreement whatsoever for the collection or transportation of solid waste, organics or
recyclables with any person who is not the franchisee or the holder of a valid commercial/multi-family solid waste collection and transportation permit,
unless the collection and transportation is exempted under this section.
C. The collection and transportation of the following types of solid waste, organics and recyclables are exempted from the requirements of subsections A
and B of this section:
1. Green waste, landscape and pruning waste, or nonhazardous wood waste removed from a premises by a gardening, landscaping or tree trimming
contractor as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a transportation service and for no additional or separate
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 114/581
fee.
2. Tree trimmings, clippings and all similar materials generated at parks and other City-maintained premises, which may be collected and transported
by the City to the disposal site or processing facility.
3. Hazardous or dangerous materials; liquid and dry caustics; acids; biohazardous, flammable and explosive materials; insecticides; and similar
substances.
4. Infectious medical waste1.
5. Byproducts of sewage treatment, including sludge, grit and screenings.
6. Recyclables which are source-separated at any premises by the waste generator and donated to youth, civic, or charitable organizations.
7. Source-separated recyclable materials which are transported by a generator who is recycling under the California Beverage Containers Recycling
Litter Reduction Act2.
8. Solid waste transported by a generator in accordance with a valid self-haul permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
9. Construction and demolition debris which is removed from any premises by the waste generator, using his/her/its own vehicles and which is
transported personally by the owner or occupant of such premises, or by his or her employees.
10. Construction and demolition debris hauled by the property or business owner using their own vehicles and their own employees.
11. A licensed contractor removing items for reuse or recycling which is incidental to work performed at a project construction site and as defined under
diversion requirements if the contractor: a) uses his or her own employees and vehicles for this purpose, and b) maintains no bins or boxes at the
site which are detachable from the vehicle.
12. Materials generated by public schools.
13. Large, bulky or heavy items that the City's franchisee does not pick up or does not pick up on a weekly basis.
14. Removal of large amounts of solid waste to address health and safety concerns such as hoarding. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-7: CHARGES FOR SERVICE:
From time to time, the City Council shall establish by resolution rates that franchisees may charge owners or occupants of one- and two-family dwelling
units for the collection, processing and/or disposal of solid waste, organics and recyclables. Prior to adopting the resolution establishing the rate, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-8: BILLING AND PENALTIES:
Each owner or occupant receiving collection services from the franchisee shall be billed by the franchisee periodically in accordance with the rates
established by the franchise agreement and approved by the City Council. If an owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to pay the bill, then a penalty
may be added to the bill and the sum, together with any costs incurred by the franchisee, may be recovered by the franchisee as provided by law,
including Government Code section 54348. If an occupant fails to pay the bill, the owner shall be responsible for the payment. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-9: FAILURE TO PAY:
If there is no payment of a bill after sixty (60) days or more, the franchisee shall undertake collection of the bill (including penalties and expenses of
collection) for a period of one year from the invoice date. Franchisee shall make reasonable efforts to obtain payment through issuance of late payment
notices, telephone requests for payment, and assistance from collection agencies (who shall make at least 2 attempts at collection). If the franchisee's
collection efforts for a one-year period fail, and franchisee can demonstrate to the City that it attempted on at least five (5) occasions to solicit moneys due
from each delinquent account, then the franchisee may assign its rights to collection (including penalties and expenses of collection) to the City. The City
may then, at its discretion, initiate any collection procedures authorized by law, including those special assessment procedures authorized by Government
Code sections 38790.1 and 25831. If the City collects the delinquent amount, it shall pay the collected moneys to franchisee after deducting City's
administrative costs and costs of collection. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-10: SELF-HAULING:
A. Permit Required: The person in charge of a residential premises may apply for and obtain a permit to self-haul, and shall not self-haul without a valid
self-haul permit issued pursuant to this section unless otherwise expressly authorized in this chapter. Every person in charge of a residential premises
who desires to self-haul in lieu of making arrangements with the solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services shall obtain a self-haul permit
from the Public Works Director prior to commencing self-hauling. For purposes of this section, "residential premises" refers to one- and two-family
dwelling units.
B. Term: A permit to self-haul shall be good for one calendar year, or such part of the calendar year that is remaining after the issuance of the permit. All
self-haul permits shall expire on December 31, and may be renewed annually. Application for a renewal permit must be filed at least sixty (60) calendar
days prior to the expiration date of the permit to allow adequate time for processing, inspection and verifications required to issue the permit.
C. Issuance Of Permit: An applicant for a self-haul permit shall submit a completed application, on a form approved by the City's Public Works Director, to
the Public Works Department. The Public Works Director shall determine whether the application is complete within five (5) business days of the
receipt of the application. If the Public Works Director finds the application incomplete, the applicant shall be given a list of information needed to
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 115/581
complete the application.
Once an application for a self-haul permit is complete, the applicant shall produce the items listed in subsections C1 through C7 of this section. The
Public Works Director shall issue a self-haul permit within five (5) working days of the production of all of the required items.
1. The applicant must produce for inspection the vehicle the applicant intends to use for self-hauling, and the vehicle must meet the following
standards:
a. The vehicle is capable of safely hauling a minimum of thirty two (32) gallons (4.3 cubic feet) of solid waste, recyclables and organics in a safe and
sanitary manner so that such matter will not spill; and
b. If the vehicle is not fully enclosed, the applicant must produce a tarp or other material, device or mechanism that is demonstrated to completely
secure the materials being self-hauled;
2. The applicant must produce evidence that he or she owns or leases the vehicle produced for inspection or has a written agreement to use the
vehicle for self-hauling with the vehicle's owner or lessor;
3. The applicant must produce evidence that he or she has a valid California driver's license to operate the vehicle produced for inspection and that the
vehicle is registered in the State of California;
4. The applicant must provide the City with proof of automobile insurance for the vehicle;
5. The vehicle must be operational and meet all applicable Vehicle Code standards;
6. The applicant must provide the City with proof that the applicant has containers for the storage of solid waste, recyclables and organics on the
applicant's premises before the materials are hauled to a disposal facility;
7. The applicant must not have any outstanding charges due to the City's solid waste franchisee for solid waste handling services previously received
at the premises for which the self-hauling permit application is being submitted; and
8. The applicant must pay the fee for a self-haul permit authorized by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall reflect the City's reasonable costs of
issuing and monitoring compliance with the permit. Permits issued between January 1 and March 31 shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the
permit fee; permits issued between April 1 and June 30 shall pay seventy five percent (75%) of the permit fee; permits issued between July 1 and
September 30 shall pay fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee; permits issued between October 1 and December 31 shall pay twenty five percent
(25%) of the permit fee.
D. Appeal Of Denial: An applicant whose application for a self-haul permit has been denied may appeal that decision to the City Manager. The appeal
must be made on a form approved by the Public Works Director. An appeal must be filed within ten (10) calendar days of the date the applicant was
notified of the denial. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within ten (10) business days of the effective date of the appeal. The decision of
the City Manager shall be final.
E. Operational Standards/Permit Conditions:
1. The permittee must dispose of solid waste weekly at a licensed or permitted landfill or disposal facility and shall procure and retain weekly receipts
from such landfill or other disposal facility. Receipts shall be submitted to the City upon request. Failure to show proof of solid waste disposal for
each week that a person is permitted to self-haul shall constitute a public health and safety nuisance sufficient to permit City to revoke the permittee's
self-haul permit.
2. The permittee must notify the City of any change in the vehicle being used to haul solid waste by the permittee. The permittee must bring the new
vehicle in for an inspection and demonstrate compliance with subsections C1 through C5 of this section before the new vehicle is used to haul any
solid waste under the permit.
3. The permittee must keep on file with the City copies of the current automobile insurance and registration for the vehicle used to self-haul and the
permittee's current California driver's license.
4. The permittee must separate and bag solid waste, recyclables and organics. Recyclables must be disposed of at a licensed or permitted recycling
center, materials recovery facility, or transfer station. Organics must be disposed of at a licensed or permitted composting facility, organics
processing facility, or must be composted on the premises covered by the self-haul permit.
5. The permittee must maintain, on a rolling basis, original records showing, for the immediately preceding twelve (12) months, the type and weight of
all solid waste collected (categorized by solid waste, organics, and recyclables) and the disposal site, recycling facility, organics processing facility or
other final destination of each load transported (categorized by solid waste, recyclables, and organics). Copies of these records must be submitted to
the Public Works Director upon request.
6. The permittee must submit quarterly reports to the Public Works Director showing the type and weight of solid waste collected (categorized by solid
waste, recyclables, and organics), the final destination of each type of waste, and the receipt number (provided by the final destination) for each load
of solid waste, recyclables, and organics collected. All such reports must be submitted on a form approved by the Public Works Director.
7. The permittee is liable for any damages and cleanup costs resulting from any solid waste, recyclables or organics spills during the course of the
permittee's self-hauling activity.
F. Revocation Of Permit: The self-haul permit shall be subject to revocation if the permittee violates any provision of this chapter. A notice of revocation
shall be mailed to the permittee informing him/her that the self-haul permit is being revoked, identifying the violations of this chapter that have occurred,
and informing the permittee that he or she has the right to dispute the revocation by an appeal to the City Manager. An appeal of a revocation must be
filed within ten (10) calendar days of the mailing of notice of the revocation. A revocation appeal hearing will be scheduled within ten (10) business
days of the date the City receives the request for an appeal. Revocation of the permit will be stayed upon filing of an appeal in accordance with this
section. The stay will remain in place until a final decision is issued by the City Manager. The City Manager will issue a decision on the appeal within
five (5) business days of the hearing and provide the permittee written notice of the decision. The decision of the City Manager on the appeal shall be
final. A person whose self-haul permit has been revoked pursuant to this subsection may not obtain another self-haul permit for one year from the date
of the revocation. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 116/581
5-2-11: PLACEMENT IN CITY WASTE CONTAINERS PROHIBITED:
City solid waste, organics and recyclables containers are placed in City parks and other public areas for the use by the public to control trash, litter and
garbage generated at their respective locations. Such containers are not to be used as disposal sites for trash or rubbish which is generated off site. It is
unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit, or throw away solid waste, organics or recyclables, or other refuse or debris of any kind or character
whatsoever in City containers if such was generated at a location other than where the container is located. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-12: BURNING VEGETATION:
It is unlawful for any person to set fire to, ignite or burn any standing or uncut dry grass, weeds, brush or vegetation on any lot or premises within the City.
(Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-13: RECYCLING OF ORGANICS:
A. Mandatory Recycling Services:
1. On and after April 1, 2016, a business or a multi-family residential dwelling that generates eight (8) cubic yards or more of organics per week must
arrange for recycling services specifically for organics in the manner specified in subsection B of this section.
2. On and after January 1, 2017, a business or a multi-family residential dwelling that generates four (4) cubic yards or more of organics per week must
arrange for recycling services specifically for organics in the manner specified in subsection B of this section.
3. On and after January 1, 2019, a business or a multi-family residential dwelling that generates four (4) cubic yards or more of commercial solid waste,
as defined in Public Resources Code section 42649.1, per week, must arrange for recycling services specifically for organics in the manner specified
in subsection B of this section.
4. On or after January 1, 2020, if the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery determines that Statewide disposal of organic waste has not
been reduced to fifty percent (50%) of the level of disposal during 2014, a business that generates two (2) cubic yards or more per week of
commercial solid waste must arrange for the organics recycling services specified in subsection A3 of this section, unless the department determines
that this requirement will not result in significant additional reductions of organics disposal.
5. For purposes of this section, "multi-family residential dwelling" means a dwelling of five (5) units or more, including, without limitation, condominiums,
apartments, and townhomes. The term does not include dwellings of four (4) or fewer units.
B. Actions Required: A business or a multi-family residential dwelling subject to subsection A of this section must take at least one of the following actions:
1. Source separate organics from other waste and subscribe to a basic level of organics recycling service that includes collection and recycling of
organics.
2. Recycle its organics on site or self-haul its own organics for recycling.
3. Subscribe to an organics recycling service that may include mixed waste processing that specifically recycles organics.
4. Sell or donate its recyclable organics to a person or entity authorized by law to receive such waste.
C. Food Waste Generated By Dwelling: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a multi-family residential dwelling is not required to arrange for the organics
recycling services specified in subsection B of this section for food waste that is generated by the dwelling.
D. Recycling Services Required: Property management companies that contract for trash service for any commercial, institutional, or multi-family
properties subject to this chapter are required to contract or otherwise make available recycling services to comply with this section.
E. Reports And Policy Compliance Required: Any business or multi-family residential dwelling subject to this chapter must:
1. Report to the City of El Segundo on an annual basis the action the business or dwelling has taken pursuant to subsection B of this section; the
amount of commercial solid waste and organics that the business or dwelling generates per week; the amount of organics recycled per week, and
any other information required by the City to comply with its State mandated reporting requirements.
2. Comply with the City's mandatory commercial organics recycling policy, adopted by the City Council and which may be amended by the City
Manager.
F. Exemptions:
1. Any business or multi-family dwelling subject to this section may apply for an exemption from the requirements of this section. The City Manager or
designee may grant either a temporary or permanent exemption for any of the following reasons:
a. Lack of sufficient space in multi-family complexes or businesses to provide additional organic material recycling bins.
b. The current implementation by a business of actions that result in the recycling of a significant portion of its organics.
c. The business or group of businesses does not generate at least one-half (1/2) of a cubic yard of organics per week.
d. Extraordinary and unforeseen events, in which case a temporary exemption only may be granted.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 117/581
2. The City Manager's or designee's decision may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) days of the decision. The City Council's decision shall
be final.
G. Violation: Any violation of this section is punishable as an infraction pursuant to section 1-2-3 of this Code. The City may enforce this section by
administrative citation or any other remedy available to the City under law and it is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies.
H. Fees: The City Council may establish fees for its costs of enforcing this section by resolution. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-14: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION; COLLECTION AND PROCESSING OF ORGANICS AND RECYCLABLES -
COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY:
A. Mandatory Arrangements For Collection And Removal: The owner or occupant of each commercial and multi-family premises is required to make
arrangements for the regular removal of all solid waste, organics, and recyclables accumulated on such premises. Effective January 1, 2020, no owner
or occupant of a commercial or multi-family premises shall employ another, other than the holder of a permit issued pursuant to section 5-2-15 of this
chapter, to collect solid waste, organics or recyclables generated on the premises. For purposes of this section, "multi-family premises" refers to a
building containing three (3) or more dwelling units designed or arranged for occupancy by three (3) or more households living independently in which
they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. If a property contains both commercial and multi-family residential premises, the
owners or occupants of the residential component of the premises must independently contract with a permittee for the collection and removal of solid
waste, organics, and recyclables in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
5-2-15: COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES:
A. Permit Requirement: Effective January 1, 2020, no person shall collect solid waste from any commercial or multi-family premises in the City and
transport it over the public streets or highways except under a valid permit issued pursuant to this section, unless an exemption set forth in this section
applies. For purposes of this section, and unless otherwise specified, "multi-family premises" refers to a building containing three (3) or more dwelling
units designed or arranged for occupancy by three (3) or more households living independently in which they may or may not share common entrances
and/or other spaces.
B. Authorization; Limitations:
1. A permit issued pursuant to this section authorizes the permittee to collect specified types of solid waste from commercial and multi-family premises
in the City and to transport it over the public streets and highways of the City, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit and this
section.
2. A person may obtain a permit under this section to collect solid waste from within the City only to the extent that another person does not have an
exclusive privilege or right to collect that solid waste from within the City pursuant to a franchise agreement.
3. A permit issued pursuant to this section does not authorize, and shall not be construed to authorize, the permittee to collect solid waste within the
City when another person has an exclusive privilege or right to collect that solid waste within the City pursuant to a franchise agreement.
C. Exemptions: The requirement to obtain a permit under this section does not apply to any of the following:
1. The collection and transport of solid waste by the owner or occupant of the real property where the solid waste was generated.
2. The collection and transport of solid waste that is generated on real property in the course of a service provided to the owner or tenant of that
property by a building contractor or landscape contractor, if the solid waste is collected and transported by the contractor.
3. The collection and transport of solid waste under a valid Federal or State permit if the Federal or State permit requirement preempts the permit
requirement under this section.
4. The collection and transport of solid waste by the franchisee under a franchise agreement.
5. The collection and transport of solid waste generated at a publicly operated wastewater treatment facility.
6. Disposal of large, bulky or heavy items that are not a byproduct of materials generated by a business or tenant or are not customarily part of the
property's solid waste generation.
7. Removal of large amounts of solid waste to address health and safety concerns such as hoarding.
D. Application: A person may apply for a commercial/multi-family solid waste collection and transportation permit by submitting an application to the Public
Works Department and paying an application fee established by resolution of the City Council. The application must be made using a form approved by
the Public Works Director and include all of the following:
1. The full legal name, address and telephone number(s) of the applicant. If the applicant is a sole proprietor who will operate under a fictitious
business name, the applicant must provide a copy of a valid fictitious business name statement for the business. If the applicant is a business entity,
the applicant must provide written documentation that the entity may lawfully conduct business in the City.
2. Identification of all vehicles proposed to be used in the collection and transport of solid waste under the permit, including legible copies of valid
California registration cards for each vehicle. If any of the vehicles is equipped to provide roll-off box services, that information must also be provided.
The Public Works Director may require inspection of any such vehicles prior to issuing a permit or at any time during the life of the permit.
3. Proof of possession of a valid motor carrier identification number in good standing issued under California Vehicle Code section 34507.5, if
applicable.
4. Identification of the types of solid waste, recyclables, and organics to be collected and transported.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 118/581
5. Identification of the locations to which the solid waste, including recyclables and organics, will be transported.
6. A description of all services to be provided to a customer related to the collection and transport of solid waste (including recyclables and organics) for
that customer.
E. Vehicle Inspections; Standards:
1. All vehicles proposed to be used for collection and transport of solid waste under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be made available for
inspection by the Public Works Director or his/her designee at a location within the City determined by the Public Works Director. The vehicle must
be made available for inspection within two (2) business days of the inspection request and at a location designated by the Public Works Director.
2. All vehicles proposed to be used for collection and transport of solid waste under the permit must comply with the following minimum standards:
a. The vehicle must be designed, constructed and configured for safe handling and to securely contain the type of solid waste proposed to be
collected; and
b. The vehicle must be prominently marked with the name and telephone number of the applicant.
F. Permit Issuance; Grounds For Denial:
1. After receipt of an application, payment of a permit fee established by the City Council by resolution, and a valid certificate of liability insurance
issued to the applicant that conforms to the coverage requirement set forth in this section, the Public Works Director shall issue a commercial/multifamily
solid waste collection and transportation permit to the applicant unless any of the following grounds for denial exists:
a. Another person has an exclusive right or privilege to collect all of the types of solid waste described in subsection D4 of this section.
b. The application is incomplete or inaccurate.
c. A permit issued to the applicant under this section has been revoked within twelve (12) months prior to the date of application.
d. The applicant has failed to pay an outstanding fine.
e. The Public Works Director determines that a vehicle proposed to be used in the collection and transport of solid waste pursuant to the permit does
not conform to the minimum standards set forth in subsection E of this section.
2. The Public Works Director shall provide written notice to the applicant of any denial of a permit under this section and the reasons for the denial.
3. A permit issued pursuant to this section will include, without limitation:
a. The name of the permittee.
b. A list of all vehicles, by license plates and vehicle identification numbers, that may be used pursuant to the permit.
c. Identification of the types of solid waste that may be collected and transported pursuant to the permit and the specific services that must be
provided to customers in connection with the collection of specified types of solid waste.
d. The effective and expiration dates of the permit.
G. Permit Conditions; Responsibilities Of Permittees: The following conditions/responsibilities apply to all commercial/multi-family solid waste collection
and transportation permits/permittees:
1. The permittee must comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
2. A copy of the permit must be kept in each vehicle used for solid waste collection and transportation under the permit and produced upon request by
any peace officer.
3. Each motorized vehicle used for solid waste collection or transportation under the permit must be marked with the name and telephone number of
the permittee. Markings must be in sharp contrast to the background and of such size as to be readily visible during daylight hours from a distance of
fifty feet (50'). Markings must be applied to each sidewall of a motorized vehicle.
4. Each vehicle used for solid waste collection or transportation under the permit must be regularly maintained and cleaned. Each vehicle must be
made available for inspection by the Public Works Director or his/her designee at a location within the City. The vehicle must be made available for
inspection within two (2) business days of the inspection request.
5. Each vehicle used for solid waste collection and transportation under the permit must carry proof of liability insurance coverage in the amounts
required by this section.
6. Each container of one cubic yard or more that is used by the permittee in the course of operations under the permit must be marked with the name
and telephone number of the permittee. All containers must be maintained in a clean and safe condition. For the purposes of this subsection,
containers include trailers but do not include motorized vehicles.
7. The permittee must maintain, on a rolling basis, original records showing, for the immediately preceding twelve (12) months, the type and weight of
all solid waste collected (categorized by solid waste, recyclables, and organics), the location where each load of waste was collected, and the final
destination of each load collected (categorized by solid waste, recyclables, and organics). Copies of these records must be submitted to the Public
Works Director upon request.
8. The permittee must submit quarterly reports to the Public Works Director stating the total number of customers serviced categorized by service type
(solid waste, recycling, and organics); the customer list of premises/businesses from which each type of waste was collected; the level of service
provided to each customer, including type and weight of solid waste collected (categorized by solid waste, recyclables, and organics); the number of
containers; the frequency of service (number of days per week); and the final destination of each type of waste. All such reports must be submitted
on a form approved by the Public Works Director. If a property contains both commercial and multi-family premises, and the permittee provides
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 119/581
collection services to both, the permittee must independently track the solid waste, organics and recyclables generated by the commercial and multifamily
components of the premises.
9. Each permittee shall be required to ensure that organics and recycling services are provided for all of its customers. Each permittee shall, at least
once annually, provide educational and informational literature to its customers and the City describing the organics and recycling services to be
provided, organics and recyclable materials to be recycled, instructions on how to participate, and instructions on how to properly separate recyclable
materials and organics to maximize waste diversion.
10. The permittee must provide each commercial and multi-family premises it serves with the collection containers necessary to comply with,
implement, and achieve State and local diversion and recycling goals, as applicable. This includes, without limitation, containers that allow for the
source separation of solid waste, organics and recyclables.
11. Unless an exemption has been granted by the City, the permittee must provide each business and each multi-family residential dwelling of five (5)
units or more that it serves with the collection containers necessary to comply with, implement, and achieve State-mandated goals for the recycling
of recyclables and organics including, without limitation, AB 341 and AB 1826. For purposes of this subsection, "business" means a commercial or
public entity, including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint stock company, corporation, or association that is organized as a
for-profit or nonprofit entity. With respect to the businesses and the multi-family residential dwellings of five (5) units or more that it serves, the
permittee must provide or arrange for organic waste recycling services consistent with all applicable State laws and regulations and must assist the
City in providing related education and outreach to, and monitoring of, such businesses.
H. Insurance Requirements: At all times while doing business in the City, each permittee must have and maintain commercial general liability insurance
coverage with limits no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate.
I. Revocation:
1. Grounds For Revocation: A permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the Public Works Director in accordance with the procedures
set forth herein if the Public Works Director determines that:
a. The permittee has failed to comply with a term or condition of operation under the permit;
b. The permittee's conduct under the permit constitutes a nuisance; or
c. During the permit period, the permittee collected and transported solid waste that another person had an exclusive right or privilege to collect and
transport pursuant to a valid franchise agreement.
2. Notice: The Public Works Director will provide written notice of intent to revoke a permit to the permittee at the address provided on the permittee's
application. The notice will state all applicable grounds for the revocation and the permittee's right to a hearing under this section.
3. Hearing: Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the notice of intent to revoke, the permittee may request a hearing before the Public
Works Director by completing and submitting a written hearing request form. The hearing will be set for a date no sooner than twenty (20) days and
no later than forty five (45) days following the date of the written request for hearing.
4. Effective Date: If no hearing is timely requested, the revocation is effective fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice of intent to revoke. If a
hearing is held, the Public Works Director shall issue a written decision within ten (10) days of the hearing. Notice of the written decision shall be
provided to the permittee by regular mail at the address indicated on the permit and the notice shall be effective two (2) business days after it is
deposited in the United States mail. The decision of the Public Works Director will become effective when the time to appeal to the City Council
expires, unless an appeal to the City Council is timely filed.
5. Appeal Of Revocation To The City Council: Any permittee whose permit is revoked under this section shall have the right, within ten (10) calendar
days after notice of the Public Works Director's decision is provided, to file a written appeal to the City Council. Any such appeal must be made on a
form provided by the Public Works Director and must set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The City Council shall hold a
hearing on the appeal within forty five (45) days after its receipt by the City, or at a time thereafter agreed upon, and shall cause the appellant to be
given at least ten (10) days' written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative will have the right to present
evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final.
J. Prohibitions:
1. No person shall engage the service of a person for compensation to collect solid waste from any commercial or multi-family premises in the City and
transport it over a public street or highway in the City unless the person whose service is engaged possesses a valid permit issued under this section
or is exempt from the permit requirement.
2. Unless specifically exempt from the permit requirement pursuant to this section, no person shall collect solid waste from any commercial or multifamily
premises in the City and transport it over a public street or highway in the City without a valid permit issued under this section.
3. No person subject to the permit requirement in this section shall transport solid waste to any location other than:
a. A solid waste facility that is lawfully operated under all required State and local permits, registrations and enforcement agency notifications; or
b. A recycling facility that, as its principal function, receives wastes that have already been separated for recycling and are not intended for disposal,
and is lawfully operated in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
c. An organics recycling facility that is lawfully operated in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1584, 6-18-2019)
Chapter 3
LITTERING PUBLIC PLACES
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 120/581
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
LITTERING: The wilful or negligent throwing, dropping, placing, depositing, or sweeping, or causing any such acts, of any waste matter on land or water in
other than appropriate storage containers or areas designated for such purposes.
WASTE MATTER: Discarded, used, or leftover substances including, but not limited to, a lighted or nonlighted cigarette, cigar, match, or any flaming or
glowing material, or any garbage, trash, refuse, paper, container, packaging or construction material, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive
matter of any kind, or any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard. (2000 Code)
5-3-2: LITTERING STREETS:
A. Garbage Or Rubbish Deposits: No person shall place or deposit, or leave or abandon, or cause to be placed or deposited, or left or abandoned, in any
public street, road, avenue, alley, highway or other public place within the City, any garbage, rubbish, trash, sweepings, garden refuse, tree trimming,
ashes, tin cans, junk or any other waste or refuse material or matter, the contents of any cuspidor or any putrid or objectionable substances of any kind.
It is provided, however, that such items or materials may be temporarily deposited in course of lawful transport or other lawful handling thereof in
accordance with any other rules or regulations which may exist or may hereafter be established with reference thereto.
B. Throwing Bottles, Paper: No person shall throw, deposit or place in or upon any street any glass, bottles, paper, rubbish, garbage (except in proper
containers as permitted by law), or any unsightly, foul or noxious substance. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
5-3-3: CONTAINERS REQUIRED FOR HAULING:
No person shall haul any dirt, rubbish, debris, garbage, oil or other petroleum products, bricks, sand, gravel, crushed rock or other materials in, upon or
along any street, unless the same is contained in a body, box, receptacle or carrier which effectively prevents any part of the load from leaking, sifting,
dropping or being deposited upon the street. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the slight leakage which is necessarily incident to the careful
and proper operation of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 429, 12-21-1955)
Chapter 4
STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
5-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers for the purpose of complying with the Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water
Quality Control Act, and the Municipal National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, including, without limitation, any amendments
or modifications, by:
1. Controlling non-stormwater discharges to the Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4);
2. Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges, thereby reducing the level of contamination of stormwater and urban runoff into the MS4 of the
City; and
3. Controlling the discharge of pollutants, including those pollutants taken up by stormwater as it flows over urban areas, to the maximum extent
practicable.
B. This chapter is intended to provide the City with the legal authority necessary to implement and enforce the requirements contained in 40 CFR section
122.26(d)(2)(i)(A - F) and in the Municipal NPDES permit to the extent that they are applicable in the City, to control discharges to and from those
portions of the MS4 over which the City has jurisdiction as required by the Municipal NPDES permit, and to hold dischargers to the MS4 accountable
for their contributions of pollutants and flows.
C. This chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to define and adopt applicable Best Management Practices (BMPs) and other stormwater
pollution control measures, to cite infractions, to impose fines pursuant to this chapter, and to grant emergency self-waivers from Municipal NPDES
permit requirements in order to conduct repairs of essential public service systems and infrastructure in emergency situations. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the authorized enforcement officer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. This chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to carry out inspections, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine
compliance and noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Municipal NPDES permit, including the prohibition of non-stormwater
discharges into the MS4. This includes the authority to enter, monitor, inspect, take measurements, review and copy records, and require regular
reports from entities discharging into the City's MS4. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-2: LIMITS OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to:
A. Infringe any right or power guaranteed by the United States or California Constitution, including any vested property right;
B. Require any action inconsistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, vesting tentative map, or other provision of this Code;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 121/581
C. Restrict otherwise lawful land use except as authorized by the laws of California, subject to the limitations of this chapter. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings stated in the Municipal NPDES permit and if not described therein, the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.); regulations implementing NPDES; California Water Code section 13050; and any successor
statutes or regulations.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The City Manager or his or her designee and any City official authorized to issue citations under this Code.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE FACILITY: A facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes: 5013, 5014,
5511, 5541, 7532 - 7534 and 7536 - 7539.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or
non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water.
BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.
CONSTRUCTION: Constructing, clearing, grading, grubbing, demolishing, or excavating that results in land disturbance. Construction does not include
emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety; routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity
of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work; or routine maintenance required to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity,
or original purpose of a facility. Construction does not include interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or construction waste to
stormwater; mechanical permit work; or sign permit work.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multiunit
or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for
future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a facility, nor does
it include emergency construction activities required to protect public health and safety immediately.
DISCHARGE: Any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping or disposal, of any pollutant, from any point source, into the waters of the United
States or any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the "contiguous zone" or the ocean from any point source other than a
vessel or other floating craft used for transportation. The term discharge includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface
runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person
which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any materials, wastes or mixture of wastes defined as a "hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 USC section 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 USC section 9601 et seq., or the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act, (HSAA), California Health and
Safety Code section 25300 et seq., and all future amendments to any of them, or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board.
Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two (2) or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous
waste" will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any human-made device or artifice, excluding roof drains and other similar connections, connected to the MS4, without a permit,
through or by which an illicit discharge may be discharged. Examples include channels, pipelines, pipes, conduits, inlets and outlets connected directly to
the MS4.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge into the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is prohibited under local, State, or Federal statutes,
ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes any non-stormwater discharge, except authorized non-stormwater discharges;
conditionally exempt non-stormwater discharges; and non-stormwater discharges resulting from natural flows specifically identified in part III.A.1.d of the
MS4 permit.
INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL FACILITY: Any facility which is the site of the production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale
of goods or commodities, and any facility involved or used in providing professional and nonprofessional services. This category of facilities includes,
without limitation, any facility defined by the SIC or the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Facility ownership (Federal, State,
Municipal, private) and profit motive of the owner or operator of the facility are not factors in this definition.
INSPECTION:
A. The entry and conducting of an on-site review of structures and devices on a property, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific
Municipal or other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an inspection include but are not limited to:
1. Pre-inspection documentation research;
2. Request for entry;
3. Interview of property owner, resident and/or occupant(s);
4. Property walk-through;
5. Visual observation of the condition of property;
6. Examination and copying of records as required;
7. Sample collection (if necessary or required);
8. Exit discussion (to discuss preliminary evaluation) as appropriate; and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 122/581
9. Report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming into compliance.
MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT: The "Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges Within the Coastal
Watersheds of Los Angeles County, Except Those Discharges Originating from the City of Long Beach MS4" (Order No. R4-2012-0175), NPDES Permit
No. CAS004001, effective December 28, 2012, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board - Los Angeles Region, and any successor
permit to that permit.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4):
A. A conveyance or system of conveyances (consisting of roads with drainage systems, Municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels, or storm drains):
1. Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State law)
having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under State law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a
designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;
2. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
3. Which is not a combined sewer; and
4. Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR 122.2.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing,
terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA section 307, 402, 318, and 405. The
term includes an "approved program".
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of
impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the MS4 not composed entirely of stormwater.
PARKING LOT: Land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for business, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of
five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty five (25) or more parking spaces.
POLLUTANT: Those "pollutants" defined in CWA section 502(6) (33 USC section 1362(6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code
section 13373.
REDEVELOPMENT: Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of
impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or
replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related
to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The owner, occupant, or other person in charge of day to day operations of premises located within the City.
RESTAURANT: A facility where prepared food and beverages are sold for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling
prepared food and beverages for immediate consumption (see SIC Code 5812).
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE:
A. Routine maintenance projects include, but are not limited to projects conducted to:
1. Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.
2. Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities.
3. Includes road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts.
4. Update existing lines and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased
capacity. This includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes.
5. Repair leaks.
6. Conduct landscaping activities without changing existing or natural grades.
B. Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and
regulations. New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines.
SIC: Standard Industrial Classification.
SOLID WASTE: Has the same meaning as in Public Resources Code section 40191 and any successor statute or regulation.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 CFR section
122.26(b)(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995 (Nov. 16, 1990)).
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN OR SWPPP: A plan, as required by a State general permit issued by the State Water Resources
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 123/581
Control Board (SWRCB), identifying potential pollutant sources and describing the design, placement and implementation of BMPs, to effectively prevent
non-stormwater discharges and to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges during activities covered by the general permit.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That part of precipitation (rainfall or snowmelt) which travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from
impervious, semi-pervious, or pervious surfaces. When all other factors are equal, runoff increases as the perviousness of a surface decreases.
STRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (STRUCTURAL BMP): Any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts
of stormwater and urban runoff pollution (e.g., a canopy, structural enclosure). This category may include both treatment control BMPs and source control
BMPs.
TREATMENT CONTROL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (TREATMENT CONTROL BMP): Any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by
simple gravity setting of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-4: ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED:
All non-stormwater discharges into the MS4 are prohibited unless those flows are: in compliance with a separate NPDES permit; pursuant to a discharge
exemption by the Regional Board, the Regional Board's executive officer, or the State Water Resources Control Board; associated with emergency
firefighting activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property); natural flows as defined in the Municipal NPDES permit; conditionally
exempt non-stormwater discharges as defined in accordance with the Municipal NPDES permit; or authorized as a temporary non-stormwater discharge
by the USEPA pursuant to sections 104(a) or 104(b) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA). (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-5: ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to use or allow the use of any illicit connection to convey an illicit discharge or any pollutant to the MS4 from premises of which
that person is an owner or is the person in charge of day to day activities. Illicit connections are prohibited by the Clean Water Act, Municipal NPDES
permit, and this chapter. The responsible person for premises at which an illicit connection is located must obtain a permit for, or remove, the illicit
connection within one hundred eighty (180) days of confirmation of discovery of the illicit connection. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-6: CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM SITES OF COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY:
A. All dischargers operating under any general stormwater permit as may be issued by the USEPA, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the
Regional Board, must comply with all requirements of such permit. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit must comply with and
undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized
enforcement officer prior to the issuance of any grading, building, or occupancy permits, or any other type of permit or license issued by the City.
B. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from industrial or commercial activities are prohibited, unless approved by a separate permit.
C. Any person or entity required to have a general industrial activities stormwater permit (GIASP) for a facility or activity in the City which discharges to the
City's MS4 must retain at such facility or activity the following documents which evidence compliance with GIASP requirements:
1. A copy of the notice of intent to comply with the general industrial activities stormwater permit;
2. A waste discharge identification number (WDID) issued by the California Water Resources Control Board;
3. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), which includes all necessary BMPs from the Municipal NPDES permit; and
4. Any required stormwater quality data.
Alternatively, if a facility has been granted a no-exposure certification, proof of this certification must be retained on site.
D. Any person or entity in the City required to have a GIASP for a facility or activity in the City which discharges to the City's MS4, upon request from a
duly authorized officer of the City, must make available to the City for review, copying, and inspection all of the documents described in this section
during any City stormwater related educational program or inspection and demonstrate compliance with the GIASP, including, without limitation,
demonstration of the adequacy of, and compliance with, any required SWPPP and all applicable BMPs. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-7: SPILLS, DUMPING AND DISPOSAL PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose into the environment any
solid waste or liquid waste, including any pollutant, in or upon any part of the MS4, or upon any public or private premises in the City, or to cause,
suffer, or permit any solid waste or liquid waste or other pollutant to come to be located upon, in, on or under any premises in the City, except in an
authorized or permitted solid waste container or at an authorized or permitted solid waste facility or publicly owned or privately owned treatment works.
B. It is unlawful for any person to dispose of leaves, grass or other clippings, dirt or any other landscape debris into any part of the MS4.
C. It is unlawful for any person to dispose of any pesticide, fungicide, or herbicide banned by, or not registered with, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation, or its successor, into any part of the MS4.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 124/581
D. It is unlawful for any person to dispose any hazardous materials into any trash receptacle accessible to the public.
E. It is unlawful for any person to pour oil or grease, or the residue of oil or grease onto any parking lot, or any part of the MS4.
F. It is unlawful for any person to place any washout water or other liquid in any container for the disposal of solid waste.
G. It is unlawful for any person to wash restaurant or automotive service facility floor mats in any place where the wash or rinse water may flow into any
part of the MS4. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-8: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED:
The responsible person must implement Best Management Practices as follows:
A. New development and redevelopment projects identified in part VI.D.7.b of the MS4 permit and chapter 7 of this title must control pollutants, pollutant
loads, and runoff volume by: 1) minimizing the impervious surface area and 2) controlling runoff through infiltration, bioretention, and/or rainfall harvest
and use.
B. Responsible persons for parking lots with more than twenty five (25) parking spaces exposed to stormwater which parking lots are associated with
industrial or commercial activities, according to the United States Office of Management and SIC must use BMPs to reduce the discharge of pollutants
to the maximum extent practicable. Such measures may include regular sweeping or other measures, if effective.
C. Responsible persons of premises where machinery or other equipment is repaired or maintained, at facilities or activities associated with industrial or
commercial activities, according to the United States Office of Management and SIC must use BMPs or other steps to prevent discharge of
maintenance related or repair related pollutants to the MS4.
D. For other premises exposed to stormwater, the responsible person must use BMPs or other steps to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum
extent practicable, including the removal and lawful disposal of any solid waste or any other substance which, if it were to be discharged to the MS4,
would be a pollutant, including fuels, waste fuels, chemicals, chemical wastes and animal wastes, from all parts of the premises exposed to stormwater.
(Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-9: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY STORMWATER MEASURES:
A. Each discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as
may be issued by the USEPA, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional Board, must comply with all requirements of such permit.
Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit must comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance
with any such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement officer prior to the issuance of any grading, building, or
occupancy permits, or any other type of permit or license issued by the City.
B. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from construction activities are prohibited.
C. Dischargers associated with construction activities must implement effective BMPs, including source control BMPs, in accordance with the Municipal
NPDES permit and construction general permit, to reduce pollutants in stormwater from such sites to the maximum extent practicable.
D. Each person applying to the City for a grading or building permit for projects disturbing one acre or more of soil for which compliance with the
construction general permit is required, must submit satisfactory proof to City: 1) that a notice of intent (NOI) to comply with the construction general
permit was filed, and 2) that a stormwater pollution prevention plan has been prepared, before the City can issue any grading or building permit on the
construction project. A copy of the NOI and the SWPPP must be maintained on site during grading and construction and be made available for
inspection, review and copying upon the request of any City inspector.
E. It is unlawful for any person or entity required under Federal or State law to comply with the construction general permit in the City to conduct,
authorize, or permit construction activities in the City at any facility which discharges to the City's MS4 without complying with all applicable
requirements of the construction general permit.
F. Each person applying for a grading or building permit for any project for which compliance with the construction general permit is not required, must
submit to the City for information and implement a grading and construction activity runoff control program adequate to comply with the Municipal
NPDES permit and accomplish all of the following:
1. Retain on site the sediments generated on or brought to the project site, using treatment control or structural BMPs in accordance with the minimum
BMPs required by the Municipal NPDES permit;
2. Retain construction related materials and wastes, spills and residues at the project site and prevent discharges to streets, drainage facilities, the
MS4, receiving waters or adjacent properties;
3. Contain non-stormwater runoff from equipment and vehicle washing at the project site; and
4. Control erosion from slopes and channels through use of effective BMPs, such as limitation of grading during the wet season, inspection of graded
areas during rain events; planting and maintenance of vegetation on slopes, if any, and covering any slopes susceptible to erosion.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 125/581
G. Persons generating or producing pavement saw cutting wastes in any street, curb or sidewalk in the City must recover and properly dispose of such
saw cutting wastes, and in no case may such wastes be permitted or suffered to enter any part of the MS4, including, without limitation, any storm
drain.
H. Persons performing street and road maintenance in any street in the City must manage street and road maintenance materials in a manner that
prevents such materials from being discharged to the MS4.
I. It is unlawful for any person to wash any concrete truck or any part of any concrete truck, including, without limitation, any chute, pump or tools, in any
place in the City except an area designated for that purpose by the City, if the City has designated such a place. It is unlawful for any person to permit
or allow any concrete rinseate or wash water from any truck, pump, tool or equipment to enter any drain, open ditch, street or road or any catch basin
or any other part of the MS4. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-10: VIOLATIONS:
Each violation of any provision of this chapter, any stormwater pollution prevention plan, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or any
administrative compliance order issued pursuant to this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-11: NOTICES OF VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS; ENFORCEMENT:
A. The authorized enforcement officer, or designee, is authorized to enforce this chapter through any lawful means including, without limitation, conducting
routine or complaint-driven inspections, and issuing notices of violation and administrative compliance orders. Such actions may be used to achieve
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, any approved stormwater pollution prevention plan or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Failure
to comply with the terms and conditions of such a notice of violation or an administrative order is a violation of this chapter.
B. The City Attorney is authorized to enforce this chapter through all administrative, civil, and criminal means available. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-12: NUISANCE:
Each violation of any provision of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated by the City in accordance with this Code. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-13: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are in addition to any other remedies available to the City under any applicable Federal, State or local law and it is
within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-14: INSPECTIONS; SEARCHES:
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the enforcement officer for the City may enter any property in the
City regulated by this chapter in a manner authorized by State law and take samples; inspect, review, and copy records relevant to any illicit connection,
illegal discharge, or the discharge of any pollutant. The owner or other person in charge of day to day activities at the premises, upon request of any City
inspector, must make available for inspection, review, and copying any required permit, NOI, BMPs, SWPPP, and any permit relevant to the reduction of
the discharge of any pollutant to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-4-15: FEES:
The City Council may establish fees for the services provided under this chapter by resolution. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
Chapter 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, WASTES
ARTICLE A. INVENTORY AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN
5-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
ACCIDENTAL RELEASE: An unanticipated emission of a regulated substance or other extremely hazardous substance into the ambient air from a
stationary source.
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any chemical listed in Appendix A of part 355 of subchapter J of chapter I of title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 126/581
OWNER OR OPERATOR: Any person who owns, leases, operates, controls, or supervises a stationary source.
RMP: The risk management plan required under part 68 (commencing with section 68.1) of subchapter C of chapter I of title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations and by California Health and Safety Code, division 20, chapter 6.95 article 2 (commencing with section 25531).
REGULATED SUBSTANCE: Any substance, unless otherwise indicated, listed in title 19, California Code of Regulations, section 2770.5, as amended.
STATIONARY SOURCE: Any stationary source, as defined in section 68.3 of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations and title 19, California Code of
Regulations, section 2735.3.
THRESHOLD QUANTITY: The quantity specified for a regulated substance pursuant to title 19, California Code of Regulations, section 2770.5 and
determined to be present at a stationary source. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-1998; amd. 2000 Code)
5-5A-2: ADMINISTERING AGENCY:
A. Designation: Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code sections 25500 through 25520, or as they may be amended, the City
Manager or his designee is designated as the administering agency for the implementation of the hazardous material inventory and emergency
response program within the City. (Ord. 1088, 8-19-1986; amd. 2000 Code)
B. Responsibilities: In order to effect such implementation, the City Manager shall:
1. Enforce the provisions of the California Hazardous Materials Release Response Plans and Inventory Law; and
2. Prepare supplemental regulations from time to time to facilitate such enforcement. (Ord. 1088, 8-19-1986)
5-5A-3: ACCIDENTAL RELEASE PREVENTION PROGRAM:
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, chapter 6.11, division 20, and chapter 6.95, commencing with section 25500,
supplemented by division 2, title 19 of the California Code of Regulations, the City assumes administrative and enforcement responsibility for the
implementation of title 19, division 2 of the California Code of Regulations and chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-
1998)
5-5A-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
A. Permit Required: A permit from the Fire Department is required to perform any or all of the activities as identified in chapter 6.11 of division 20 of the
California Health and Safety Code. The permittee shall operate all activities in accordance with established permit conditions to the extent such
conditions are identified in regulation, ordinance, or policy and as they apply to the permittee's operation.
B. Permit Fees: Any person required by this Article to have a permit shall pay the established permit fee as it related to the implementation of any and all
CUPA elements. The CUPA elements shall include, but not be limited to, those programs identified in chapter 6.11, division 20 of the California Health
and Safety Code. The State-mandated surcharges shall be separate from the City permit fee. The permittee shall pay the amount as designated in the
fee resolution, as may be amended by the Council from time to time. In addition to the remedies set forth in the California Health and Safety Code,
further remedies, fees or restitution authorized by this Code, not inconsistent with State law, shall apply to any violation of the State laws. (Ord. 1285, 2-
17-1998)
5-5A-5: REGULATED SUBSTANCE REGISTRATION:
Effective March 1, 1998, stationary sources handling extremely hazardous substances or regulated substances shall complete and submit the California
Accidental Release Prevention Program registration form [OES 2735.6 (6/97)] to the Fire Department. New or modified stationary sources shall register
prior to the date on which a regulated substance is first present in a process. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-1998)
5-5A-6: RMP SUBMISSION:
Effective June 21, 1999, each owner or operator of a stationary source, which handles more than a threshold quantity of a regulated substance or
extremely hazardous substance, shall submit a single RMP that addresses all elements required in 40 CFR part 68 and title 19, California Code of
Regulations, division 2, chapter 4.5. (Ord. 1285, 2-17-1998)
5-5A-7: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates section 25507 of the State Health and Safety Code shall be subject to the penalties specified in section 25515 of the State Health
and Safety Code. This Section is supplemental to and in addition to any other civil or criminal liability or penalty provided by law. (Ord. 1088, 8-19-1986)
ARTICLE B. UNDERGROUND STORAGE
5-5B-1: ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 127/581
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, chapter 6.11, section 25404, and chapter 6.7, section 25283, the City assumes
enforcement responsibility for the implementation of title 23, division 3, chapters 16 and 18 of the California Code of Regulations and division 20, chapters
6.7 and 6.75 of the California Health and Safety Code. Chapter 16 and chapter 6.7 relate to underground storage of hazardous materials. Chapter 18 and
6.75 relate to petroleum underground storage tank cleanup. (Ord. 1264, 2-4-1997; amd. 2000 Code)
5-5B-2: PERMIT FEES:
Any person required by this Chapter to have a permit or to pay fees related to the underground storage of hazardous substances shall pay that amount as
designated in the City Fee Resolution, as may be amended by the Council from time to time. In addition to the remedies set forth in the Health and Safety
Code, further remedies, fees or restitution authorized by this Code, not inconsistent with the State law, shall apply to any violation of the State laws. (Ord.
1264, 2-4-1997)
ARTICLE C. SOURCE REDUCTION PROGRAM
5-5C-1: TITLE:
This Article shall be entitled HAZARDOUS WASTE SOURCE REDUCTION PROGRAM and shall be known as such throughout the Code. (Ord. 1280, 10-
7-1997)
5-5C-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Article is to protect public health and the environment and to promote the reduction of hazardous waste generation by:
1. Effectively regulating hazardous waste generators that generate waste for treatment or disposal off-site; and
2. Educating businesses on source reduction opportunities; and
3. Establishing incentives and disincentives to encourage hazardous waste source reduction.
B. Intent: The intent of this Article is to enhance and protect the environmental quality of Los Angeles County in a matter that is consistent with the
Pollution Prevention Act of 1990. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
5-5C-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the followings words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BUSINESS: Refers to any employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, or association which routinely
generates any amount of hazardous waste at a nonresidential site located within the City. "Business" includes both a nonprofit and profit-making business.
CERTIFIED OR CUPA: The City of El Segundo.
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any hazardous waste or mixture of hazardous wastes which, if human exposure should occur, may likely result in
death, disabling personal injury or serious illness caused by the hazardous waste or mixture of hazardous wastes because of its quantity, concentration or
chemical characteristics.
GENERATOR: Any person, by site, whose act or process produces a hazardous waste or whose act first causes a hazardous waste to become subject to
regulation.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A hazardous waste as defined in California Code of Regulations, title 22, section 66261.3, as amended.
SOURCE REDUCTION:
A. "Source reduction" shall mean one of the following:
1. Any action which causes a net reduction in the generation of hazardous waste.
2. Any action taken before the hazardous waste is generated that results in a lessening of the properties which cause it to be classified as a
hazardous waste.
B. "Source reduction" includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
1. "Input change" which means a change in raw materials or feedstocks used in a production process or operation so as to reduce, avoid, or
eliminate the generation of hazardous waste.
2. "Operational improvement" which means improved site management so as to reduce, avoid, or eliminate the generation of hazardous waste.
3. "Production process change" which means a change in a process, method, or technique which is used to produce a product or a desired result,
including the return of materials or their components, for reuse within the existing processes or operations, so as to reduce, avoid, or eliminate the
generation of hazardous waste.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 128/581
4. "Production reformulation" which means changes in design, composition, or specifications of end products, including product substitution, so as to
reduce, avoid, or eliminate the generation of hazardous waste.
SOURCE REDUCTION ASSESSMENT: A review conducted by the generator of the processes, operations, and procedures in use at a generator's site,
according to the format established in California Health and Safety Code, section 25244.16(a) and does both of the following:
A. Determines any alternatives to, or modifications of, the generator's processes, operations, and procedures that may be implemented to reduce the
amount of hazardous waste generated.
B. Includes a plan to document and implement source reduction measures for hazardous wastes that are technically feasible and economically
practicable for the generator, including a reasonable implementation schedule. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
5-5C-4: HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATOR AND ON-SITE TREATMENT PROGRAM:
Pursuant to the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, chapter 6.11, division 20, and chapter 6.5, commencing with section 25100,
supplemented by division 4.5, title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, the City assumes administrative and enforcement responsibility for the
implementation of title 22, division 4.5 of the California Code of Regulations and chapter 6.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-
1997)
5-5C-5: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
A. Permit Required: A permit from the Fire Department is required to perform any or all of the activities as identified in chapter 6.11 of division 20 of the
California Health and Safety Code. The permittee shall operate all activities in accordance with established permit conditions to the extent such
conditions are identified in regulation, ordinance, or policy and as they apply to the permittee's operation.
B. Permit Fees: Any person required by this Section to have a permit shall pay the established permit fee as it relates to the implementation of any and all
CUPA elements. The CUPA elements shall include, but not be limited to, those programs identified in chapter 6.11, division 20 of the California Health
and Safety Code. The State-mandated surcharges shall be separate from the City permit fee. The permittee shall pay the amount as designated in the
Fee Resolution, as may be amended by the Council from time to time. In addition to the remedies set forth in the California Health and Safety Code,
further remedies, fees or restitution authorized by this Code, not inconsistent with State law, shall apply to any violation of the State laws. (Ord. 1280,
10-7-1997)
5-5C-6: HAZARDOUS WASTE SOURCE REDUCTION:
A. Assessment: Effective January 1, 1998, any business which routinely generates between nine hundred (900) and twelve thousand (12,000) kilograms
of hazardous waste per year or any amount of extremely hazardous waste shall develop a source reduction assessment, similar to requirements in
California Health and Safety Code, chapter 6.5, article 11.9. (Ord. 1280, 10-7-1997)
B. Incentives: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter 5, the amount of a hazardous waste permit fee imposed on any business by this Chapter
5, commencing on the effective date hereof, shall be reduced by five percent (5%) for any business maintaining a source reduction assessment and an
annual reduction of hazardous waste generation of more than five percent (5%) from 1997 levels, or prior year, based on a calendar year. (Ord. 1280,
10-7-1997)
Chapter 6
SMOKING REGULATED OR PROHIBITED
5-6-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The City Council hereby finds that the smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or plant, is a danger to health and a material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort and a health hazard to those who are present in confined spaces, and in order to serve public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose
of this Chapter is to prohibit the smoking of tobacco, or any weed or plant, in public places and places of employment as stated and required in this
Chapter. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall when used in this Chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this Section:
BAR: An establishment which is devoted to serving of alcoholic beverages and which does not serve meals.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for monetary compensation or profit.
EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal corporation, who employs the services of more than five (5) persons.
ENCLOSED: Closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress and is not intended to mean areas commonly described as
public lobbies.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 129/581
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT OR WORK PLACE: Any enclosed area of a structure or portion thereof under the control of a public or private employer which
employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, and
employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to: banks, educational
facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, lobbies, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail
service establishments, retail stores, theaters, waiting rooms, offices, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms. A private residence is not
a public place.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or the
lighting or emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-3: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to smoke in the following places:
A. Any City-owned or City-operated vehicle;
B. Any public place, or in any similar enclosed area in City-owned or private buildings generally used by and open to the public, including, but not limited
to, elevators and public restrooms. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-4: SMOKING REGULATED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
A. Places Of Employment:
1. Smoke-Free Areas: It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke-free areas for nonsmoking employees within existing facilities to the
maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these
areas.
2. Implement Smoking Policy: Within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof, each employer shall adopt, implement and maintain a written and
posted smoking policy which shall contain at a minimum, provisions related to the following:
a. Provision and maintenance of a contiguous no smoking area of not less than one-half (1/2) of the seating capacity and floor space in employee
lounges, cafeterias, and lunchrooms with a seating capacity of ten (10) or more. Employee lounges, cafeterias and lunchrooms with a seating
capacity of less than ten (10) would be designated as nonsmoking.
b. Any employee in an office or similar workplace of more than five (5) employees shall be given the right to designate his or her individual and
immediate work area as a nonsmoking area and to post it with appropriate sign(s).
c. Smoking shall be prohibited in all common workplaces in a place of employment, unless every person who works in that workplace is a smoker.
3. Precedence Of Nonsmoker: In any dispute arising under the smoking policy, the rights of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence.
4. Exceptions: This subsection is not intended to regulate smoking in the following places and under the following conditions:
a. A private home which may serve as an office workplace.
b. Any property owned or operated by other governmental agencies.
5. Compliance Of Employer: An employer who makes reasonable efforts to develop and promulgate a policy regarding smoking and nonsmoking in the
workplace shall be deemed to be in compliance with subsection A2 of this Section; provided, that a policy which designates an entire workplace as a
smoking area shall not be deemed in compliance with this subsection.
6. Nonsmoking Area Designation: Notwithstanding the above, every employer shall have the authority to designate any work area as a nonsmoking
area.
7. Time Limit: The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three (3) weeks of its adoption.
8. Supply Copy Of Policy To Employees: All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective
employee.
B. Eating Establishments: Every publicly or privately owned coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, restaurant, or other eating
establishment serving food and/or any alcoholic beverage to the general public whose occupied capacity is more than forty (40) persons shall provide
and maintain a nonsmoking area of at least fifty percent (50%) of the seating capacity. Every publicly or privately owned coffee shop, cafeteria,
luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, restaurant, or other eating establishment serving food and/or any alcoholic beverage to the general public
whose occupied capacity is less than forty (40) persons shall post a sign in a prominent place near the entrance of such establishment stating either
that the establishment allows smoking or prohibits smoking. Excluded from the calculation of occupied capacity herein shall be those portions of such
establishments which are located outdoors. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The following establishments are hereby exempted from smoking restrictions under this Chapter:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 130/581
A. Bars;
B. Banquet rooms used for private functions;
C. Buildings owned or leased by County, State, and Federal Government agencies;
D. Private homes which serve as offices. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-6: NONRETALIATION:
No person or employer shall discharge, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant
exercises any rights afforded by this Chapter. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-7: POSTING OF SIGNS:
Whenever in this Code smoking is prohibited, conspicuous signs shall be posted so stating with letters of not less than one inch (1") in height on a
contrasting background, or an international "no smoking" symbol, a red circle with a diagonal bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted. It
shall be the duty of the owner, operator, manager, or other persons having control of such room, building, or other place where smoking is prohibited, to
post such signs or to cause such signs to be posted. (Ord. 1140, 5-16-1989)
5-6-8: VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be an infraction, punishable as provided in this Code by: a) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a
first violation; b) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same Section of this Chapter within one year; c) a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same Section of this Chapter or ordinance within one year. (Ord. 1140, 5-
16-1989)
ARTICLE A. REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT SALES
5-6A-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California Business and Professions Code section 22960(c), including any successor
statute, for the purpose of further restricting access to and reducing the availability of cigarette and tobacco products from vending machines or devices.
(Ord. 1339, 10-16-2001)
5-6A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
article:
BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profit, including retail establishments where goods or
services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional
services are delivered.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for monetary compensation or profit.
EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal corporation, who employs the services of more than four (4) persons.
MINOR: Any individual who is less than eighteen (18) years old.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal
entity.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products to which the public has
access without the intervention of any employee.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for
smoking, chewing, inhaling, or other manner of ingestion.
TOBACCO RETAILER: Any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are
made to purchasers for consumption or use.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE: Any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether
coin or paper bill, or other thing representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product or tobacco accessories.
VENDOR-ASSISTED: Only an employee has access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not
take possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 1339, 10-16-2001)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 131/581
5-6A-3: PROHIBITIONS:
A. It is unlawful for a person or business to offer tobacco products for sale without prominently displaying a sign at the point of purchase for tobacco
products stating: "SELLING TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS YOUNGER THAN EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS ILLEGAL. PHOTO ID IS
REQUIRED TO PURCHASE ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT." The letters of the sign will be at least one-quarter inch (1/4") high.
B. It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager, or operator of any establishment to sell, offer to sell, or permit to be sold any
tobacco product to an individual without first examining identification that establishes the purchaser's age as at least eighteen (18) years unless the
seller has some reasonable basis for determining the buyer's age.
C. It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment to sell or offer for sale any tobacco product that is not in the
manufacturer's original packaging containing all required health warnings.
D. It is unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale any tobacco product by means of
self-service merchandising, tobacco vending machine, or by means other than vendor-assisted sales. (Ord. 1339, 10-16-2001)
ARTICLE B. TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSE
5-6B-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
5-6B-1-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers for the purpose of promoting compliance with federal, state, and local laws that regulate the sale
and use of tobacco products and paraphernalia. Nothing in this article is intended to, nor does it, duplicate or conflict with applicable local, state, or federal
laws. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
article:
CHIEF: The police chief or designee.
DEPARTMENT: The El Segundo police department.
PERSON: Any natural person or legal entity.
PROPRIETOR: A person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest is deemed to exist when a person has a ten
percent (10%) or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest is
deemed to exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share, ultimate control over the day to day operations of a business.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other
item designed for smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, without limitation, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco,
dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco.
TOBACCO RETAILER: Any person that operates a store, stand, concession, or other place at which sales, or other exchanges for value, of tobacco
products are made to purchasers for consumption or use. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-3: PROHIBITIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without a valid license issued pursuant to this article for each location at which activity is
proposed to occur.
B. It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer from other than a fixed location within the city's jurisdiction.
C. It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit, aid, abet, or conceal a violation of any provision of this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-4: ADMINISTRATION BY DEPARTMENT:
The chief and department are authorized to administer and enforce this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-1-5: NOTICES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 132/581
A. Where the provisions of this article require that an applicant/licensee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when personally delivered to
such applicant/licensee or when deposited in the first class U.S. mail, addressed to such applicant/licensee at the applicant/licensee's last known
address.
B. Unless otherwise provided, written notification to an applicant/licensee of a license decision will state with particularity the basis for such decision. (Ord.
1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-2: LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
5-6B-2-1: FORM AND CONTENT OF APPLICATION:
A. Permit applications must be filed by a natural person in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales.
B. Every application must be signed by the proprietor, or the proprietor's authorized representative, under penalty of perjury.
C. Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the chief and contain all of the following information:
1. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person filing the application;
2. The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought;
3. The name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all notices. If such an address is not supplied, notices will be sent to the
business address;
4. Whether or not the proprietor was previously issued a license under this article that was suspended or revoked and, if so, the dates of the
suspension period or revocation date; and
5. Such other information as the department deems reasonably necessary for administering or enforcing this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-2-2: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. The chief must issue a license if:
1. The application was complete in accordance with this article;
2. The applicant pays all applicable license fees;
3. There are no grounds for denying the license; and
4. The applicant accepts the license approval or conditional approval in writing.
B. Use of any license issued pursuant to this article must conform to this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-2-3: LICENSE DENIAL:
A license can be denied for the following reasons:
A. The application is incomplete;
B. The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application information requested by the chief;
C. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
D. The application is submitted by a proprietor with a suspended license or whose license was revoked; or
E. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited by this chapter or unlawful under any other local, state, or federal law. (Ord.
1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-3: CONDITIONS:
5-6B-3-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Tobacco retailer licensees must:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 133/581
A. Comply with all local, state, and federal laws regulating tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia including, without limitation, this code;
B. Maintain a valid business license issued pursuant to this code;
C. Allow authorized enforcement officers to enter onto licensed premises to ensure compliance with this article during business hours. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-
2003)
5-6B-3-2: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Each license issued by this article must be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed tobacco retailer's location. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-
2003)
5-6B-3-3: LICENSE RENEWAL:
Unless suspended or revoked, licenses issued pursuant to this article have a term of one year. Licenses must be renewed not later than thirty (30) days
before they expire in order to be maintained. Should a license expire, the proprietor must comply with this article to obtain a new license. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-
2003)
5-6B-3-4: NO ADDITIONAL PRIVILEGES GRANTED:
Nothing in this article is intended to, nor does it, grant to a properly licensed tobacco retailer privileges other than permission to operate as a tobacco
retailer at the location identified in the license. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-3-5: LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE:
A license issued to a tobacco retailer pursuant to this article is nontransferable. Any change in business name or location requires a new license issued in
accord with this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4: VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
5-6B-4-1: ENFORCEMENT:
A. In addition to the remedies set forth in this article, violations of a tobacco retailer's license may be enforced as follows:
1. Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the city attorney's discretion.
2. Abated as a public nuisance.
3. Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed to nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the tobacco
retailer operates.
B. Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public may bring an action for injunctive relief to prevent future violations or to
recover actual damages.
C. The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-2: CITY ATTORNEY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to the city attorney by this code or California law, the city attorney is authorized to:
A. Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for violations of this article including, without limitation, administrative or judicial nuisance
abatement and suits for injunctive relief;
B. Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties, forfeitures, and other money accruing to the city under this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Upon determining that a person is violating this article, the chief must serve a notice of violation on the apparent violator. The notice must state the basis of
such violations and provide information regarding appeals rights. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-4: VIOLATIONS DEEMED CONCLUSIVE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 134/581
The judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, or the admission of a tobacco retailer licensee in any civil or criminal action against a tobacco retailer
licensee, whether the city is a party or not, that the tobacco retailer has violated any tobacco related local, state, or federal law is conclusive of that fact for
purposes of enforcing this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-5: ADMINISTRATIVE FINE:
A. In addition to any other enforcement remedy, the chief may fine a tobacco retailer for violating this article as follows:
1. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation in any twelve (12) month period;
2. A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation in any twelve (12) month period; or
3. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or subsequent violation in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-6: PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
An administrative fine must be paid to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation or, if an appeal is made, within fifteen (15) days
after the date of the city manager's notice of the decision to uphold the imposition of administrative fines, whichever is later. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-7: DELINQUENT ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
A. A penalty of ten percent (10%) is added on any delinquent fines on the last day of each month after the due date. The penalty will not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the fine.
B. In addition to penalties provided by this section, delinquent fines accrue interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, exclusive of penalties, from
the due date. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-8: LIABILITY FOR FINES:
All fines, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this article are civil debts owed to the city by the person fined. In the event that judicial action is
necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the city, the person or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs of suit and attorney fees
incurred by the city to collect the fine. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-9: LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the chief may suspend or revoke a tobacco retailer's license for the following reasons:
A. Upon learning or discovering facts that require license denial under this article that were not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable; or
B. If the licensee violates the tobacco retailer license conditions. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-10: SUSPENSION TIME PERIODS:
A. After serving a notice of violation, the chief may suspend a tobacco retailer's license as follows:
1. Upon finding a first license violation within any sixty (60) month period, a thirty (30) day suspension;
2. Upon finding a second license violation within any sixty (60) month period, a ninety (90) day suspension;
3. Upon finding a third license violation within any sixty (60) month period, a one year suspension;
4. Upon finding a fourth license violation within any sixty (60) month period, revocation.
B. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the chief's ability to impose a different suspension period or to revoke a license as the circumstances of a
violation may require. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-4-11: NO NEW LICENSE AFTER REVOCATION:
Should a tobacco retailer's license be revoked, the proprietor is presumptively disqualified to apply for a new license in accordance with this article. This
presumption may be overcome upon a showing of good cause as to why a license should be issued following a revocation. Any such showing must be
made to the chief's satisfaction or, if the chief denies a license, to the city manager as prescribed by this article. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-5: APPEALS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 135/581
5-6B-5-1: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
An applicant is entitled to appeal the chief's decisions to the city manager provided:
A. A request for review must be commenced within ten (10) days from the date on which written notice of the chief's decision is served on the
applicant/licensee. If request is untimely, the city manager may, nevertheless, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown.
B. A request for appeal must be on a form provided by the department and contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person making the request;
2. A description of the decision, determination or order which is the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was made
or issued;
3. A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
4. Such other information as may be required by the department.
C. Upon receiving an appeal, the city manager will review the request and, within ten (10) days of receiving the appeal, provide the appellant with a written
notification that:
1. The chief's decision is affirmed;
2. The chief's decision is modified;
3. The chief's decision is reversed and a license is issued.
D. The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a time, place, and manner determined in the city manager's sole discretion. Should a
hearing occur, the city manager may issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing, but also notify the applicant and the chief in writing of the
city manager's decision.
E. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There is no right of city council appeal. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-5-2: CONTENT OF NOTICES:
Any notification of action, whether oral or written, must describe with particularity the facts and the reasons for the decision. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
5-6B-5-3: RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A. An applicant/licensee may appeal the city manager's decision by filing an appeal with the superior court pursuant to Government Code section 53069.4,
or any successor statute, within twenty (20) days from service of the city manager's decision.
B. Should a licensee file a timely appeal with the superior court, any requirement to pay an administrative fine is suspended and the payment of the fine, if
any, will be in accordance with the superior court decision. (Ord. 1358, 4-1-2003)
Chapter 7
PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
5-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers for the purpose of complying with the Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water
Quality Control Act, and the Municipal National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, including, without limitation, any amendments or
modifications, by:
A. Controlling non-stormwater discharges to the Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).
B. Controlling the discharge of pollutants, including those pollutants taken up by stormwater as it flows over urban areas, to the maximum extent
practicable. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-2: LIMITS OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to:
A. Infringe any right or power guaranteed by the United States or California Constitutions, including any vested property right;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 136/581
B. Require any action inconsistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, vesting tentative map, or other provision of this Code;
C. Restrict otherwise lawful land use, except as authorized by the laws of California, subject to the limitations of this chapter;
D. Convey any property rights of any sort, or any exclusive privileges;
E. Authorize any injury to persons or property, or invasion of other private rights, or any infringement of State or local law or regulations. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-
2017)
5-7-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any provisions of this chapter or the application of any provision of this chapter to any circumstance is held invalid, the application of such provision to
other circumstances and the remainder of this chapter will not be affected. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-4: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
A. This chapter applies to ministerial and discretionary approvals of the new development or redevelopment projects defined in the County of Los Angeles
LID ordinance (ordinance no. 2013-0044).
B. Each of the projects must meet the requirements of this chapter; the Municipal NPDES permit; and the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings stated in the Municipal NPDES permit and if not described therein, the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.); regulations implementing the NPDES, Clean Water Act section 402; California Water Code
section 13050; and any successor statutes or regulations.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE FACILITY: A facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes: 5013, 5014,
5511, 5541, 7532 - 7534, or 7536 - 7539.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or
non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water.
BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.
CONSTRUCTION: Constructing, clearing, grading, grubbing, demolishing, or excavating that results in land disturbance. Construction does not include
emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety; routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity
of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work; or routine maintenance required to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity,
or original purpose of a facility. Construction does not include interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or construction waste to
stormwater; mechanical permit work; or sign permit work.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multiunit
or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for
future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of a facility, nor does
it include emergency construction activities required to protect public health and safety immediately.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any materials, wastes or mixture of wastes defined as a "hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 USC section 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 USC section 9601 et seq., or the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act (HSAA), California Health and
Safety Code section 25300 et seq., and all future amendments to any of them, or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board.
Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two (2) or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous
waste" will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition.
HILLSIDE: Property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development will require grading on any natural slope which is twenty
five percent (25%) or greater and where grading will result in cut or filled slopes.
INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL FACILITY: Any facility which is the site of the production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale
of goods or commodities, and any facility involved or used in providing professional and nonprofessional services. This category of facilities includes,
without limitation, any facility defined by the SIC or the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Facility ownership (Federal, State,
Municipal, private) and profit motive of the owner or operator of the facility are not factors in this definition.
INSPECTION:
A. Entry and the conduct of an on-site review of a facility and its operation, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific Municipal or
other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an inspection, include, but are not limited to:
1. Pre-inspection documentation research;
2. Request for entry;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 137/581
3. Interview of facility personnel;
4. Facility walk-through;
5. Visual observation of the condition of facility premises;
6. Examination and copying of records as required;
7. Sample collection (if necessary or required);
8. Exit conference;
9. Report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming into compliance.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): Building or landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff.
MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT: The "Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharges Within the Coastal
Watersheds of Los Angeles County, Except Those Discharges Originating from the City of Long Beach MS4" (Order No. R4-2012-0175), NPDES Permit
No. CAS004001, effective December 28, 2012, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board - Los Angeles Region, and any successor
permit to that permit.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of conveyances (consisting of roads with drainage systems,
Municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):
A. Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State law)
having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under State law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated
and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
D. Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR 122.2.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing,
terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA section 307, 402, 318, and 405. The
term includes an "approved program".
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of
impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge into the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PARKING LOT: Land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for business, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of
five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty five (25) or more parking spaces.
POLLUTANTS: Those "pollutants" defined in CWA section 502(6) (33 USC section 1362(6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code
section 13373.
REDEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of
impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, without limitation: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or
replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related
to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.
RESTAURANT: A facility where prepared food and beverages are sold for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling
prepared food and beverages for immediate consumption (see SIC Code 5812).
RETAIL GASOLINE OUTLET: Any facility where gasoline and lubricating oils are sold.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE: Routine maintenance projects include, but are not limited to projects conducted to:
A. Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.
B. Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities.
C. Includes road shoulder work, re-grading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts.
D. Update existing lines and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased
capacity. This includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes.
E. Repair leaks.
F. Conduct landscaping activities without changing existing or natural grades.
Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and
regulations. New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 138/581
SIC: Standard Industrial Classification.
SIMPLE LID BMP: A BMP constructed above ground on a single-family residential home that can be readily inspected by a homeowner or inspector.
Simple LID BMPs do not require an operation and maintenance plan per the Municipal NPDES permit. Examples of such BMPs include but are not limited
to vegetated swales, rain barrels and above ground cisterns, rain gardens, and pervious pavement.
SOURCE CONTROL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (SOURCE CONTROL BMP): Any schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the
source of pollution.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage related to precipitation events (pursuant to 40 CFR section
122.26(b)(13); 55 Fed. Reg. 47990, 47995 (Nov. 16 1990)).
STORMWATER DISCHARGES: Any discharge into the MS4 that is composed entirely of stormwater.
STRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (STRUCTURAL BMP): Any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts
of stormwater and urban runoff pollution (e.g., a canopy, structural enclosure). This category may include both treatment control BMPs and source control
BMPs.
TREATMENT: The use of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include, but are
not limited to, filtration, gravity settling, media absorption, biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation, and UV radiation.
TREATMENT CONTROL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (TREATMENT CONTROL BMP): Any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by
simple gravity setting of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. (Ord.
1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-6: RATE OF DISCHARGE:
No new development or redevelopment project may increase the pre-project's stormwater runoff flow rates, volumes, and durations from the developed
site if this increase would make downstream erosion more probable. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-7: SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
Unless inconsistent with vested rights, the site design for all new development and redevelopment subject to this chapter, to the maximum extent
practicable, must:
A. Concentrate or cluster new development on portions of the site while leaving the remaining land in a natural undisturbed condition;
B. Limit clearing and grading of native vegetation to the minimum extent practicable, consistent with the construction of lots, and to allow access and
provide fire protection;
C. Preserve riparian areas and wetlands. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-8: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs):
A. On the date this chapter takes effect, those Best Management Practices required by the Municipal NPDES permit or the County of Los Angeles LID
ordinance (ordinance no. 2013-0044) are deemed incorporated herein by reference and adopted by the City.
B. No Best Management Practice may be used in new development or redevelopment regulated under this chapter unless listed in the Municipal NPDES
permit, County of Los Angeles LID ordinance (ordinance no. 2013-0044), or the County of Los Angeles LID Standards Manual, unless otherwise
approved by the City. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-9: CONTROL OF EROSION OF SLOPES AND CHANNELS:
A. Single family hillside homes are required to implement mitigation measures in accordance with the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance (ordinance no.
2013-0044) to:
1. Conserve natural areas;
2. Protect slopes and channels;
3. Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;
4. Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and
5. Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability.
B. Best Management Practices used on slopes or channels in new development or redevelopment subject to this chapter must:
1. Convey runoff from tops of slopes;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 139/581
2. Eliminate or reduce flow to natural drainage systems, and for flows which cannot be eliminated, utilize natural drainage systems, rather than artificial
drainage systems, to the maximum extent practicable;
3. Stabilize soil at permanent channel crossings;
4. Vegetate slopes with native or drought tolerant species known to control erosion; and
5. Dissipate concentrated flows before they enter unlined channels. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-10: SIGNAGE AT STORM DRAINS:
Within the project area of new development and redevelopment projects, a notice that dumping in storm drains and catch basins is illegal must be:
A. Stenciled in paint or other permanent means at all storm drain inlets and catch basins;
B. Posted at all known public accesses to natural or artificial drainage channels, creeks, lakes, or other relevant waterbodies; and
C. Maintained to preserve the sign. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-11: OUTDOOR STORAGE OF MATERIALS:
A. All materials stored outdoors in new development or redevelopment projects subject to this chapter which, if exposed to stormwater, reasonably may be
expected to add pollutants to stormwater, must be isolated from contact with stormwater by:
1. Enclosure in a structure; or
2. By a surrounding curb or other containment structure.
B. The storage area for materials referred to in subsection A of this section must be covered completely:
1. By impermeable paving, or
2. An overhead covering that adequately diverts precipitation away from the ground between the material and the surrounding containment structure.
(Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-12: OUTDOOR TRASH STORAGE AREAS:
Except where they serve only single-family residences, solid waste containers in new development or redevelopment projects subject to this chapter must
be placed between collections in areas that:
A. Are isolated from contact with stormwater flows originating outside the storage area, and
B. Are surrounded with a barrier sufficient to prevent all trash from being transported out of the storage area, except during collection. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-
2017)
5-7-13: MAINTENANCE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
A. Prior to receiving approval for final occupancy, every person applying to the City for approval of any new development or redevelopment project subject
to this chapter, with the exception of simple LID BMPs implemented on single family residences, must agree in writing to maintain any structural or
treatment control Best Management Practice to be implemented in that development by means of a covenant running with the land. A maintenance and
operation plan must be made part of said covenant and records of maintenance must be kept on site.
B. The agreement described in this section will remain in force until ownership of the developed property is transferred, and upon transfer, will be binding
on the new owner(s). (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-14: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
All new development and redevelopment projects must install BMPs in accordance with the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance.
Compliance with the LID standards set forth in the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance will be demonstrated through the City's LID plan review process.
The applicant for any development project must submit a LID plan to the City for review and approval that provides a comprehensive, technical discussion
of how the development project will comply with the County of Los Angeles LID ordinance and the applicable provisions specified in the County of Los
Angeles LID Standards Manual. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-15: LOADING DOCKS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 140/581
In any ten thousand (10,000) square foot industrial/commercial facility or in any automotive service facility, in new development or redevelopment subject
to this chapter, the design of any outdoor loading dock area must:
A. Use an overhead covering that prevents the entry of stormwater; or
B. Prevent the entry of stormwater by diverting it away; and
C. Not direct stormwater from any truck well directly into a storm drain system. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-16: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE BAYS:
In any ten thousand (10,000) square foot industrial/commercial facility or in any automotive service facility, in new development or redevelopment subject
to this chapter, repair or maintenance bays must:
A. Prevent the entry of stormwater by diverting it away or by locating such bays indoors; and
B. Use a drainage system that collects all water from washing and from leaks or spills and stores the water in a sump for disposal; and
C. Not direct stormwater from the bay directly to a storm drain system. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-17: WASH AREAS:
Each wash area for motor vehicles or equipment in any new development or redevelopment subject to this chapter must incorporate:
A. An adequate overhead covering; and
B. A device that clarifies or otherwise pretreats all wash water; and
C. A drain conducting all treated wash water to a sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-18: RESTAURANTS:
Each restaurant in any new development or redevelopment subject to this chapter must include an area for the washing or cleaning of equipment, which:
A. If indoors, will:
1. Be self-contained;
2. Use a grease trap; and
3. Use a drain conducting all wastewater to a sanitary sewer.
B. If outdoors, will:
1. Use an overhead covering adequate to prevent contact with stormwater;
2. Be covered with impermeable paving;
3. Be surrounded by a curb or other containment; and
4. Use a drain conducting all wastewater to a sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-19: RETAIL GASOLINE OUTLETS:
All fuel dispensing areas in any retail gasoline outlet subject to this chapter must:
A. Be covered by a structure that:
1. Extends outward at least as far as the grade break at all points; and
2. Diverts all stormwater away from the fueling area;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 141/581
B. Be paved with a material, other than asphaltic concrete, that is impermeable to water and has a smooth surface with a slope of not less than two
percent (2%) but not more than four percent (4%);
C. Be separated from the rest of the site by a grade break that, to the maximum extent practical, prevents stormwater from entering the fueling area;
D. Extend outward at least six and one-half feet (6.5') from the outermost corner of any fuel dispenser, or a distance one foot (1') greater than the
combined length of the dispensing hose and nozzle, whichever distance is less. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-20: PARKING LOTS:
Owners and operators of parking lots in any new development or redevelopment subject to this chapter must minimize off site transport of pollutants to the
maximum extent practical by using the following BMPs:
A. Minimize impervious land coverage;
B. Provide effective treatment or infiltration of stormwater before it is discharged into storm drains; and
C. Use operational and maintenance measures to remove heavy metals, oil and grease and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-21: SITE SPECIFIC MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT WITH POTENTIAL
ADVERSE IMPACTS ON POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER QUALITY:
On and after the effective date of this chapter, all projects for new development or redevelopment not meeting the thresholds of subsection 5-7-4A of this
chapter, but which have the potential to have adverse impacts on post-development stormwater flows from the site, must submit for approval a site-specific
plan adequate to mitigate post-development stormwater quality if the project has any one or more of the following characteristics:
A. A vehicle or equipment fueling area;
B. A vehicle or equipment maintenance area, including washing and repair;
C. Any commercial or industrial waste handling or storage area;
D. An area for outdoor handling or storage of "hazardous materials", as defined in this chapter;
E. An outdoor manufacturing area;
F. An area where outdoor food handling or processing occurs;
G. An area where outdoor animal care, confinement or slaughter occurs; or
H. An area of outdoor horticultural activity. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-22: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Each violation of any provision of this chapter is both a misdemeanor and a public nuisance.
B. The remedies specified in this chapter are in addition to any other legal remedy that may be available to the City. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
5-7-23: INSPECTIONS:
A. The Director of Public Works, and his/her designated officers, may enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. As necessary, these officers may, at a reasonable time and in a manner authorized by the laws of California, enter and make inspections on any
property regulated under this chapter. (Ord. 1560, 10-3-2017)
Title 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 142/581
Chapter 1
COUNTY REGULATIONS
6-1-1: INCORPORATION OF TITLE 10, LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
Pursuant to Government Code section 50022.9, the city council incorporates title 10 of the Los Angeles County code entitled "Animals", subject to the
amendments, additions and deletions set forth below, into this code. The provisions of this code will take precedence over any conflicting provisions in title
10 of the Los Angeles County code. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-2: DELETIONS FROM LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
The following provisions of title 10 of the Los Angeles County code are deleted:
Chapter 10.04 entitled "General Provisions";
Sections 10.08.210 and 10.08.220 in chapter 10.08 entitled "Definitions";
Sections 10.20.011, 10.20.212, 10.20.213, 10.20.214, 10.20.215, and 10.20.262 in chapter 10.20 entitled "Dogs And Cats".
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-3: AMENDMENTS TO LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
The following provisions of title 10 of the Los Angeles County code are amended to read as follows:
Section 10.08.100. "Department" means the El Segundo police department.
Section 10.08.110. "Director" means the police chief, or designee.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-4: ADDITIONS TO LOS ANGELES COUNTY CODE:
The following sections are added to title 10 of the Los Angeles County code:
Section 10.08.260. "Director of health services" means the police chief or designee.
Section 10.08.270. "Sheriff", "sheriff deputy", and "sheriff officer" means police officer.
Section 10.08.280. "Tax collector" means the finance director, or designee.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-1-5: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title is guilty of an infraction, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 1482, 10-15-2013)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers, and applicable provisions of the California code, for the purpose of protecting public health and
safety; the health and safety of animals kept within the city's jurisdiction; and ensuring that the requirements of this title are enforced. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-
2001)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions, in addition to those set forth in chapter 1 of this title, govern the
construction of the words and phrases used in this title:
AT LARGE: Whenever a dog is elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or other person having the custody or control of such dog and is not
restrained by a leash less than ten feet (10') in length, under the control of a person capable of controlling such dog.
DOG: Both male and female dogs.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 143/581
KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats or any combination thereof, are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons
providing activities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or cat is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of
four (4) months.
OWN: Includes the terms keep, maintain, control, harbor, or possess.
OWNER: Any natural or artificial person who owns an animal for more than fifteen (15) days.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any of the following:
A. Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within the prior thirty six (36) month period, engages in any behavior that requires
a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.
B. Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe injury than as defined in Food and Agricultural Code section 31604.
C. Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within the prior thirty six (36) month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted
injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.
VICIOUS DOG: Any of the following:
A. Any dog seized under Penal Code section 599aa and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under Penal Code section 597.5(a).
B. Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being.
C. Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this
determination, continues the behavior described in the definition of "potentially dangerous dog" in this section, or is maintained in violation of Food
and Agricultural Code section 31641, 31642, or 31643. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-3: ANIMALS PERMITTED:
It is lawful for a person to own the following animals within the city:
A. Canaries, pigeons, doves or birds of the psittacine family kept as household pets or as a hobby only, not exceeding ten (10) in number, when kept in
facilities that are humane and adequate as to noise, sanitation and security;
B. Fish and turtles kept as household pets or as a hobby only;
C. Hamsters, white rats or guinea pigs as household pets or as a hobby only, not exceeding ten (10) in the aggregate and the young thereof not exceeding
three (3) months in age;
D. Hen chickens, kept as household pets or as a hobby, not to exceed five (5) in number when kept in facilities that are humane and adequate as to noise,
sanitation and security;
E. Rabbits as household pets or as a hobby only, not exceeding four (4) in number and the young thereof not exceeding four (4) months in age;
F. In any residential dwelling, dogs and cats not to exceed three (3) for each residential living unit in any combination thereof and the young thereof not
exceeding four (4) months in age;
G. Except in residential districts, dogs used for guard or sentry purposes. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-4: CIRCUS, CARNIVAL, WILD WEST SHOW, PARADE:
The animals allowed to be owned in this chapter may be used in association with any circus, carnival, wild west show, or parade for which a permit has
been issued.
A. Unless otherwise provided by a permit issued pursuant to this code, animals used in conjunction with the type of event listed herein may not be used for
such an event more than twenty four (24) hours before the first performance of the event nor may such animals remain within the city more than twenty
four (24) hours after the conclusion of the last performance of an event. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-5: LABORATORY:
All animals enumerated in this chapter may be kept within the city in connection with a laboratory that holds a valid clinical laboratory permit issued by the
state department of health. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-6: SCHOOL:
All animals enumerated in this chapter may be kept within the city in a public or private school licensed by the state. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 144/581
6-2-7: ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess, or control any poisonous or venomous snake or any
wild, carnivorous animal. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-8: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
It is unlawful for any animal owner to allow that animal to be at large. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-9: ANIMAL CARE:
Every person, within the city, who owns any animal or who owns, conducts, manages or operates any kennel or animal breeding operation for which a
permit is required by this title, will comply with each of the following conditions:
A. Housing facilities for animals will be structurally sound and will be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, to contain the animals,
and to restrict the entrance of other animals.
B. All animals will be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require.
C. All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
D. All animals will be so maintained as to eliminate excessive and nighttime noise.
E. No animals will be without attention more than twelve (12) consecutive hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at a kennel, the telephone number
of the police department, or the name, address and telephone number of the responsible person, will be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of
the property.
F. Every reasonable precaution will be used to ensure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to
suffer by any person or means.
G. No condition will be maintained or permitted that is or could be injurious to the animals.
H. Animal buildings and enclosures will be so constructed and maintained as to prevent escape of animals. All reasonable precautions will be taken to
protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public.
I. Every animal establishment will isolate sick animals sufficiently so as not to endanger the health of other animals. Sick animals will at all times be
isolated from the other animals.
J. Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained will be constructed of material easily cleaned and will be kept in a sanitary condition. The
building will be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling will be provided as required, according to the physical
needs of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals and sanitation.
K. Such person will take any animal to a veterinarian for examination or treatment, if the director finds this is necessary in order to maintain the health of
the animal and orders the owner or custodian to do so.
L. All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs will be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for the animals kept therein.
M. Every violation of an applicable regulation will be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the chief of police.
N. Such person will provide proper shelter and protection from the weather at all times.
O. Such person will not give an animal any alcoholic beverage, unless prescribed by a veterinarian.
P. Such person will not allow animals that are natural enemies, temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible, to be quartered together, or so near
each other as to cause injury, fear or torment. If two (2) or more animals are so trained that they can be placed together and do not attack each other or
perform or attempt any hostile act to the others, such animals will be deemed not to be natural enemies.
Q. Such person will not allow the use of any tack, equipment, device, substance or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to
any animal.
R. Such person will not allow any animal to cause a hazard, or be a menace to the health, peace or safety of the community. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 145/581
6-2-10: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any animal (or animals) which molests passersby or passing vehicles, attacks other animals, trespasses on school grounds, is repeatedly at large,
damages or trespasses on private or public property, barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, is a public nuisance. (Ord.
1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-11: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Compliance; Permit: It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or have in possession or under control in the city any animal except as permitted
by this chapter.
B. Permit For Keeping Animals: The director may issue a permit to persons wishing to keep types of animals not identified in this chapter or a greater
number of animals than allowed by this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-12: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
An application for a permit will be initiated by filing a verified application on a form furnished by the director. At a minimum, the application will include:
A. The applicant's name, address, and telephone number;
B. The number and kind of animals for which a permit is requested;
C. The number and kind of other animals kept on the premises;
D. The type and location of caging, if applicable; and
E. Other information reasonably required by the director. The director will make or cause to be made such investigation as may be appropriate. (Ord. 1340,
11-7-2001)
6-2-13: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
The director may issue or renew the permit if:
A. Issuing a permit will not adversely affect the public peace, health or safety;
B. Keeping of the animal will not violate any applicable laws; and
C. The facilities for keeping such animals are humane and adequate under the circumstances as to noise, security and sanitation. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-2-14: EXPIRATION OF PERMITS:
All permits issued on or before October 31 of any year will expire on December 31 of that year. Any permit issued on or after November 1 of any year will
expire on December 31 of the next succeeding year. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-15: APPEAL DECISION OF DIRECTOR; FEE:
Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the director may file an appeal of such decision with the planning commission by filing a written notice of
appeal in letter form accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, said fee to cover the cost of posting, postage,
advertising and other costs incident to the proceedings. Said notice of appeal must be filed within ten (10) days after the director renders a decision.
Failure to appeal a decision within this time period will waive an applicant's appeal rights. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-16: PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING; NOTICE; DECISION:
A. Hearing Notice: When an appeal is filed, the director will give notice of a public hearing by mailing a letter notice, first class mail with postage prepaid, to
the applicant and to the owners of property abutting the boundary of the property that is the subject of the application for an animal permit, using for this
purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County. Such notice will
contain the address, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and the time and place at which the public hearing on the matter will be held.
B. Decision By Resolution: The planning commission will announce its decision by resolution.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 146/581
C. Decision Final: Any action by the planning commission on such matters will be a final decision. There is no right for city council appeal.
D. Notice Of Decision: Not later than fifteen (15) days following the adoption of a resolution ordering that an appeal be granted or denied, a copy of the
resolution will be mailed to the applicant and to any other person requesting notice of the action. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-2-17: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the director if the director finds:
A. That the permit, or a prior permit of which the permit is an extension was obtained by fraud; or
B. That the permittee violated the law in keeping such animal; or
C. That the animal or animals endanger the public peace, health or safety. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
Chapter 3
DOGS
6-3-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required; Exceptions:
1. Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to own any dog without obtaining an annual city license.
2. It is not necessary to purchase a license or to pay a license fee for any dog under the age of four (4) months.
3. The license fee will not apply to any dogs kept or maintained exclusively in any dog kennel in the city.
B. Annual License Fees: The annual license fee for keeping and maintaining an unaltered dog in the city will be set from time to time by city council
resolution. The annual license fee for a spayed or neutered dog will be set at an amount that is one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee for an unaltered
dog; if a certificate is presented from a licensed veterinarian verifying that the dog has been spayed or neutered.
C. Discount For Senior Citizens: A fifty percent (50%) discount on the dog license fee will be made available to any resident sixty two (62) years of age or
older who makes application for the discount.
D. Seeing Eye Or Guide Dogs: Seeing eye or guide dogs are those dogs that have been especially trained to lead and aid the blind or deaf. Any blind or
deaf person having custody of such a dog may keep and harbor the dog within the city by obtaining a license to keep a dog as provided herein, and
may lawfully take the dog into any food establishment within the city. There will be no fee charged for such dogs upon proof of antirabies vaccination.
E. Date Payable; Proration; Penalty:
1. Any license fee required to be paid by this chapter will be payable annually in advance on March 1 of each year, and the license will expire at twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on the last day of February of the following year. The full amount of the license fee will be payable for any license falling due
during the period from January 1 of the year to June 30 of the year.
2. Fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the license fee will be payable for any license falling due subsequent to September 30 of the year for the
remaining fraction of the year.
3. Any license fee payable under the provisions of this chapter remaining unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after the same will become payable
hereunder, will be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the fee due, which penalty will be collected by the license collector at the time of the
collection of the license fee, and will be in addition to the principal sum thereof. In determining whether or not a penalty has accrued under the
provisions of this chapter, the license collector may require an affidavit from any person claiming exemption from the payment of any penalty
hereunder, which affidavit will set forth the facts upon which the claim for the exemption is based.
F. Failure To Pay License Fee: Whenever any person owning, harboring or having the care or custody of any dog fails to pay the license fee provided and
specified in this chapter for the dog, the director may cause the dog to be seized and kept in the public pound for the period and in the manner and
upon the terms, conditions and requirements as specified in this chapter.
G. Exception: Animals, other than dogs, are not required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-2: LICENSE TAGS:
A. Contents: Each year the city will procure a sufficient number of suitable metallic license tags to meet the requirements of this chapter.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 147/581
B. Duplicate: The city council will by resolution establish a fee for issuing a license and metallic tag to replace a lost license or tag.
C. Affixing To Dog Collar: The owner of any dog upon which the license fee has been paid will securely fasten the metallic license tag upon a suitable
collar and securely fasten the collar with the tag attached thereto upon the dog. A dog harness or other device may be substituted in lieu of the collar, if
so desired. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-3-3: LICENSE APPLICATION/RENEWAL:
The city will print a sufficient number of applications to meet the requirements of this chapter. The applications will provide for the description of the dog for
which the license fee is paid and the name and address of the owner of the dog. The applications will also designate the rabies vaccination date and the
sex of the dog for which the license fee has been paid. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-3-4: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DOG LICENSE:
The director may suspend or revoke any dog license issued under the provisions of this chapter, if at any time the director finds that any dog described or
referred to in any dog license, or for which any dog license has or may be issued under this chapter is vicious, dangerous or apt to bite or injure any
person. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-5: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any person owning or having charge, custody, possession or control of any dog to cause, permit or allow the dog to run at large in or
upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court or other public place, or in or upon any private property or premises, other than those of the person owning
or having charge, custody, possession or control of the dog within the city, unless the dog is restrained by a substantial leash not to exceed six feet (6')
in length and is in charge, custody, possession or control of a competent person.
B. This provision will not apply to public areas of the city officially designated as a "dog park" or to police service dogs while such dogs are under the
control of a peace officer. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-6: RABIES CONTROL:
A. Vaccination Required; Exception: Every dog in the city over the age of four (4) months must be vaccinated against rabies.
B. Revaccination:
1. Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the city that has been vaccinated with chick embryo vaccine will cause the dog to be
revaccinated within a period of not more than two (2) years after the prior vaccination.
2. Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the city which has been vaccinated with tissue phenolized vaccine will cause the dog to be
revaccinated with rabies vaccine within a period of not more than one year after the prior vaccination.
C. Vaccination Certificate Issuance: Every person practicing veterinary medicine in the city who vaccinates a dog with rabies vaccine will issue to the
person keeping, harboring or having the dog a certificate, which is signed by the veterinarian and which states thereon the name and description of the
dog, the date of the vaccination and the type of vaccine used.
D. Certificate: Every person applying for a dog license will exhibit a rabies vaccination certificate issued by a person licensed by the state or any other
state or nation to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate will show that the dog for which the license will be issued either:
1. Was vaccinated in accordance with this chapter; or
2. Should not be vaccinated with rabies vaccine by reason of age, infirmity or other disability, which disability is shown on the face of the certificate and
to the satisfaction of the person issuing the license to be in effect at the time. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-3-7: DOG PARK RULES:
The city council may, by resolution, designate particular parks within the city as dog parks. Persons having custody of dogs at dog parks will comply with
the following:
A. Owner Present: Dogs will not be present at a dog park without an owner or custodian;
B. Hours: The dog park will be open from dawn to dusk, seven (7) days a week;
C. Aggressive Dogs: Aggressive dogs are not allowed in the park;
D. Food: No food in the park/do not feed dogs in the park;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 148/581
E. Clean Up And Supervision: Owners must supervise and clean up after dogs;
F. Children: Children under twelve (12) years of age must be supervised by an adult;
G. Age And Vaccination: Dogs must be at least four (4) months old and vaccinated;
H. Dogs In Heat: Dogs in heat are not permitted;
I. Spiked Collars: No spiked collars;
J. Bikes Or Similar Items: No bikes, rollerblades, roller skates, strollers or similar items allowed in the park;
K. Leash: Owners must have a leash available at all times;
L. Parking: Parking regulations must be obeyed;
M. Liability: Dog owners are liable for any injuries or damage caused by their dog(s);
N. License: All dogs must be currently licensed;
O. Trainers: Professional dog trainers are not allowed to conduct training on site;
P. Number Of Dogs: No person may bring more than three (3) dogs to the park at one time.
Q. Prohibited Behavior: The following behaviors must be stopped immediately:
1. Prolonged growling;
2. Mounting or pinning of other dogs. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-8: INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
A person will not interfere with, oppose or resist the director or any employee of the city, while such person is engaged in the performance of any act
authorized by this title. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-3-9: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully tease, torment, agitate, provoke, beat, kick, strike, injure, maim, disable, kill, or in any way interfere with any dog
being used in a police function by law enforcement officers. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
Chapter 4
LICENSES FOR KENNELS AND ANIMAL BREEDING BUSINESSES
6-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate or maintain a kennel or animal breeding business in the city without a valid kennel or breeder's license issued pursuant to this title.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-2: APPLICATIONS FOR ALL LICENSES:
Persons wishing to obtain either a kennel or a breeder's license must file an application as follows:
A. License applications will be filed by a natural person.
B. License applications will be in a form prescribed by the director and will, at a minimum, contain all of the following information:
1. Whether the applicant is seeking a kennel or breeder's license;
2. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person filing the application;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 149/581
3. If filing on behalf of a business, the name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the organization; and if requested by the director,
written documentation of the authority under which the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;
4. For a kennel license, the proposed location of the kennel. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-3: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION:
In addition to the information required by this chapter, applications for all licenses will include such supplemental information which the director may find
reasonably necessary in order to determine whether to approve or deny a license under this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The director will issue a kennel or breeder's license if:
A. The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
B. There are no grounds for denying a license;
C. For a kennel license, operating the proposed kennel will not violate any state or local regulation;
D. Operating the proposed breeding business will not endanger the health, peace or safety of the community;
E. The proposed site for the proposed breeding business is clean and sanitary;
F. The applicant has not had a similar license revoked within one year before the application; and
G. Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in writing. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-5: LICENSE DENIAL:
A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
A. The application is incomplete;
B. The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application information requested by the director;
C. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
D. The proposed location for a kennel does not conform with the zoning regulations of this code. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-6: KENNEL LICENSES; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any person conducting, managing or maintaining a kennel must pay the city an annual fee for the privilege of conducting or maintaining a dog kennel.
The amount of the annual fee will be set by city council resolution and entitles the kennel operator to maintain ten (10) or fewer dogs. An additional fee,
set by city council resolution, must be paid by persons managing or maintaining kennels housing more than ten (10) dogs. (Ord. 1379, 1-18-2005)
B. Every person owning or operating any kennel will keep all animals therein under proper confinement on the premises and will not cause, permit or allow
such animals to be or to run at large.
C. The holder of a kennel license will keep available for inspection, on the premises, a record that will show:
1. The name, current address and telephone number of the owner of each animal kept at the kennel;
2. The date such animal entered the kennel;
3. The reason for such animal being at the kennel, such as for boarding, sale, breeding or grooming;
4. The description of the animal, including its age, breed, sex and color;
5. That there exists a current, valid rabies certificate for every dog over four (4) months of age so long as such dog is kept at the kennel.
D. The provisions of this section do not apply to breeder's licenses. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 150/581
6-4-7: DURATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter will expire one year from the date of issuance. The license may be revoked or suspended for cause in
accordance with this chapter before the expiration date. The license is void if the licensee changes the location of the breeding business or sells, assigns,
transfers or otherwise disposes of such business or his or her interest therein for a period of thirty (30) days or more. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-8: RENEWAL:
Each license or permit issued under this chapter will be renewed within thirty (30) days after the expiration thereof. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-9: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A. Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended if the director finds:
1. That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, has been convicted of any offense involving the violation of Penal Code sections 596, 596.6, 597,
597.1, 597.5, 598 and 599, or of any provision of this chapter;
2. That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, has, at the place for which the license was issued, failed to provide any animal in his or her
possession care or control with proper and sufficient food, drink, shelter or protection, or subjected any such animal to suffering, cruelty or abuse;
3. That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, failed to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary condition;
4. That the licensee, his or her agent or employee, has violated any rule or regulation made pursuant to the provisions of this title;
5. That the licensee has falsified facts on the license application.
B. If a license is denied or revoked for cause, the director will not accept a new application by the same person for a breeding license less than six months
after such denial or revocation, unless the applicant affirmatively shows and the officer finds, by inspection or investigation, that the grounds upon
which the first application was denied or the license was revoked no longer existed.
C. On revocation of a license, no part of the fee is refundable. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter will be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-4-11: BREEDER'S LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS:
A. The director may issue a breeder's license in the same manner as kennel licenses. Persons who possess a valid kennel license issued pursuant to this
title need not obtain a breeder's license.
B. In addition to every other applicable requirement of this title, every licensee will comply with each of the following conditions:
1. Every puppy or kitten offered for sale must be examined by a veterinarian and be certified free of congenital defects, distemper, worms, skin disease,
skin and ear mites, and other diseases or conditions which would be injurious to the animal or a potential owner.
2. Every puppy or kitten offered for sale will have been vaccinated against distemper by a veterinarian. A certificate providing the name of the
veterinarian and the date and treatment must be provided to the purchaser at the time of sale.
3. No animal will be transported by a licensee unless housed in a container designed for that purpose including provisions for adequate ventilation and
food and water.
4. No licensee will allow the whelping of more than one litter per female dog or cat during the license term. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
Chapter 5
IMPOUNDING ANIMALS
6-5-1: DIRECTOR; DUTIES; IMPOUNDMENT FEES:
A. Duties: In addition to any other duties under this code, the director is responsible for all duties relating to operation of an animal pound including, without
limitation, capturing, holding, and releasing animals violating any provision of this code.
B. Record Kept: The director will keep a full, true and correct record of all animals impounded, the date of the impoundment, and the date of release,
discharge or disposal. This documentation will be available for public inspection. The director may promulgate appropriate regulations for public
viewing of impounded animals.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 151/581
C. Care Of Animals And Fowl: The director will provide the necessary subsistence and will properly care for all impounded animals.
D. Removal From Public Property: The director will remove and dispose of all dead animals found in or upon any of the public highways, streets, avenues,
ways, lanes, alleys, parks, squares, sidewalks or other public places within the city.
E. Removal From Private Property: The director will remove and dispose of any abandoned dead animal found on private property in accordance with the
nuisance abatement proceedings of this code. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-2: FEES FOR IMPOUNDING AND KEEPING ANIMALS:
The director will collect a fee set by city council resolution from the owners of impounded animals. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-3: VACCINATION FEE; REDEMPTION OF STRAY DOGS AND CATS:
The director will collect a fee from persons redeeming impounded dogs and cats for administering distemper vaccinations to stray dogs and for vaccinating
stray cats for feline diseases. This vaccination fee will be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-4: IMPOUNDING DOGS:
At any time within five (5) days from the date of impoundment, the owner or persons entitled to the possession of the dog may reclaim the dog upon
payment to the director of the impounding fee:
A. For the second impoundment of a dog, owned by the same person, the pound fee will be an amount that is double the standard impoundment fee;
B. For the third impoundment of a dog, owned by the same person, the pound fee will be an amount triple the standard impoundment fee;
C. In addition to the foregoing impounding fee, the daily maintenance fee will be paid for each day or portion thereof for which the dog was impounded.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-5: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOG WITHOUT TAG:
A. The director may capture and impound any dog found within the city limits that is not wearing a valid license tag conforming to the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The director may enter private property in accordance with applicable law to examine or capture any dog suspected of being in violation of the
provisions of this code or is suspected of being rabid or infected with rabies. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-5-6: DANGEROUS DOGS; IMPOUNDMENT; HEARING:
A. Impoundment: Whenever any dog is, in the written opinion of the director, vicious, dangerous, potentially dangerous or apt to bite or injure any person,
and is kept in such manner as to constitute an apparent menace to any person, the dog may be immediately impounded by the director.
B. Notice Of Impoundment:
1. The director must provide written notice to the owner/guardian of the specific behavior of the animal alleged in the petition and the date upon which a
hearing will be held to consider the petition. The hearing must be held promptly within no less than five (5) working days nor more than ten (10)
working days after service of notice upon the owner/guardian of the animal as set forth by the Food And Agricultural Code section 31621. The notice
must advise the owner/guardian of the consequences of a finding of potentially dangerous or vicious.
2. Where the owner/guardian's address of any animal is unknown, notice of the hearing must be given by posting the same in the police department
and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. Notice must then be deemed given on publication of the notice.
C. Hearing; Procedures: A hearing on whether a dog is declared potentially dangerous or vicious must be conducted in the following manner:
1. If the director has investigated and determined that probable cause exists to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, a hearing must be
conducted. The director must prepare a petition specifying the basis as to why the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious.
2. Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the director to find probable cause
must be sworn to and verified by the complainant and must be attached to the petition.
3. The city manager, or designee, must designate a hearing officer. The hearing officer must conduct a hearing on whether a dog must be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious.
4. The hearing must be open to the public and the hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, and exercise the full scope of authority
set forth in Food And Agricultural Code section 31621.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 152/581
5. A hearing may be continued if the hearing officer deems it necessary and proper or upon a showing of good cause.
6. If the owner/guardian fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing will nevertheless proceed and an appropriate order must be issued.
7. The hearing officer must consider all relevant responsible evidence without regard to the formal rules of evidence, including circumstances of
mitigation, and the record of any prior violations by the owner/guardian.
8. The hearing officer must issue a written determination based upon a preponderance of the evidence, which must be mailed to the owner/guardian
within seven (7) days after the hearing is completed.
9. The hearing officer's decision is final. There is no right to a city council appeal.
D. Designation Of Animal: If an animal is found to be potentially dangerous or vicious by a preponderance of the evidence, the animal must be so
designated on the records of the animal services agency. Such a designation must be considered in future determinations involving the animal and/or
owner/guardian.
E. Surrender Of Dangerous Dog: Any dog declared after a hearing to be dangerous, if not already impounded by the department, will be immediately
surrendered to the department.
F. Microchipping Before Release: If at the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer determines that the dog will be released, the dog must have a
microchip embedded subcutaneously in accordance with industry standards before being released to the owner. The microchipping will be at the
owner's expense.
G. Waiver: The owner of a dog for which a potentially dangerous petition has been issued may irrevocably waive rights to a hearing and any further appeal
under Food And Agricultural Code section 31622 and accept all conditions, sanctions and penalties set forth in Food And Agricultural Code sections
31641, 31642 and 31643. The director will mail a waiver form to the dog owner/guardian. The waiver must be signed by the dog owner/guardian and
received by the director within thirty (30) days from the date of agreement to waive or a hearing will be scheduled within thirty (30) days of the
agreement to waive.
H. Additional Fees:
1. In accordance with Food And Agricultural Code section 31641, the owner/guardian of a potentially dangerous dog must in addition to the regular
licensing fee, pay to the city an annual fee as may be established by city council resolution for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the
dog.
2. The owner/guardian of a dog determined to be vicious must, in addition to the regular licensing fee, pay to the city an annual fee as may be
established by separate city council resolution to provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog.
I. Registration Of Animal: The owner/guardian of a vicious dog must, within ten (10) days of such determination, upon request by the city present said
animal at the animal services agency and allow photographs and measurements of the animal to be taken for purposes of identification.
J. Undesignation Of Animal:
1. The owner/guardian of a dog found potentially dangerous, who has no additional violations of any of the provisions of this title, within a thirty six (36)
month period from the date of designation as potentially dangerous, must be removed from the list of potentially dangerous dogs by the director. The
dog may be, but is not required to be, removed from the list of potentially dangerous dogs before the expiration of the thirty six (36) month period if
the owner/guardian of the dog demonstrates to the director that changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner/guardian, such as
training of the dog, mitigated the risk to public safety.
2. The owner/guardian of a dog found vicious, who has no additional violations of any of the provisions of this title, after a thirty six (36) month period
from the date of designation as vicious, may apply to the director to remove the animal from the list of vicious animals. The director has the discretion
to remove the animal from the list of vicious animals upon proof of the successful completion of at least eight (8) weeks of formal obedience training,
other similar evidence of training, or other rehabilitative efforts designed to mitigate the risk to public safety. (Ord. 1457, 12-21-2010)
6-5-7: ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Costs Of Subsistence And Care: The costs of subsistence or care for impounded animals and fowl will be a charge against and paid by the city, unless
otherwise specified in any contract which may be awarded for the pound service as contemplated by this chapter, in which case the costs thereof will
be paid and discharged as contemplated in the contract.
B. Minimum Period Of Impoundment: Every animal and fowl impounded in the public pound will be kept therein for a full period of at least five (5) days,
exclusive of the day of impoundment, unless sooner redeemed by the lawful owner thereof or unless in the opinion of the director the physical condition
of the animal or fowl is such as to justify prior disposition in order to serve humane considerations. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-8: RECLAMATION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A. Right To Reclaim Upon Payment Of Charges: The owner or any person entitled to the control of any animal or fowl impounded in the public pound has
the right to reclaim the same at any time before the sale or other actual disposal thereof, upon payment to the director of the costs and charges
provided for in this chapter.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 153/581
B. Payment Of Fees: When any redemption is made under this chapter, in addition to paying any impounding and maintenance fee or costs incurred by
reason of impounding any animal impounded under this chapter, there will also be paid the amount of any license fee which may then be due or
payable on such animal under this title or any other section of this code or ordinance of the city, in case a current license for the animal is not in
existence at the time.
C. Damage Payment: When any redemption is made under this chapter, in addition to paying any impounding fee or costs incurred by reason of
impounding any animal or fowl, there will also be paid reasonable demands for actual damage done by any animal or fowl running at large. The
damages required to be paid by this subsection will be paid to the person whose property was damaged. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-9: RELEASE FROM IMPOUNDMENT:
No impounded dog will be released to any person except where the following occurs:
A. A current license and rabies tag is presented to the director for the dog.
B. The director is given proof that a license fee was paid to the city pursuant to this title.
C. Impound, collection, and other fees related to the impoundment required by this title are paid to the city.
D. The director is given proof that the dog is vaccinated for rabies, if required, or a fee is paid for vaccination.
E. The director determines that the dog does not have and is not reasonably suspected of having rabies. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-10: RABIES SUSPECT, IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE:
If the director suspects that an impounded dog has rabies, the dog will be inspected by a county health officer. Should the dog be found to have rabies, it
will be disposed of or confined for such time as the health officer directs. In the event that the health officer suspects that the dog may develop rabies, it
will be confined for such time as the health officer directs. Whenever the health officer determines that the dog does not have rabies, it will be released in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
6-5-11: TRESPASSING ANIMAL OR FOWL:
Any animal or fowl found trespassing upon private property may be captured by the party owning, controlling or having possession of the ground or
premises, or by the agent or representative of the person, and committed to the director to be dealt with as provided in this chapter. Any person taking up
the stray animal or fowl found running at large or trespassing upon any property, ground or premises owned, controlled or in possession of the person will
promptly notify the director of such capture and it is unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to surrender the animal to the director upon demand.
(Ord. 1340, 11-7-2001)
Title 7
NUISANCES AND OFFENSES
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
7-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers; Government Code sections 38771-38773.7, 53069.3, including any successor statutes; and
Civil Procedure Code section 731, including any successor statutes, for the purposes of identifying public nuisances; authorizing abatement of such
nuisances; and imposing criminal and civil penalties upon persons for causing or permitting such public nuisances. Nothing contained in this chapter is
intended to, nor will it, preclude the city from pursuing any other available civil or criminal remedies concurrently or in addition to the proceedings
established by this chapter to enforce this code. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of
defacing property.
FELT TIP MARKER: Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which at its broadest width is one-eighth inch (1/8") or greater, containing an ink
that is not water soluble.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 154/581
GLASS CUTTERS: Any tools or instruments designed, or intended, to cut or etch glass surfaces.
GRAFFITI: Any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, pasted, or otherwise placed on property without the prior approval of the property
owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property, except as otherwise provided in section 7-1-6 of this chapter.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: Any implement capable of marking a surface to create graffiti including, without limitation, any aerosol paint container, paint stick,
felt tip marker, marking pen, gum label, marking instrument, drill bit, grinding stone, scribe, glass cutter, or etching tool, or other implements capable of
marking or scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood.
GRAFFITI REMOVAL COSTS: All costs that would be considered abatement costs in the context of a nuisance abatement proceeding pursuant to this
chapter. In addition, such costs expressly include, without limitation, costs of removal of graffiti or other material, costs of repair and replacement of the
defaced property, all city staff time, costs of the police investigation, attorney time and fees, and any court costs incurred.
GUM LABEL: Any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an adhesive backing which, when placed on a surface, is not easily removed.
HEARING OFFICER: City manager or designee.
INCIDENTAL EXPENSES: Include, without limitation, actual expenses, city administrative costs and other costs of the city of all previous code
enforcement efforts, the preparation of the abatement work specifications, contracts, and staff time in inspecting the work, as well as the costs of printing,
posting and mailings required by this chapter.
MINOR: Except as otherwise provided, a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PAINT OR GRAFFITI STICK: A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface
by pressure and, upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty feet (20'), and not water
soluble.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any person or persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining any public nuisance as defined by this code including,
without limitation, any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of real property and any parent or legal guardian of a minor
creating graffiti.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open display of graffiti implements to which the public has access without the intervention of any employee.
SPRAY ACTUATOR: An object, such as a spray tip, nozzle, or button, which is capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the purpose of
spraying the substance contained therein.
VENDOR ASSISTED: Only an employee has access to the graffiti implement and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not
take possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-3: NUISANCE; GENERALLY:
Anything that is injurious to health; is indecent; offensive to the senses; obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment
of life or property; or obstructs the free passage or use in the customary manner of any public park, square, street or highway, is a public nuisance. (Ord.
1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-4: NUISANCES; DESIGNATED:
It is unlawful and it is declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property within
the city to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the conditions listed below are found to exist. This section is not the exclusive definition or
designation of what constitutes a nuisance within this city. It supplements and is in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances enacted by
the city, state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. Designated public nuisances include the following:
A. A violation of any provision of applicable law including, without limitation, the El Segundo municipal code;
B. Any land, the topography, geology, or configuration of which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavations, fill, or other
alteration, interferes with the established drainage pattern over the property or from adjoining or other properties which does or may result in erosion,
subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare or to neighboring properties;
C. Any building or structure which is partially destroyed, damaged, abandoned, boarded up, dilapidated, or permitted to remain in a state of partial
construction;
D. The failure to secure and maintain against public access all doorways, windows, and other openings into vacant or abandoned buildings or structures;
E. Painted buildings and walls, retaining walls, fences or structures that require repainting, or buildings, walls, fences, or structures upon which the
condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite
infestation;
F. Any premises, building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or walkway which is painted in a garish manner or is out of harmony or conformity with the
standards of adjacent properties;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 155/581
G. Any building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or walkway upon which any graffiti, including paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar marking
substances, is allowed to remain for more than twenty four (24) consecutive hours;
H. Any wall, fence, gate, or hedge that is damaged, broken, or a hazard or is maintained in violation of this code;
I. Broken windows;
J. Any overgrown, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous tree, weeds, vegetation, or debris which:
1. May harbor rats, vermin, or other disease carriers;
2. Is maintained so as to cause an obstruction to the vision of motorists or a hazardous condition to pedestrians or vehicle traffic;
3. Creates a danger or attractive nuisance to the public;
4. Detrimentally affects neighboring properties or property values; or
5. Constitutes a fire hazard;
K. Building exteriors, roofs, landscaping, grounds, walls, retaining and crib walls, fences, driveways, parking lots, planters, sidewalks, or walkways which
are maintained in such condition so as to become defective, unsightly, cracked or no longer viable;
L. The accumulation of dirt, litter, trash, junk, feces, or debris in doorways, adjoining sidewalks, walkways, courtyards, patios, parking lots, planters,
landscaped or other areas;
M. Any premises upon which there is or is permitted to be,
1. Lumber, building materials, rubble, broken asphalt or concrete, containers, or other similar materials, except where construction is occurring under a
valid permit;
2. Junk, solid waste, vegetation, salvage materials, scrap metals, hazardous waste, broken or neglected machinery, dirt or fill material deposited or
stored contrary to any law, automobile parts, except within a commercial business lawfully engaged in retail sales;
3. Sinks, fixtures or equipment, appliances or furniture, except lawn furniture in residential yards and new or used furniture lawfully stored or displayed
in connection with a valid business engaged in the sale or purchase of the same;
4. Inoperative vehicles, except where permitted by the zoning code;
5. Deteriorated driveways and parking lots, including those containing potholes, or cracks;
6. Abandoned, broken, unused, neglected or unprotected equipment and machinery, ponds, reservoirs and pools, whether or not the same contains
any water or liquid, excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, foundations, or other holes, abandoned refrigerators or other appliances,
abandoned motor vehicles, any unsound structure, skateboard ramps, or accumulated lumber, solid waste, junk, or vegetation which may reasonably
attract children to such abandoned or neglected conditions;
7. Temporary service bins or construction debris storage bins stored on a public street or on private property, except where permitted by this code;
8. Any garbage can, solid waste container, solid waste, packing box or junk placed or maintained so as to be visible from neighboring properties or the
public right of way, except for those times scheduled for collection, in accordance with this code;
9. Any property with accumulations of grease, oil, or other hazardous material on paved or unpaved surfaces, driveways, buildings, walls, or fences, or
from which any such material flows or seeps onto any public street or other public or private property, or which is likely to seep or migrate into the
underground water table;
10. Any front yard, parkway, or landscaped setback area which lacks turf, other planted material, decorative rock, bark, or planted ground cover or
covering, so as to cause excessive dust or allow the accumulation of debris;
11. Any condition of vegetation overgrowth which encroaches into, over, or upon any public right of way including, without limitation, streets, alleys, or
sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or property or any impediment to public travel;
12. Animals, livestock, poultry, or bees kept, bred, or maintained for any purpose and in violation of this code;
13. Any property, or any building or structure thereon, maintained in such condition so that it is defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration
or disrepair that it causes or will cause an ascertainable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or be otherwise materially
detrimental to adjacent and nearby properties and improvements;
14. Any building or portion thereof maintained in a manner which constitutes a substandard building pursuant to Health and Safety Code section
17920.3. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-5: ABATEMENT AUTHORITY:
The city manager, or designee, is authorized to abate public nuisances summarily or otherwise in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-
2007)
7-1-6: GRAFFITI:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 156/581
7-1-6-1: FINDINGS:
The city council finds as follows:
A. Graffiti on either public or private property, results in blight, decreases property values and deprives surrounding residents and owners of the right to
comfortable enjoyment of life and property.
B. Graffiti is obnoxious, constitutes a public nuisance, and is a threat to public safety which must be abated to prevent its proliferation.
C. Graffiti must be removed as quickly as possible to minimize harm to persons and property in the community.
D. This section is intended to be complementary to, and not in conflict with, Penal Code section 594, which provides that any person who maliciously
defaces property is guilty of vandalism, and Penal Code section 594.1, which provides that certain activities involving the possession, sale and use of
aerosol paint containers are misdemeanors. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-2: POSSESSION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to mark, apply, or etch graffiti on any structure located on public or private real property within the city. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-3: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement while on public or private property without the consent of the property owner, or the person in
lawful possession or control of the property. Any law enforcement officer who observes a violation of this section may take immediate possession of the
graffiti implements. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-4: POSSESSION IN DESIGNATED PUBLIC PLACES:
Except as may be authorized by the city manager, or designee, no person may possess any graffiti implement while on any property owned or operated by
the city. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-5: POSSESSION WITH INTENT TO DEFACE, MARK OR DAMAGE PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement for the purpose of defacing, marking, or damaging any public or private property without the
express consent of the property owner or the person in lawful possession or control of the property. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-6: PARENTAL LIABILITY:
Any parent or other legal guardian of a minor is personally liable for any and all graffiti removal costs associated with graffiti caused by the minor. This
section does not limit the amount of recovery against the parent or other legal guardian for their own common law negligence. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-7: ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or otherwise furnish any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of the minor's parent or legal
guardian. Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent, demanded and was shown bona fide evidence of majority and acted upon such
evidence of majority in a transaction or sale is a defense to any criminal prosecution.
B. It is unlawful for any person to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale any graffiti implement by means of self-service merchandising or
by means other than vendor assisted sales. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-8: AUTHORIZATION TO REMOVE:
Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:
A. Wherever the city manager, or designee, determines that graffiti, as defined in this chapter, is located on public or privately owned property within the
city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right of way in the city, the city manager is authorized to provide for the
removal of the graffiti upon the following conditions:
1. If the graffiti is located on property owned by the city, the city manager, or designee, may immediately remove the graffiti by any practicable means.
2. Except as provided below, where a structure is privately owned, the removal of graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of the
owner and the owner having executed a release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 157/581
B. Graffiti located on privately owned structures or privately owned real property in the city and which can be viewed by a person utilizing any public right
of way within the city may be removed by the city at the owner's expense as a public nuisance. This section applies under the following circumstances:
1. The private property owner persuaded, allowed or encouraged the graffiti problem;
2. The private property owner's consent cannot be obtained; or
3. The city manager determines that the removal of graffiti or other inscribed material from a privately owned property exceeded three (3) occurrences
per privately owned real property during one calendar year. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-9: NOTICE TO ABATE GRAFFITI:
Whenever the city manager, or designee, determines that graffiti is located on privately owned structures or privately owned real property in the city in
violation of this chapter, the city manager, or designee, may abate such public nuisance in the manner set forth in section 7-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1407,
8-7-2007)
7-1-6-10: RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM LANDOWNER:
The costs of graffiti abatement may be recovered as set forth in section 7-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-11: FAILURE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI UPON NOTICE:
In addition to any graffiti removal costs incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti from private property, failure to voluntarily abate graffiti after
notification will result in the penalties set out in this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-12: RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM MINOR OR PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
A. If the city manager, or designee, abates graffiti in accord with this chapter, the city may recover the graffiti removal costs by making such costs a lien
against the property of the minor creating, causing, or committing the nuisance. Further, such costs may be recovered against the property of the
parent or guardian having custody or control of the minor up to and including the sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
B. For the purposes of this section, the terms "expense of abatement", "graffiti" and "minor" have the same meaning set forth in Government Code section
38772.
C. The cost recovery procedures against the property of a minor or a parent or guardian of the minor are the same as set forth in section 7-1-7 of this
chapter.
D. The graffiti removal costs are also a personal obligation of the minor and his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-13: COMMUNITY SERVICE:
A. After the conviction of any person for violation of this section, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, the city may
petition the sentencing court to impose community service time, pursuant to Penal Code section 640.6. The sentencing court may require the
performance of community service within the city in addition to any monetary penalties imposed. In the event the sentencing court approves community
service, the city will request any adult or emancipated minor convicted of vandalism, as defined by Penal Code section 594(a)(1), to:
1. Complete a minimum of twenty four (24) hours, but not more than forty eight (48) hours, of community services cleaning up, removing and repairing
property damaged by graffiti for the first conviction; and
2. Complete forty eight (48) hours, but not more than ninety six (96) hours of community services cleaning up, removing, and repairing property
damaged by graffiti for each subsequent conviction.
B. Any minor violating any provision of this chapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement who is found to be a
person described in Welfare and Institutions Code section 602 by reason of the commission of vandalism, may be required to perform community
service time pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 742.16. For any minor adjudicated guilty of vandalism, the city will petition the juvenile
court and the court may, in addition to any other penalties imposed by the city, require the unemancipated minor to provide the necessary labor to clean
up, repair, or replace defaced, damaged or destroyed property, or otherwise make restitution to the property owner.
C. If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for violating any provision of this section or is otherwise unable to make restitution for damages,
the minor's parent or legal guardian is liable for payment of the fine or restitution. If the parent or legal guardian cannot make restitution, the sentencing
court may waive payment of the fine or community service time by the parent or legal guardian upon finding good cause. If the sentencing court waives
payment of the fine by the parent or legal guardian, the city will petition the sentencing court, and the court, at the court's option, may order the parent
or legal guardian to provide the necessary labor, equal to the number of hours assigned to the minor adjudicated guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter, to clean up, repair, or replace property damaged by the unemancipated minor. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-14: SUSPENSION OR DELAY OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 158/581
For each conviction of a person aged thirteen (13) to twenty one (21) for violating this chapter, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a
graffiti implement, the city may petition the sentencing court to suspend driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in accordance with
Vehicle Code section 13202.6. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-6-15: PENALTY:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is otherwise provided is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Any person failing to remove graffiti within the prescribed time period is guilty of an infraction and may be punished with a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for a first conviction, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the second conviction, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent
violation. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7: NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
7-1-7-1: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
All or any part of a use or the condition of any property, including, without limitation, any use, or improvement, found to constitute a public nuisance, will be
abated by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, cessation of use or a combination thereof, or in such other manner as designated in a nuisance abatement
order, which is reasonably required to abate the public nuisance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ABATEMENT:
Whenever the city manager, or designee, reasonably believes a public nuisance exists, the city manager, or designee, may commence abatement
proceedings under this section. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-3: NOTICE OF HEARINGS FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
A. Notices: To initiate abatement proceedings, the city manager, or designee, will cause written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted on the
property containing a nuisance. Notice will be titled in letters at least one inch (1") in height and read substantially as follows:
Notice of Public Nuisance Hearing
On , 20 , the City of El Segundo will determine whether this property known and designated as , constitutes a public nuisance. If this property is found
to constitute a public nuisance as defined by the El Segundo Municipal Code ("ESMC"), and if the public nuisance is not promptly abated by the
responsible person as ordered by the hearing officer, then the City will abate the nuisance. If the City abates the nuisance, the cost of these
proceedings, all previous code enforcement efforts concerning this condition of the property, and the cleaning, clearing, rehabilitation, repair, or
demolition by the City will constitute a special assessment and a Nuisance Abatement Lien upon such land until paid. The City may foreclose on any
such lien in order to reimburse the City for these costs.
The alleged violations consist of the following:
The methods of abatement available are:
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should attend a hearing to be conducted by the City Manager or designee, to be held at
on , at the hour of .m., when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration.
Dated:
Department Officer
B. Mailing/Posting: Notice of the hearing will be served by posting the subject property and by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed
to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before
the hearing notice is mailed. The notice will be posted on the property and mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing date. Proof of posting and
mailing will be by declaration. Failure of any person to receive the notice will not affect the validity of any provision set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1407,
8-7-2007)
7-1-7-4: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. The hearing must be conducted by a hearing officer selected by the city manager. At the time set for such hearing, the hearing officer will conduct a
hearing to determine, based upon the evidence presented, whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. At the hearing, the hearing officer
will accept reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the issue of whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. The
hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations under the Code of Civil Procedure section 2093(a).
Based upon the evidence submitted including, without limitation, any written staff reports regarding the alleged nuisance, the hearing officer will
determine whether or not a public nuisance exists on the subject property.
B. As soon as is practicable following the close of such hearing, the hearing officer will render a decision on the matter. If a public nuisance is found to
exist, the hearing officer will issue an order requiring the abatement of the public nuisance in a reasonable time and manner as set forth in the order.
The hearing officer will promptly give written notice to the responsible person and any other interested person who requests, in writing, notice of such
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 159/581
decision, including, a copy of the order. The order issued by the hearing officer will be deemed a final order and may be judicially reviewed pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. There is no right to a city council appeal. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-5: COMPLIANCE WITH ABATEMENT ORDER:
At no cost to the city, the responsible person will comply with all of the provisions of an abatement order. If the responsible person fails, for any reason, to
comply with an abatement order within the time required in the order, the city manager, or designee, will cause the nuisance described in the abatement
order to be abated by city forces or by private contractor. The city attorney is authorized to take such action as needed to gain entry upon the property
where the public nuisance exists for purposes of abating a public nuisance. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-6: CITY EXPENSES; RECORD OF COSTS:
The department director or designee will keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of abating nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of
land where the work is done. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-7: HEARING ON THE COST OF ABATEMENT:
A. The department director or designee will give notice of the cost of abatement by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the
owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before mailing
of the cost notice. The cost notice will include a statement of the hearing rights of the property owner concerning the cost of abatement. Upon written
request for a hearing by the property owner received by the city manager within ten (10) days after mailing the cost notice, a hearing will be held by the
city manager, or designee, on the question of the cost of the abatement.
B. Notice of the hearing will be mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land. The city manager or
designee will either confirm the cost of abatement or modify such amount. The decision of the city manager or designee is final. The city manager or
designee will give notice of the decision on the cost of abatement by registered or certified mail to the property owner. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-8: NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Lien: Pursuant to Government Code sections 38773, 38773.1, and 38773.5, and any successor statutes, persons failing to abate a public nuisance as
ordered pursuant to this chapter, will be obligated to pay all city expenses of abating the nuisance and all administrative costs associated therewith. A
nuisance abatement lien in favor of the city for such expenses of the city will be created and recorded, pursuant to this section, against the property on
which the nuisance is maintained. The lien will specify the amount of the lien, the name of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address,
legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the
parcel.
B. Notice Of Proposed Recordings: Notice will be sent by certified mail at least ten (10) days before recording the lien, an itemized notice of the lien
amount and proposed recording will be sent by certified mail to the property owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance was abated by
the city, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before recordation of the lien. The notice will
be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure section 415.10, et seq. If the owner of record,
after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten
(10) days, and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located.
C. Recording: The city's nuisance abatement lien will then be recorded in the Los Angeles County recorder's office, and from the date of recording, will
have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.
D. Special Assessment: The city's total costs described in this section may also be collected as a special assessment against the lot or parcel on which
the nuisance existed. After recordation of the nuisance abatement lien the city may provide a copy of the notice of proposed recordation, proof of
service, and the recorded lien to the tax collector and the tax collector will add the described special assessment payments to the next regular tax bill
levied against the respective lots or parcels and the amounts will be collected and subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under
foreclosure and sale as in the case of tax delinquencies. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attached thereon, before the date
on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement will not result in a lien against the real property but
instead will be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
E. Satisfaction: In the event that the lien or special assessment is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, a notice of the
discharge containing the information specified in the lien will be recorded by the city.
F. Fees: Any fees incurred by the city for processing, recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner may be recovered by the city as part
of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-9: ORDER FOR TREBLE COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two (2) year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition
that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 17980, the court may order the
owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 160/581
7-1-7-10: JUDICIAL REMEDIES:
A. Nothing in this chapter will be deemed to prevent the city attorney from:
1. Commencing a civil action in the superior court to enforce all or any of the provisions of any abatement order;
2. Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to or in conjunction with an administrative proceeding pursuant to this
chapter;
3. Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a confirmed accounting from an owner or occupant of the lot to which it relates; or
4. Filing a criminal action to enforce this code.
B. Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the abatement of
the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting, the court will also award the city its actual costs of abatement, including, without
limitation, reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city in such judicial proceeding. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
7-1-7-11: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the city manager, or designee, determines that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, or
in any other applicable law, exists upon a lot, and that such public nuisance constitutes an immediate threat or hazard or danger to persons or property,
the city manager, without observing procedures set forth in this chapter with reference to public nuisance abatement, will forthwith immediately cause the
abatement of such public nuisance in such manner as the city manager, or designee, determines is reasonably required. If the city manager, or designee,
deems it feasible, the city manager, or designee, will attempt to give the owner and occupant, verbal notice of the existence of the public nuisance, and the
proposed timing and method of abatement thereof. The city manager will, forthwith, report such circumstances to the city council. Where such abatement
is ordered by the city manager, person abating such nuisance will, after completing the abatement of the public nuisance, comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1407, 8-7-2007)
Chapter 2
NOISE AND VIBRATION
7-2-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises and vibrations from all sources subject to its police
power. Therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, caused or maintained, any noise
or vibration in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance as well as an infraction and shall be
punishable as such. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used are defined as follows:
"A" WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (dBA): The total sound level in decibels of all sound as measured with a sound level meter with a reference pressure of
twenty (20) micro-pascals using the "A" weighted network scale at slow response. The unit of measurement shall be defined as dBA.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL: The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the
location and approximate time at which a comparison with an intrusive noise is to be made.
CONSTRUCTION: Any site preparation, grading, demolition, assembly, erection, repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way,
structures, utilities or similar property.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micro-pascals.
EMERGENCY MACHINERY, VEHICLE, WORK OR ALARM: Any machinery, vehicle, work or alarm used, employed, performed or operated in an effort to
protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
FIXED NOISE SOURCE: A stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial
and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment.
IMPULSIVE NOISE: A noise of short duration usually less than one second and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and end.
INTRUSIVE NOISE LEVEL: The total sound level, in decibels (dBA), created, caused, maintained or originating from an alleged offensive source
measured at a specific location while the alleged offensive source is in operation.
NOISE: Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans of normal sensitivity or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological
effect on humans of normal sensitivity.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER: The Director of Community, Economic and Development Services.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 161/581
SOUND AMPLIFICATION EQUIPMENT: Any device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard S1-4-1971 or most recent revision thereof for type 1 or
type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.
VIBRATION: Mechanical motion of the earth or ground, building, or other type of structure induced by the operation of any mechanical device or
equipment. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
7-2-3: SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA:
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighted scale at
slow response for continuous sound levels or at fast response for impulsive sounds. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-4: NOISE STANDARDS:
No person shall, at any location within the City, create any noise, nor shall any person allow the creation of any noise within the person's control on public
or private property (hereinafter "noise source"), which causes the noise level when measured on any other property (hereinafter "receptor property"), to
exceed the applicable noise standard, except as set forth in subsection C1 of this section.
A. Residential Property: Five (5) dBA above the ambient noise level.
B. Commercial And Industrial Property: Eight (8) dBA above the ambient noise level.
C. Adjustments:
1. Increases to the noise standards as set forth in subsections A and B of this Section may be permitted in accordance with the following:
NOISE STANDARDS ADJUSTMENTS
Permitted Duration of
Increase Increase
(dBA) (minutes)*
0 30
5 15
10 5
15 1
20 less than 1
* Cumulative minutes during any one hour.
2. If the receptor property is located on a boundary between two (2) different noise zones, the lower noise level standard applicable to the quieter zone
shall apply. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-5: NOISE LEVEL MEASUREMENT:
The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the receptor property, and at least four feet (4') above the ground and five
feet (5') from the nearest structure or wall. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the receptor residential unit. The measurements shall be
made at a point at least four feet (4') from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source with windows and doors in a closed position. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-
1996)
7-2-6: LOUD, UNUSUAL AND UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED:
Consistent with other provisions of this Chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make, produce, suffer or allow to be
produced by human voice, machine, animal, or device, or any combination of same, any loud, unusual, or unnecessary noise which disturbs the peace,
quiet, and comfort of any neighborhood, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area. (Ord. 1242,
1-16-1996)
7-2-7: STANDARDS; CRITERIA:
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of Section 7-2-6 of this Chapter exists shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the following criteria:
A. The frequency of the noise;
B. The intensity of the noise;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 162/581
C. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
D. The ambient noise level;
E. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
F. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
G. The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;
H. The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
I. The duration of the noise;
J. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
K. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-8: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be in violation of this Chapter if they occur in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area; and occur:
A. Between The Hours Of 10:00 P.M. And 7:00 A.M:
1. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar
device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound.
2. Using or operating any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device.
3. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects.
4. Repairing, building, rebuilding, adjusting or testing any motor vehicle.
B. Between The Hours Of 8:00 P.M. And 7:00 A.M:
1. Refuse Collection Vehicles:
a. Collection of refuse with a collection vehicle in a residential area or within five hundred feet (500') thereof;
b. Operation or permitting the operation of the compacting mechanism of any motor vehicle which compacts refuse in a residential area or within five
hundred feet (500') thereof.
2. Loudspeakers/Public Address Systems: Using or operating for any commercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device
on a public right of way or public space.
3. Powered Model: Operating or permitting the operation of powered models. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-9: VIBRATION:
Notwithstanding other sections of this Chapter, a person shall not create, maintain or cause any ground vibration which is perceptible, without the use of
instruments, to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity at any point on any affected property. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-10: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this Chapter:
A. School And Park Facilities: Authorized activities conducted on public school grounds and City park facilities, associated with normal operation of the
facilities including, but not limited to, school and public athletic and entertainment events.
B. Mechanical Or Electronic Devices: Any mechanical or electronic device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency
machinery, vehicle, work or warning alarm or bell, provided the sounding of any bell or alarm on any building or motor vehicle shall terminate its
operation within fifteen (15) minutes of its activation.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 163/581
C. Public Speaking Or Assemblies: Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right of way
without the use of sound amplification equipment.
D. Construction Noise: Noise sources associated with or vibration created by construction, repair, or remodeling of any real property, provided said
activities do not take place between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Monday through Saturday, or at any time on
Sunday or a Federal holiday, and provided the noise level created by such activities does not exceed the noise standard of sixty five (65) dBA plus the
limits specified in subsection 7-2-4C of this Chapter as measured on the receptor residential property line and provided any vibration created does not
endanger the public health, welfare and safety.
E. Real Property Maintenance: Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided said activities take place between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on any day except Sunday, or between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. on Sunday.
F. Activities Preempted By State Or Federal Law: Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by State or Federal law, including, but
not limited to, aircraft, motor vehicles, railroads and other interstate carriers. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-11: PERMITS:
A. Circumstances For Issuance: The noise control officer may grant amplified sound or noise permits to applicants who cannot comply with the
requirements of this Chapter if the applicant can show that compliance with this Chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant,
on the community as a whole, or on other individuals, or that compliance would be impractical. If the noise control officer determines that sufficient
controversy may exist regarding an application, the application shall be referred to the City Council. A permit shall not be granted to waive compliance
with Section 7-2-15 of this Chapter.
B. Determination: In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the noise control officer shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the
community as a whole, and other individuals, of not granting the permit against the adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of persons
affected; the adverse impact on property affected; and any other adverse impacts of granting the permit. Applicants for permits may be required to
submit any information the noise control officer may reasonably require. The noise control officer shall retain on public file a copy of the decision which
shall include a statement of the reason for the decision.
C. Granting Of Permit; Conditions: Permits shall be granted by written notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on
the permitted activity. The time limit shall be for a maximum time period not to exceed one year. The permit shall not become effective until the
applicant agrees to all conditions. In the case of noncompliance with any condition imposed, the permit shall immediately terminate, and the noise
source shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
D. Application For Change Of Conditions: Application for extension of time limits specified in subsection C of this Section or for modification of other
substantial conditions shall be treated as an initial application for a permit.
E. Guidelines: The noise control officer may issue guidelines defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a permit.
F. Activities Requiring Permit: Unless otherwise specifically exempted by this Chapter, permits shall be required for all exterior activities which utilize
amplified sound; such as, but not limited to, outdoor gatherings, dances, shows, performances or carnivals.
G. Appeal: An appeal of the decision of the noise control officer with respect to any amplified sound or noise permit may be made to the City Council in
writing within ten (10) days after the action of the noise control officer has been communicated to the applicant. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-12: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Responsible Official: The noise control officer is directed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. During times the noise control officer is not on duty,
enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police.
B. Interference: No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this Chapter while such person is
engaged in the performance of his duty. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-13: IMMEDIATE THREATS TO HEALTH AND WELFARE:
A. Order Immediate Halt: The noise control officer may order an immediate halt to any sound which exposes any person to continuous sound levels in
excess of those shown in Table A in subsection D of this Section, or impulsive sounds in excess of Table B in subsection D of this Section. Within two
(2) working days following issuance of such an order, the noise control officer shall apply to the appropriate court for an injunction to replace the order.
B. Exceptions To Issuance Of Order: No order pursuant to subsection A of this Section shall be issued if the only persons exposed to sound levels in
excess of those listed in Tables A and B of subsection D of this Section are exposed as a result of:
1. Trespass;
2. Invitation upon private property by the person causing or permitting the sound; or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 164/581
3. Employment by the person or a contractor of the person causing or permitting the sound.
C. Remedial Action: Any person subject to an order issued by the Noise Control Officer pursuant to this section shall comply with such order until:
1. The sound is brought into a compliance with the order, as determined by the Noise Control Officer; or
2. A judicial order has superseded the Noise Control Officer order.
D. Prohibited Sound Level: The sound levels which pose an immediate threat to health and welfare are:
TABLE A
CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVELS
(Measured At 50 Feet Or 15 Meters)
Sound Level
Limit (dBA) Duration
90 8 hours
95 4 hours
100 2 hours
105 1 hour
110 30 minutes
TABLE B
IMPULSIVE SOUND LEVELS
(Measured At 50 Feet Or 15 Meters)
Sound Level
Limit (dB)
Number Of
Repetitions Per
24-Hour Period
145 1
135 10
125 100
(Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
7-2-14: USE OF POLICE AT PARTIES; SECOND RESPONSE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-2-15: PENALTY; ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
A. Violation; Penalty; Infraction:
1. Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation.
2. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense if, after receiving a written warning or infraction citation, the person commits or continues to
commit a violation of this chapter.
3. If a person is found to be in violation of this chapter, the Noise Control Officer shall issue a written warning of the violation. If the person continues to
be in violation of this chapter, the Noise Control Officer shall issue an infraction citation. Every violation within a thirty (30) day period after the first
written warning is issued shall be considered an infraction.
B. Public Nuisance: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, as an additional remedy, any violation of the provisions of this chapter,
which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of
residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily in the manner provided in
chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 1242, 1-16-1996)
Chapter 3
DUST AND PARTICULATE MATTER
7-3-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 165/581
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit unnecessary and excessive emission of dust and particulate matter from all sources subject to
its police power. Therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, maintained, or caused,
any emissions of dust or particulate matter in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, is a public nuisance and shall
be punished as such. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-2: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
A. Dust Emissions: A person shall not create, maintain or cause or allow to be created, maintained or caused, the emissions of dust or particulate matter
from any transport, handling, construction, demolition, excavation, grading, clearing of land, or storage activity so that the presence of such dust or
particulate matter remains visible in the atmosphere beyond the property line of the emission source.
B. Exclusions: A person or entity shall not be found in violation of subsection A of this Section if that person or entity has taken every reasonable
precaution to minimize the dust or particulate matter emissions resulting from its activity. Reasonable precautions include, but are not limited to, the
following: site watering; soil binders; street sweeping; organic control erosion mats; covering loose soil; sloping and bracing excavation sites to
minimize erosion; and establishing ground cover. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-3: EXCEPTIONS; CITY PERMIT:
The City Council reserves the right to exempt certain activities which require a City permit from the regulations under this Chapter. The exemption under
this Section must appear on the permit. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Responsible Official: The City Manager, or his designee, is directed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Interference: No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this Chapter while such person is
engaged in the performance of his duty. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992)
7-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
Section 1-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1184, 9-1-1992; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 4
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
7-4-1: STANDARDS OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
All land and structures shall be properly maintained in such a manner as to not: a) depreciate aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties; b)
create a visual eyesore; or c) constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1149, 2-6-1990)
7-4-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
It is a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises in the City to maintain such premises in such a manner
that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:
A. Land Excavations, Grading: Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations,
excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to the public health, safety and
welfare, or to adjacent properties.
B. Abandoned Buildings: Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed or permitted to remain unreasonably in a state of partial construction.
C. Openings In Vacant Structures: The failure to close, by such means as are acceptable to the City Manager, all doorways, windows and other openings
into vacant structures.
D. Unpainted Buildings: Unpainted buildings causing dry rot, warping and lack of weather protection.
E. Broken Windows: Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief; or constituting a harbor for
vagrants, criminal or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 166/581
F. Overgrown Vegetation:
1. Likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisances; or
2. Having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding property.
G. Diseased Trees; Weeds: Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds and other vegetation:
1. Dangerous to public safety and public welfare; or
2. Having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding property.
H. Abandoned Vehicles, Trailers: The accumulation and storage, for unreasonable periods of time, of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
automobiles, trailers, campers, boats, and other mobile equipment, in yard areas.
I. Attractive Nuisances: Attractive nuisances dangerous to children in the form of:
1. Abandoned and broken equipment;
2. Unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds and excavations; or
3. Neglected machinery.
J. Furniture And Household Equipment: Broken or discarded furniture and household equipment on the premises for unreasonable periods, and having a
tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding property.
K. Trash And Debris: Packing boxes, lumber, trash, dirt and other debris either inside or outside buildings and visible from public streets or from the sight
of neighboring properties for unreasonable periods, and having a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding property.
L. Commercial Buildings: The accumulation of dirt, litter or debris in vestibules, doorways or the adjoining sidewalks of commercial or industrial buildings.
M. Deteriorated Structure: The maintenance of any structure in a state of substantial deterioration, such as peeling paint on a facade, broken windows,
roofs in disrepair, damaged porches or broken steps, or other such deterioration or disrepair not otherwise constituting a violation and which is viewable
from the sight of neighboring properties, where such condition would have a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding
property.
N. Landscaped Areas; Open Spaces: The substantial lack of maintenance and landscaped areas, including the lack of cultivation, irrigation, fertilizing,
trimming of trees, and lawns, shrubs, vines and any other ground cover and the lack of maintenance of nonlandscaped areas, where the areas are to
be maintained are viewable by the public from a public right of way or viewable from the sight of neighboring properties, and where such conditions
would have a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties.
O. Conditions Constituting Public Nuisances: Maintenance of premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general
welfare, or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by California Civil Code section 3480.
P. Cause Depreciated Values: Property maintained (in relation to others) so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments and
social and economic maladjustments to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from such particular area are
inadequate for the cost of public services rendered therein. (Ord. 1149, 2-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1290, 12-15-1998)
7-4-3: ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever the City Manager, or his duly authorized representative, determines that any premises within the City is maintained contrary to one or more of
the provisions of this Section, then he or she shall institute the abatement proceedings in accordance with adopted enforcement procedures. (Ord. 1149,
2-6-1990)
Chapter 5
DAYTIME CURFEW
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
This daytime curfew is established pursuant to the city's police powers for the purpose of preserving and promoting the public health safety and welfare
and, in particular, to protect minors. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the terms used in this chapter will be defined as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 167/581
CURFEW HOURS: Eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. until one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M. Monday through Friday.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, without limitation, a
fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, without limitation, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed
by a court.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, without limitation to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
REMAIN: To linger or stay or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor; or at least eighteen (18) years of age and
authorized by a minor's parent or guardian to have the care and custody of that minor.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-3: OFFENSES:
It is unlawful for a minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during daytime curfew hours. (Ord. 1342, 11-
20-2001)
7-5-4: DEFENSES:
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a minor was:
A. Accompanied by a responsible person;
B. On an errand at the direction of a responsible person, without any detour or stop;
C. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
D. Involved in an emergency;
E. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of El Segundo, a civic or religious
organization, or another similar entity, which takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such
supervised activity;
F. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to
peaceably assemble;
G. Emancipated pursuant to law;
H. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
I. Allowed to leave campus for lunch or a school related activity and has in his/her possession a valid, school issued, off campus permit or is supervised by
school personnel;
J. Accompanied by a responsible person or has in his/her possession a written excuse from a responsible person, which provides a reasonable
explanation for the minor's absence from school;
K. Not subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education pursuant to the California Education Code or when the minor is authorized
to be absent from his or her school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code section 48205, or any other applicable state or federal law;
or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 168/581
L. Not in school because the minor's school is not in session. This defense is not applicable if the minor remains in the public areas in the immediate
vicinity of another school that is in session. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer will ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or
establishment. The officer will not issue a citation under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in this chapter exists. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-6: PENALTIES:
A. Each violation of this chapter will constitute a separate offense and will be an infraction. Police officers will be authorized to issue a citation for the
offender to appear in a juvenile traffic court of competent jurisdiction, issue a notice to appear in court pursuant to California Welfare and Institutions
Code section 256, or to file a juvenile application for a petition to be filed under section 601 or 602 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, at
the police officer's discretion.
B. A minor cited for an infraction under this chapter must attend a court hearing on the infraction and must be accompanied at the hearing by a responsible
person(s). If a responsible person(s) fails to attend the hearing with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the court
will continue the hearing and will issue a citation to the responsible person(s) directing said person(s) to appear at the continued hearing with the minor.
C. Persons convicted of violating this chapter may be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense within a one year period; two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the second offense within a one year period; and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense within a one year period. Persons
convicted may, in addition or alternatively, be required to perform community service for a total time not to exceed ten (10) hours over a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days, during times other than his or her hours of compulsory school attendance or employment. The court may continue the
imposition of the sentence described herein and if, after sixty (60) days, the minor has had no unexcused absences from school during that period, and
the minor produces proof of that fact to the court, the court will cause the imposition of the sentence to be set aside.
D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, if the city council adopts a resolution to implement cost recovery in accordance with this chapter, the
police officer will issue a warning citation for a minor's first violation of this chapter in accordance with California Welfare and Institutions Code section
625.5 and any provisions of that city council resolution. Warning citations issued in accordance with this subsection will not be counted as a violation of
this chapter for the purpose of determining the amount of fines for infraction violations. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
7-5-7: COST RECOVERY:
A minor who violates this chapter and the responsible person(s) of such a minor, will be jointly and severally liable for the costs of the law enforcement
services as provided in Welfare and Institutions Code section 625.5. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 625.5, this section will be
implemented by city council resolution. (Ord. 1342, 11-20-2001)
Chapter 5A
NIGHTTIME CURFEW
7-5A-1: PURPOSE:
This nighttime curfew is established pursuant to the city's police powers for the purpose of preserving and promoting the public health, safety and welfare
and, in particular, to protect minors. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the terms used in this chapter will be defined as follows:
CURFEW HOURS: Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until sunrise of the following day.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, without limitation, a
fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, without limitation, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed
by a court.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, without limitation to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 169/581
REMAIN: To linger or stay or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor; or at least eighteen (18) years of age and
authorized by a minor's parent or guardian to have the care and custody of that minor.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-3: OFFENSES:
It is unlawful for a minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during nighttime curfew hours. (Ord. 1343,
11-20-2001)
7-5A-4: DEFENSES:
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a minor was:
A. Accompanied by a responsible person;
B. On an errand at the direction of a responsible person, without any detour or stop;
C. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
D. Involved in an emergency;
E. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if that neighbor or other neighborhood resident did not
complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
F. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of El Segundo, a civic or religious
organization, or another similar entity, which takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such
supervised activity;
G. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to
peaceably assemble;
H. Emancipated pursuant to law; or
I. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer will ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or
establishment. The officer will not issue a citation under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in this chapter exists. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-6: PENALTIES:
A. Each violation of this chapter will constitute a separate offense and will be an infraction. Police officers will be authorized to issue a citation for an
offender to appear in a juvenile traffic court of competent jurisdiction, issue a notice to appear in court pursuant to California Welfare and Institutions
Code section 256, or to file a juvenile application for a petition to be filed under section 601 or 602 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, at
the police officer's discretion.
B. A minor cited for an infraction under this chapter must attend a court hearing on the infraction and must be accompanied at the hearing by a responsible
person(s). If a responsible person(s) fails to attend the hearing with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the court
will continue the hearing and will issue a citation the responsible person(s) directing said person(s) to appear at the continued hearing with the minor.
C. Persons convicted of violating this chapter may be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense within a one year period; two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the second offense within a one year period; and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense within a one year period. Persons
convicted may, in addition or alternatively, be required to perform community service for a total time not to exceed ten (10) hours over a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days, during times other than his or her hours of compulsory school attendance or employment. The court may continue the
imposition of the sentence described herein and if, after sixty (60) days, the minor has had no unexcused absences from school during that period, and
the minor produces proof of that fact to the court, the court will cause the imposition of the sentence to be set aside.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 170/581
D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, if the city council adopts a resolution to implement cost recovery in accordance with this chapter, the
police officer will issue a warning citation for a minor's first violation of this chapter, in accordance with California Welfare and Institutions Code section
625.5 and any provisions of that city council resolution. Warning citations issued in accordance with this subsection will not be counted as a violation of
this chapter for the purpose of determining the amount of fines for infraction violations. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
7-5A-7: COST RECOVERY:
A minor who violates this chapter and the responsible person(s) of such a minor, will be jointly and severally liable for the costs of the law enforcement
services as provided in Welfare and Institutions Code section 625.5. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 625.5, this section will be
implemented by city council resolution. (Ord. 1343, 11-20-2001)
Chapter 6
GENERAL OFFENSES
7-6-1: USE OF VEHICLES FOR HUMAN HABITATION:
A. Mobile Home, Campers: No person shall use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any mobile home, camper, house trailer or other recreational
vehicle for human habitation, including, but not limited to, sleeping, eating or resting, on any street, park, beach, square, avenue, alley, public parking
lot or public way, within the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
B. Motor Vehicles: No person shall use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any motor vehicle for human habitation, including, but not limited to,
sleeping, eating or resting, on any street, park, beach, square, avenue, alley, parking lot or public way, within the city, between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. For purposes of this section, "motor vehicle" shall mean any self propelled vehicle other than a house car,
camper or trailer coach. For purposes of this section "habitation" shall mean the use of a motor vehicle for a dwelling place, and shall not mean the use
of a motor vehicle for amelioration of sickness or other temporary physical inabilities causing an inability to operate such a motor vehicle. (Ord. 1261,
10-1-1996)
7-6-2: GAMBLING:
A. Nuisance Declared: Any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, ticket, chance, share, interest, instrument or article operated, used, kept,
possessed, placed or maintained in violation of the provisions of:
1. Section 330a of the California Penal Code; or
2. Any section enumerated in part I, title 9, chapter 9 of the California Penal Code;
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement. (Ord. 762, 3-22-1971)
B. Destruction Of Nuisance:
1. Any article declared by subsection A of this section to be a nuisance, as a result of the operation, use, keeping, possession, placing or maintaining of
which any person has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to any violation of any law of this state or of any ordinance of the city, shall be
destroyed by the chief of police, after the plea or after judgment of conviction becomes final. The contents of the machine shall be destroyed, or if
money, shall be deposited in the general fund of the treasury of the city.
2. If the articles subject to destruction as herein provided are in the custody of the municipal court of the Inglewood judicial district, the chief of police
shall cause to be made an application to the judge of the court for an order releasing the articles to him for the purpose of complying with this
subsection; provided, however, that this subsection shall not limit the power of the chief of police to abate the articles as public nuisances. (Ord. 514,
1-13-1958)
C. Gambling For Money Or Merchandise: It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain
within the city, any house, room, apartment or place used in whole or in part as a place where any game, not mentioned in section 330 or section 330a
of the state Penal Code is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices for money, checks,
chips, credit or other representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value; provided, however, that it shall be lawful to maintain a
pinball machine or marble game which awards free plays if and only if such free play may not be exchanged for money, checks, chips, credit or other
representative of value, or for any merchandise or for any other thing of value except free replays.
D. Use Of House, Room: It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, knowingly to permit any house, room, apartment
or place owned by him or under his charge or control in the city to be used in whole or in part for playing, conducting, dealing or carrying on therein any
game not mentioned in section 330 or in section 330a of the state Penal Code with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices for
money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value; provided, however, that it shall be
lawful to permit the playing of pinball machines or marble games which award free games if and only if such free play may not be exchanged for
money, checks, chips, credit or other representative of value, or for any merchandise or for any other thing of value except free replays.
E. Playing Or Betting: It is unlawful for any person to play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in section 330 or section 330a of the state Penal
Code which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit or
any other representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value; provided, however, that it shall be lawful to play any pinball or
marble machine which provides free games if and only if such free play may not be exchanged for money, checks, chips, credit or other representative
of value, or for any merchandise or for any other thing of value except free replays. (Ord. 762, 3-22-1971)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 171/581
F. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in section 1-2-1 of this code. (Ord. 514, 1-13-1958; amd. 2000 Code)
7-6-3: TRESPASSING:
A. Prohibited; Exceptions: It is unlawful for any person to trespass in, upon, on or across the property of another without permission of the person in
charge or control thereof; provided, that the person in charge or control of the property has complied with the provisions of subsection B of this section.
B. Property Posting Required: Any person in charge or control of property shall post, or cause to be posted, at each of the corners of the property a sign
constructed of metal or wood, or other material equally substantial, which sign shall be at least one square foot in area and shall be placed not less
than three feet (3') nor more than six feet (6') above the normal level of the ground at the location thereof. Upon the sign there shall be placed a notice
in writing or printing, in legible letters at least two inches (2") in height, the words "Private Property - No Trespassing" and such other words as may be
desired, if any, indicating that trespassers are subject to prosecution. Each such sign shall have either a white or black base, and in the event the white
base is used, the letters shall be in black, and if a black base is used, the letters shall be in white; provided, that in the event the property exceeds a
total area of one acre, that in addition to the posting of the notice at the corners thereof, similar signs shall be posted at intervals of not to exceed three
hundred feet (300') on or near the boundary lines of the property.
C. Peace Officer Exemption: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall have no application to a trespass committed by any officially authorized
peace officer or law enforcement agent, when the trespass is committed in the execution of the officer's or agent's official duty, nor to any person
visiting or calling at the residence or place of business of another person for a legitimate social reason, or for the purpose of transacting any legitimate
business. (Ord. 231, 6-12-1940)
7-6-4: WEAPONS:
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to discharge or use any pistol, shotgun, revolver, air gun, spring gun, sling or other device for throwing
stones, shot or metal slugs within the limits of the city, without a permit from the city council.
B. Application For Permit: Any person desiring the permit required by subsection A of this section may make application therefor addressed to the chief of
police and shall specify therein the purpose for which the applicant desires to use the weapon or instrument in the application referred to. (Ord. 29, 12-
26-1917; amd. 2000 Code)
7-6-5: MERCHANDISE ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
A. Leaving Personal Property Prohibited: No person shall leave or permit to remain in or upon any sidewalk or in or upon any parkway in any street within
the city, any merchandise, fruit, melon, vegetable, meat, or any baggage or any article of personal property.
B. Placement Of Containers: Except in the discharge or performance of official duty, no person shall place any boxes, barrels or other receptacles for or
containing goods, wares, merchandise or any other articles or things in or upon any public street, whether in the roadway or on the sidewalk, or in the
parkway thereof, with the intent or for the purpose of unpacking or removing the contents thereof upon the streets, sidewalks or parkways, and except
in the discharge or performance of official duty, no person shall unpack or remove the contents of or from any such box, barrel or other receptacle for or
containing goods, wares, merchandise or any other articles or things while the same is in or upon any street, sidewalk or parkway; provided, however,
that the provisions of this subsection shall not prevent peddlers duly licensed by the city from merchandising their produce or wares in a proper and
usual manner incident to the business of peddling. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
7-6-6: DANCES, GAMES AND EXHIBITIONS IN STREET:
A. Games: Unless by special written permit from the city manager first had and obtained, no person shall play, carry on or engage in any game in or upon
any street.
B. Dancing; Permit: No person shall dance or conduct any dance or engage in any dancing in any street without a written permit from the city manager to
do so first had and obtained.
C. Exhibitions; Permit: No person shall conduct or engage in any exhibition in any street or use any street or any portion thereof within the city for any
purpose other than street purposes without written permission from the city manager to do so first had and obtained. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953; amd. 2000
Code)
7-6-7: CEMETERIES PROHIBITED:
The establishment of any cemetery or the maintenance of any cemetery or burying ground or mausoleum within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
prohibited. (Ord. 131, 9-10-1926)
7-6-8: CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 172/581
A. Public Places: Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is unlawful to drink any alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of any alcoholic
beverage:
1. Upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, pathway, parking lot, park, beach, or other public property;
2. On any public school property;
3. In the entranceway to any nonresidential building, which entranceway is open to view from the public street; or
4. On a privately owned automobile parking lot to which the public is invited and permitted.
B. Near Alcoholic Beverage Establishments: With regard to premises that sell alcoholic beverages for off site consumption, it is unlawful to drink an
alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage when:
1. Entering into or being present at such premises;
2. Being present upon the sidewalk, pathway or parking lot adjacent to such a premises.
C. Exceptions: The prohibitions set forth in this section will not apply to:
1. A group operating an organized event according to the conditions of a permit issued by the city pursuant to this code which allows consumption and
possession of alcoholic beverages; or
2. An outdoor dining facility that serves alcoholic beverages pursuant to the terms of a permit issued by the state or the city.
D. Definitions:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains onehalf
of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances, or which may be ingested in any way.
OPEN CONTAINER: A bottle, can or other receptacle which has been opened, or a seal broken or the contents partially removed.
PREMISES FROM WHICH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE SOLD FOR OFF SITE CONSUMPTION: The premises of a retail package off sale
alcoholic beverage licensee licensed under the alcoholic beverage control act1. (Ord. 1344, 12-4-2001)
Chapter 7
HANDBILLS
7-7-1: HANDBILL DEFINED:
"Handbill", for the purposes of this Chapter, includes any printed or written advertising matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
newspaper, paper, booklet or any other printed matter or literature. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940)
7-7-2: DISTRIBUTION:
A. Public Property: It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or on any public
thoroughfare, park, ground or other public place within the City. The provisions of this Section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting
or distributing of any handbill to any person willing to accept the handbill.
B. Private Property:
1. It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private yard,
grounds, walk, porch, steps, mailbox, vestibule, house, residence, building or any other private property. The provisions of this subsection shall not
be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of the private yard, grounds, walk,
porch, steps, mailbox, vestibule, house, residence, building or other private property.
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the distribution of handbills by firms securing a handbill on the doorknob with a
rubber band or a container designed to hang on a doorknob.
3. The provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the placing of a political handbill, a religious handbill, or a newspaper on the door or
in front of and immediately adjacent to the door of any private residence. (Ord. 916, 12-21-1976)
7-7-3: POSTING PROPERTY TO PREVENT HANDBILLS:
It is lawful for the owner or the occupant of any property to place a sign in a conspicuous place near the entrance thereof indicating that no handbills are
desired; and, when the property is so signed or posted, it is unlawful for any person to go upon the premises or property so posted and distribute, deposit,
place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940)
7-7-4: PLACING IN VEHICLES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 173/581
It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other
vehicle. The provisions of this Section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other
occupant of any automobile or other vehicle. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940)
7-7-5: HOURS OF DISTRIBUTION:
It is unlawful for any person to distribute any handbills between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of any day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the
following day. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940; amd. 2000 Code)
7-7-6: LOCATIONS WHERE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful within the City for any person to post, print, stick, stamp, tack or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any other person, any
handbill, notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, tin sign, advertisement or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public to or upon
any public sidewalk, crosswalk, City tree, curb, curbstone, lamppost, hydrant, street sign or post, tree, railroad trestle, electric light or power pole,
telephone, telegraph or trolley-wire pole, or upon any fixture of the fire alarm, police or telegraph systems or lighting systems of the City. (Ord. 232, 8-7-
1940; amd. 2000 Code)
7-7-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of the United States mail, nor to the delivery of any handbill to any person
who has requested delivery of the same; nor to the posting of legal notices by public officers or attorneys in the manner and places prescribed by law; nor
to permanent signs painted on buildings or signs advertising the business painted on buildings or signs advertising the business conducted on the
premises; nor to official numbers, insignia or wording placed upon any such buildings, structures, hydrants, polls, posts, sidewalks, crosswalks, curbs,
curbstones or fixtures, by or with the consent of the owner or person in charge or control thereof. (Ord. 232, 8-7-1940)
Chapter 8
PARADES
(Rep. by Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
Chapter 9
PRIVATELY OWNED PARKING LOTS
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the meanings set forth herein:
DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT: Includes, but shall not be limited to, any police officer of the city of El Segundo who has been given specific or general
authority on behalf of the owner of a parking lot to request that persons thereon leave the lot.
SHOPPING CENTER: Any store or stores, business or businesses, office or offices or theater or theaters, or any combination thereof, in the city of El
Segundo, California, with off street parking facilities. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990; amd. Ord. 1344, 12-4-2001)
7-9-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Patronage Of Shopping Center: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park it or allow it to remain parked upon any parking lot in, of or
adjacent to a shopping center except while the driver or the occupants of the vehicle are patronizing a store or service of said shopping center.
B. Remaining After Request To Leave: It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cause public disturbance or annoyance, to be or remain upon any
parking lot in, of or adjacent to a shopping center or when asked to leave by a police officer or the owner thereof, or his duly authorized agent.
C. Noise:
1. Causing Disturbance: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a radio or other sound amplifier emitting loud and raucous noises with the intent
to cause a public disturbance or annoyance.
2. Outside A Vehicle: No person shall operate or permit operation of any vehicle radio system which emits sound audible outside a vehicle when the
vehicle is being operated or parked on private property, open for public use at a distance greater than twenty five feet (25') from the source of the
sound. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990)
7-9-3: LIQUOR CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS:
See section 7-6-8 of this title. (Ord. 1344, 12-4-2001)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 174/581
7-9-4: APPLICABILITY OF VEHICLE CODE:
All privately owned and maintained off street parking facilities within the city shall be subject to the provisions of sections 22350 (basic speed law), 23103
(reckless driving), 23109 (speed contest and exhibitions of speed), and division 16.5 commencing with section 38000 (off highway motor vehicles) of the
California Vehicle Code, if the owner or operator of said parking facility has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to that off street
parking facility a notice not less than seventeen inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22") in size with lettering less than one inch (1") in height to the effect
that the off street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control. This section shall not require the police department to provide patrol or
enforce any provisions of this code on a privately owned or maintained off street facility except as provided for in other sections of this code. (Ord. 1150, 2-
20-1990)
7-9-5: POSTING OF NOTICE:
The owner of any private property to which this chapter applies may post a notice to all persons of the applicability of the regulations contained herein.
However, the failure to post such a notice shall not prevent the enforcement of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990)
7-9-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter is an infraction, punishable as provided in section 1-2-1 of this code. (Ord. 1150, 2-20-1990; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 10
MOTOR VEHICLE ALARMS
7-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall be applied to the terms utilized in this Chapter unless it appears from the context that a
different meaning is intended:
EMERGENCY SITUATION: Any situation where life or property is in physical jeopardy.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal emitting from a motor vehicle necessitating a response by the Police Department where an emergency situation does not
exist.
MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: A vehicle which is self-propelled as defined in California Vehicle Code section 415. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-2: TIME RESTRICTION:
A. Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any alarm located in a motor vehicle registered in the name of or driven by such
person to emit any audible sound within the City for a period of more than five (5) minutes.
B. Calculation: The time shall be calculated based upon the emission of the first audible sound ending five (5) minutes thereafter notwithstanding any
variation or delay in the emissions of audible sound. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-3: ENFORCEMENT OF FALSE ALARMS:
Any vehicle parked in a public right of way, parking lot, parking structure, or other public property is subject to enforcement under this Chapter. In addition,
any vehicle parked on private property may be cited hereunder where the false alarm is clearly audible on the public thoroughfare or nearby private
properties. Any owner of private property upon which a vehicle emitting a false alarm is parked may summon City enforcement authorities for the purpose
of citing the offending vehicle. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-4: EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS; PENALTY:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit an alarm to be emitted from a motor vehicle registered in the name of or driven
by such person.
B. Penalty: Any violation of this Chapter shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993;
amd. 2000 Code)
7-10-5: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any violation of this Chapter is declared a public nuisance which is subject to abatement pursuant to the procedures described in this Chapter and as
authorized by law. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
7-10-6: ABATEMENT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 175/581
A. Deactivate Alarm: The Police Department, in order to abate the public nuisance created by a vehicle in violation of this Chapter, may undertake such
procedures as are reasonably necessary to deactivate the alarm.
B. Removal Of Vehicle: Should the Police Department be unable to deactivate the alarm, the vehicle shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of
California Vehicle Code section 22651.5. (Ord. 1200, 7-20-1993)
Chapter 11
MARIJUANA
7-11-1: REGULATIONS:
For regulations regarding marijuana, commercial marijuana activities, and marijuana cultivation, see title 4, chapter 14 and title 15, chapter 13B of this
code. (Ord. 1544, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 12
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERINGS
7-12-1: FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
A. Loud or unruly social gatherings frequently become public nuisances since they interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, and threaten
public safety. All such activities detrimentally affect the neighbors that surround these nuisances.
B. Frequently, these loud or unruly gatherings create opportunities for crimes against persons, public peace and property. The City has, both now and in
the past, responded to Code violations multiple times for enforcement actions.
C. In addition, the public services required for responding to incidents that occur as a consequence of unruly gatherings (for example, driving while
intoxicated, increased social violence, and incidents of sexual assault) are also disproportionately greater than what is required within the City's
jurisdiction.
D. It is in the public interest to establish procedures for recovering costs incurred by the City when enforcing any provision of this Code through
inspections, nuisance abatement, or other similar, administrative or judicial means.
E. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to, nor will it, interfere with any California law provision that regulates activities identified by this chapter; it
is intended only to enact measures that are different from, or supplement, California law to further restrict acts associated with loud or unruly
gatherings. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
CITATION: Means an administrative citation issued pursuant to title 1, chapter 2A of this Code.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Has the same meaning as in section 1-2A-3 of this Code.
LOUD OR UNRULY CONDUCT: As used in this chapter, includes any of the following conduct if in violation of any provision of this Code or State law:
A. Loud noise;
B. Obstruction of a street or public right-of-way, including a sidewalk or driveway;
C. Public intoxication or drinking in public;
D. Assault, battery, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of the peace;
E. Vandalism or destruction of property;
F. Litter;
G. Urinating or defecating in public;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 176/581
H. Trespassing; or
I. Illegal drug use.
Loud or unruly conduct does not include any activity that is protected by article 1, section 4 of the California Constitution, or protected by the First or
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING: Means a gathering of persons at any residence where loud or unruly conduct occurs at the residence and which
threatens or interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, or the comfortable enjoyment of life and property.
PERSON: Means an individual or any firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, business, corporation, company or entity.
RESIDENCE: Means any lot in a residential zone, and includes any garage, carport, walkway, yard, patio, deck, or other structure or area on said lot,
whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. The term "residence" also includes any sidewalk, street or alleyway which abuts the
lot.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Means:
A. Any person(s) with a right of possession or ownership interests in the residence where a loud or unruly gathering occurs; or
B. Any person who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts, or controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a
gathering at a residence. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-12-3: LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERINGS PROHIBITED:
Loud or unruly gatherings are prohibited and constitute a public nuisance subjecting the owner and/or responsible party to fines and/or penalties under this
section. The City may abate a loud or unruly gathering by all available means, including, but not limited to, an order of a peace officer requiring individuals
at the loud or unruly gathering to leave the residence, the issuance of a citation, and/or the arrest of anyone committing a criminal violation under this
section or any other applicable State or local law. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-12-4: CITATION AND NOTICE - CONTENTS:
A peace officer responding to a loud or unruly gathering must post, on the front entrance of the residence at which the loud or unruly gathering occurs, a
notice stating:
A. The name and agency of the officer who responded to the loud or unruly gathering;
B. The address of the residence and the date of the loud or unruly gathering, along with a description of the loud or unruly conduct observed; and
C. That it is unlawful to alter, tamper with or deface this notice, or remove it prior to thirty (30) days from the date of the posting. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
7-12-5: CITATION AND NOTICE - PROCEDURE:
A. Referral To Code Enforcement Officer: A copy of any notice caused to be issued by a peace officer during the enforcement of this chapter will be
referred to the Director of Planning and Building Safety, or his/her designee. Once referred, the Code Enforcement Division will be responsible for
processing, investigating and implementing the citation. However, the peace officer who issued the citation may be required to submit evidence and/or
attend any administrative hearing pertaining to the citation, if necessary.
B. Notice: The Code Enforcement Officer must serve on all responsible parties a copy of the notice posted pursuant to subsection A of this section. The
delivery of the notice must be by personal service or by depositing in the mail for delivery by the United States Postal Service, in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid. Notice to the property owner must be sent to the address shown on the County's last equalized Property Tax assessment roll.
C. Administrative Process Applicable To Citations: Unless otherwise specified herein, all citations issued for violations of this chapter will be subject to the
provisions set forth in title 1, chapter 2A of this Code, including, but not limited to, the administrative hearing and appeal process. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-
2018)
7-12-6: VIOLATIONS, FINES AND PENALTIES:
A. Administrative Fines: Any person who alters, tampers with or defaces a posted notice issued pursuant to this chapter, and/or who violates section 7-12-
3 of this chapter may be subjected to administrative fines and penalties. Penalties will be established by City Council resolution. Any violation which
arises within twelve (12) months from the date of the first violation will trigger escalating penalty amounts, as established by City Council resolution. A
violation occurring after a period of twelve (12) consecutive months of no violations will be considered a first violation.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 177/581
B. Penalties To Same Party: Any escalated penalty amounts will apply to the same responsible party, regardless of whether different residences
throughout the City are utilized as venues for loud or unruly gatherings.
C. Fine For Removal Of Posted Notice: Any person who alters, tampers with or defaces a posted notice issued pursuant to this chapter will be subject to
an administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
D. Civil Or Criminal Proceeding: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a
public nuisance or from pursuing any other means available under any other statute, ordinance or law (civil or criminal), to correct conduct regulated by
this chapter in addition to or as alternatives to the procedures set forth herein. This chapter in no way limits the authority of law enforcement personnel
to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 1568, 6-19-2018)
Chapter 13
SOCIAL HOST REGULATIONS
7-13-1: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is:
1. To facilitate the enforcement of laws prohibiting the use of marijuana by minors and the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors,
in an effort to deter, and to promote the reduction of, underage drinking and drug use;
2. To protect public health, safety and welfare and quiet enjoyment of property and properties neighboring the location of gatherings at which minors
use marijuana or are served and consume alcoholic beverages; and
3. To establish a duty of persons twenty one (21) years of age or older having control over any premises, who knowingly host, permit or allow a
gathering at the premises to take reasonable steps to prevent the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages or use of marijuana by minors.
Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to, controlling the access to and provision of marijuana and alcoholic beverages to minors, and
monitoring the responsible, safe and lawful conduct of minors on the premises.
B. This chapter should not be construed as adding any additional authority for any law enforcement officer or government official to either enter private
property or subject any property or person to search or seizure that does not otherwise exist independent of the provisions of this chapter.
C. It is not the intent of this chapter to impose strict liability against a parent or legal guardian whose best intentions and reasonable efforts to prevent the
service and consumption of alcoholic beverages or use of marijuana by minors at a gathering are circumvented by the actions of any person to obtain
alcoholic beverages or marijuana at the premises or to bring concealed alcoholic beverages or marijuana to the premises. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of words and phrases used in this
chapter:
ALCOHOL: Means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every other liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined
with other substances.
GATHERING: Means a party, gathering, or event where three (3) or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
MARIJUANA: Means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin.
MINOR: Means any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
PREMISES: Means a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or any commercial, business or industrial site, hall
or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: Means a person twenty one (21) years of age or older who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where
the gathering occurs.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Means:
A. The person in charge of the premises when the gathering occurs; or
B. The person who organized the gathering. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-3: GATHERING AT WHICH MINORS USE MARIJUANA OR CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 178/581
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for either a responsible person or responsible adult to cause or allow a gathering to take place at the premises
whenever the responsible person or responsible adult knows or reasonably should have known alcoholic beverages or marijuana are being unlawfully
consumed or used by minors. Liability for a violation of this section will be imputed to either a responsible person or responsible adult, but not both.
A. Prima facie evidence that a responsible person had the knowledge, or should have had the knowledge, necessary to establish a violation of this section
include those situations where:
1. Minors are consuming alcoholic beverages or using marijuana and there is a minor present on the premises who is obviously under the influence of
alcohol or marijuana; or
2. A warning has been issued to the location within the last twelve (12) months regarding alcohol or marijuana use by minors at the premises.
B. Prima facie evidence that a responsible adult had the knowledge, or should have had the knowledge, necessary to establish a violation of this section
include those situations where:
1. A responsible adult is present at the premises during a gathering where minors are consuming alcoholic beverages or using marijuana; or
2. A warning has been issued to the location within the last twelve (12) months regarding alcohol or marijuana use by minors at the premises.
C. A warning for a violation of this section will only be issued where the responsible adult was not present at the premises during a gathering where minors
are consuming alcohol or using marijuana and there is no evidence that a minor is present on the premises who is obviously under the influence of
alcohol or marijuana. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-4: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to:
A. Any California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licensee at any premises licensed and regulated by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
B. Conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages which occurs exclusively between a minor child and his or her parent or legal guardian, including the
possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in connection with a cultural or religious activity. This exemption does not include any conduct that
would contribute to the delinquency of a minor (a violation of Penal Code section 272).
C. Conduct which the City is expressly preempted from prohibiting under State law, specifically, the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and
Safety Act.
D. A responsible person or responsible adult who called 911 and reported that a minor was in need of medical attention due to alcohol consumption or
marijuana use, was the first person to make the 911 call, and when reporting that a minor was in need of medical assistance, remained on the scene
with the minor until that medical assistance arrived and cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene.
E. A responsible person or responsible adult who requests immediate assistance from the Police Department to remove any person who refuses to abide
by the requesting person's performance of duties imposed by this chapter, or to terminate the gathering because of the requesting person's ability to
prevent minors from consuming alcoholic beverages or using marijuana despite having taken reasonable steps to do so, as long as such request is
made before any other person makes a complaint about the gathering. (Ord. 1567, 9-18-2018)
7-13-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. The City Council may adopt a resolution establishing a schedule of administrative fines and community service hours for a violation of this chapter.
B. In addition to the administrative fines described in this section, the responding law enforcement officer may issue an order requiring the gathering to be
disbanded and may cite and arrest any violators under any other applicable ordinances and statutes.
C. For any responsible person who is a juvenile, each parent or legal guardian of the juvenile will be considered a responsible person liable for any fines,
penalties and fees imposed pursuant to this chapter. The parents or guardians of a juvenile found to have violated this chapter may request to have
that juvenile serve community service as described in subsection E of this section, and pay City administrative fees, if any, as an alternative penalty to
paying the applicable civil penalty.
D. Nothing in this chapter is deemed to prevent the City from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any
other means available under any other statute, ordinance or law (civil or criminal), to correct conduct regulated by this chapter in addition to or as
alternatives to the procedures set forth herein. This chapter in no way limits the authority of the Police Department to make arrests for any criminal
offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter.
E. The responsible person or responsible adult may perform community service and pay City administrative fees, if any, as an alternative to paying the civil
penalty with the prior written consent and approval of the Police Chief or designee. The Police Chief or designee retains the discretion to approve the
community service requested by the responsible person/adult. Upon approval of the Police Chief or designee to perform community service, the
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 179/581
responsible person/adult must complete the required hours within one year of approval and must submit proof of completion to the Police Chief or
designee. Failure to receive approval to perform community service or failure to complete the required hours of service will result in the imposition of
the applicable civil penalty, which is immediately payable. No reduction in the penalty is authorized for completion of less than the required hours of
community service unless approved by the City Manager or designee. Community service will only be approved for the first citation issued within a oneyear
period.
F. Violations of this chapter are not subject to the response cost reimbursement provisions outlined in sections 1-2A-23, et seq., of this Code. (Ord. 1567,
9-18-2018)
Title 8
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, those definitions
shall apply.
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
COACH: Any motor bus or motor coach used as a common carrier of passengers.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of El Segundo, California.
CURB: A physical barrier defining the lateral boundary of the roadway including returns at intersections.
DIVISIONAL ISLAND: A raised island or an area designated by double paint stripes located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams
of traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in the city.
OVERSIZED VEHICLE: Any vehicle, as defined by section 670 of the California Vehicle Code, or combination of vehicles, which exceeds twenty two feet
(22') in length, seven feet (7') in width, or eight feet (8') in height, exclusive of projecting lights or devices allowed by section 35109 or 35110 of the
California Vehicle Code, as may be amended. The term "oversized vehicle" does not include pickup trucks or sport utility vehicles that are less than twenty
five feet (25') in length and eighty two inches (82") in height.
PARKWAY: That portion of a street right of way other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
PASSENGER LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The El Segundo police department.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the police department of the city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Has the same meaning as section 18010 of the Health And Safety Code.
STOP: Complete cessation of movement.
TRAILER: A trailer, semitrailer, camp trailer (including tent trailers), unmounted camper, or trailer coach as defined in sections 242, 243, 550, 630, 635,
and 636 of the California Vehicle Code, or fifth wheel travel trailer, as defined in section 324 of the Vehicle Code. The term "trailer" includes trailers that are
attached to another vehicle by means of a hitch or otherwise, and trailers that are not attached to another vehicle (i.e., "detached" trailers).
VEHICLE CODE: The Vehicle Code of the state of California.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is that minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel to the front line of the permitted structures.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear of the required front yard to the front of the required rear yard, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967; amd. Ord. 1281, 10-7-1997; Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-1-2: TRAFFIC DIVISION:
A. Division Established; Police Administration: There is hereby established in the police department of the city a traffic division to be under the control of an
officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 180/581
B. Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce
the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out those duties especially imposed upon the division by this title and the traffic
ordinances of the city.
C. Accident Studies: Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer
in conducting studies of the accidents and determining remedial measures.
D. Accident Reports: The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall
be filed alphabetically by location. The reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967; amd.
2000 Code)
8-1-3: CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER:
A. Office Established: The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The city engineer shall be ex officio city traffic engineer. He shall exercise the
powers and duties as provided in this title and in the traffic ordinances of the city.
B. Powers And Duties: It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic
control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic
investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to
carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city. Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power is granted to the city
traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by
him. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-1-4: TRAFFIC COMMITTEE:
A. Established: There is hereby established an advisory traffic committee to serve without compensation, consisting of the city traffic engineer, the chief of
police or in his discretion as his representative an officer of the traffic division and a representative from the city engineer's office. The chairman of the
committee shall be the city traffic engineer.
B. Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the traffic committee to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and
agencies of the city having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and assist in the preparation
and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters; and to recommend ways and means for improving traffic
conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 2
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIALS
8-2-1: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible
or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the
contrary contained in this Title or the State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-2: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person
authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any
mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the City Traffic Engineer. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY REQUIRED:
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member
of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or by law. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-4: BICYCLE AND ANIMAL RIDERS:
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by this Title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-5: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICERS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 181/581
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of the City in their enforcement of the provisions of this
Title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of the
City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this Title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Title, constitute
such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-6: PUBLIC EMPLOYEE OBEDIENCE:
The provisions of this Title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State or any
county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this Title except as otherwise permitted in this Title or by the State
Vehicle Code. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-7: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Certain Vehicles Designated: The provisions of this Title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated
by the Police or Fire Department, any ambulance or any public utility vehicle which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle
mentioned in this Section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
B. Due Care: The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of
others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others.
C. Mail Delivery Vehicles: The provisions of this Title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or
public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office department while
in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-8: REPORT CERTAIN PROPERTY DAMAGE:
A. Publicly Owned Property: The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property
publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or
power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty
four (24) hours after the accident make a written report of such accident to the Police Department of the City.
B. Contents Of Report: Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person
owning and of the person operating or in charge of the vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the
property damage in the accident.
C. Delay Of Report For Incapacity: The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this Section
if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection A of this Section
within twenty four (24) hours after regaining ability to make the report. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-2-9: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM STREETS:
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of the City may remove or cause to be removed:
A. Time Limit:
1. Streets And Highways: Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy two (72) or more consecutive hours.
(Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
2. City Parking Lots, Property: Any vehicle, or portion thereof, that has been parked or left standing upon a City parking lot or on City property for
seventy two (72) or more consecutive hours. (Ord. 688, 4-8-1968)
B. Prohibited Parking Area:
1. Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway when parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of the City
and signs are posted giving notice of removal.
2. Any vehicle parked or left standing when, by ordinance or resolution of the City, such parking or standing is prohibited and signs are posted giving
notice of the removal.
C. Street Cleaning; Construction: Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of the street or highway or a portion
thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the
street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any
portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with the use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that the vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty four (24)
hours prior to the removal. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 182/581
8-2-10: AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN CROWDS:
At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are together or have gathered, nothing in this Title shall be construed to prevent any police officer
from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or
sidewalk, and the police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is hereby declared
to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the police officer's order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of this Title. (Ord. 659,
3-13-1967)
8-2-11: AUTHORITY OF OTHERS; PARKING CITATIONS:
Police cadets, police service officers and retired senior volunteers are hereby authorized to issue parking citations and perform such other related duties
as may be required by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1207, 10-5-1993)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
8-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
A. Installation And Maintenance: The City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained
official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this Title.
B. Notice To Public: Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice
to the public of the application of the law, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any
limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
C. Additional Devices: The City Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices
as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make the determination only upon the basis of traffic
engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this Title or as may
be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-2: SIGN PLACEMENT NECESSARY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this Title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs
are in place giving notice of the provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-3: OBEDIENCE:
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this Chapter unless otherwise
directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to emergency calls. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-4: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Placement: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic
conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to
protect life or property from exceptional hazard.
B. Determination Of Placement: The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where the signals are required by field investigation,
traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent.
C. Street Name Signs: Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and
maintain at the intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless the street name signs have previously been
placed and are maintained at the intersection. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
8-3-5: LANE MARKING:
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by
vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the
highway. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-6: DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 183/581
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of
streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of the marking or signs and
markings. The marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to
provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-7: REMOVAL OF DEVICES:
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the
Vehicle Code or this Title whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer
exist. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-8: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this Title. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-3-9: UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS:
No person, unless authorized by the City, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the painting of
numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of the City pertaining thereto. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
Chapter 4
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
8-4-1: TURNING REGULATIONS:
A. Marker Authority; Multiple Lanes: The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections and
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at the intersections, and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than
one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be
other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.
B. Restricted Turn Signs: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at these intersections. The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day
and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when the turns are permitted.
C. Right Turn On Red Signal:
1. No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign posted giving notice of the restriction as
hereinafter provided in this subsection.
2. The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this subsection where he determines that the making of right turns against
traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-2: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates any one-way street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-3: SPECIAL SPEED ZONES:
A. Declaration Of Prima Facie Speed Limits: It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speeds permitted by the
State Vehicle Code upon the following streets are more or less than are appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and are reasonable and
safe, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limits for these streets be as follows:
Name Of Street
And Limits
Affected
Declared
Prima Facie
Speed Limit
(Miles Per Hour)
Alaska Avenue, Douglas
Street to Aviation
Boulevard
35
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 184/581
Aviation Boulevard,
Rosecrans Avenue to
116th Street
40
Continental Boulevard,
El Segundo Boulevard to
to Mariposa Avenue
30
Douglas Street, Alaska
Avenue to Imperial Highway
40
El Segundo Boulevard,
Sepulveda Boulevard to
Isis Avenue
40
El Segundo Boulevard,
Whiting to Sepulveda
Boulevard
35
Grand Avenue, Eucalyptus
Drive to Duley Road
35
Hawaii Street, Alaska
Avenue to Aviation
Boulevard
35
Hughes Way, East of
Sepulveda Boulevard
40
Imperial Highway, Sepulveda
Boulevard to Aviation
Boulevard
40
Lairport Street, Mariposa
Avenue to Maple Avenue
35
Maple Avenue, Sepulveda
Boulevard to Nash Street
35
Mariposa Avenue, Sepulveda
Boulevard to Douglas Street
40
Nash Street, El Segundo
Boulevard to Imperial Highway
35
Rosecrans Avenue, Bell Avenue
(in Manhattan Beach) to
Aviation Boulevard
45
Rosecrans Avenue, westerly
City limits to Bell Avenue
(in Manhattan Beach)
35
Utah Avenue, Douglas Street
to Aviation Boulevard
35
Vista del Mar, Grand Avenue
to 45th Street (in Manhattan
Beach)
45
B. Signal Regulation Of Speed: The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an
orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 1222, 6-7-1994)
8-4-4: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS; REMOVE VEGETATION:
Whenever the Traffic Engineer feels that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a parkway obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the
streets approaching the intersection, he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-5: VEHICLES TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
A. Driver In Attendance: A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance as identified in title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be
attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, shoulder,
street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet (5') of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential district except for brief periods when
mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operations require the vehicle to be parked and
make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place.
B. Certain Vehicles Exempt: Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support
and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of subsection A of this Section. Additionally, such
exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicle or the
provider of the service.
C. Explanation Of Terms: For purposes of this Section:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 185/581
1. A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred
feet (100') of the vehicle and has it within his unobstructed field of view.
2. A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who:
a. Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle;
b. Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he attends;
c. Has been instructed on the procedures he must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances;
d. Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so.
D. Further Obligations: The rules of this Section do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by Federal, State, or local laws relating to the
transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety regulations or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle
is stopped on a public street or highway. (Ord. 1003, 4-7-1981)
8-4-6: TRUCK ROUTES:
A. Designation:
1. Whenever any resolution of the City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons, the City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to designate the street or streets by
appropriate signs as "Truck Routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons.
2. Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons.
B. Pickups And Deliveries: When the truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a
maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons shall drive on the route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this Section shall prohibit the
operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and
from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or
structure located on the restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling
or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of this Section shall not apply to: 1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or to 2) any
vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-7: HEAVY VEHICLES; PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Permit Required: No persons shall move or operate upon any of the City streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the
Vehicle Code without a written permit from the City Traffic Engineer. (Ord. 1154, 7-3-1990)
B. Guarantee Repair Of Streets: The City Traffic Engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle
Code, if in his judgment, the streets upon which the vehicle used is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight or if the applicant will
guarantee to the City that all cost of repair to the streets or to the public property of the City damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be
paid in full. The permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon satisfactory proof of financial responsibility determined under the Vehicle Code
as the City Traffic Engineer in his discretion may require. Extra insurance or other financial security may be imposed at the discretion of the City Traffic
Engineer as a condition for a permit for unusually large or heavy loads which pose a substantial risk to public facilities. (Ord. 1154, 7-3-1990; amd. Ord.
1163, 5-7-1991)
C. Application For Permit: Application for the permit authorized by this Section shall be on the standard application form developed by the State
Department of Transportation pursuant to Vehicle Code section 35781.
D. Permit Fee: For any permit so issued, there shall be a charge which shall be equal to the largest fee allowed by the fee schedule developed by the
State Department of Transportation pursuant to Vehicle Code section 35795 for single or multiple trips. (Ord. 1154, 7-3-1990; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Police Escort: Whenever the City Traffic Engineer shall deem a police escort necessary or advisable in connection with operation under the permit, the
permittee shall pay the current charge for the escorts required. (Ord. 1154, 7-3-1990)
8-4-8: FLANGE WHEEL MACHINERY:
No person shall operate over the City streets any vehicle, piece of equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges or other projections on the
wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat bearing surface will be
in contact with the pavement at all times. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-9: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION:
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously so
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 186/581
designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which the funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders
of the Police Department. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-10: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE:
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of
receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-11: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this Section, a "commercial vehicle" means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half (1/2) ton.
B. Consent Required: No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the
driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of the driveway is
prohibited. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-12: RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed
driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that the sidewalk
area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches (2") thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the City Traffic Engineer. The
wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon the sidewalk area during the hours from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 659, 3-
13-1967)
8-4-13: DRIVING OVER NEW PAVEMENT OR MARKINGS:
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier
sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across the pavement or marking or when the device is in place
indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-14: BARRIERS AND SIGNS GENERALLY:
No person, public utility or department of the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic
Engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any
department of the City. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-15: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-16: LIMITED ACCESS ROADWAYS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
8-4-17: RESTRICTIONS ON FREEWAY USE:
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a
"freeway", as defined by State law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside
for the use of pedestrians; provided, official signs are in place giving notice of the restrictions. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-18: NONCOMPLIANCE TO SIGNS:
No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of any barrier or sign erected: a) pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of
the city, or b) by any public utility, or c) by any department of the city, or d) by any other person pursuant to law or contract with the city, nor shall any
unauthorized person move or alter the position of the barrier or sign. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-19: DRIVING ON PARK OR RECREATION GROUND:
No persons shall ride, drive or propel, or cause to be ridden, driven or propelled into or upon any roadway, path or way in any public park or recreation
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 187/581
ground within the city any vehicle, device or other equipment, including a bicycle. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-20: VEHICLES ON VACANT PROPERTY:
A. Prohibition: A person shall not operate any motor vehicle (including any motorcycle, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, or jeep) or the motor thereof
on any vacant lot, parking lot, vacant property or acreage so as to disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person by noise, dust, smoke, or
fumes caused by such motor vehicle.
B. Exceptions: This section does not apply to any act prohibited by section 372 of the California Penal Code, or prohibited or expressly permitted by any
state statute. (Ord. 746, 10-12-1970)
8-4-21: AUTO THEFT PREVENTION; KEY REMOVAL:
A. Locked Ignition, Key Removal Required: No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any public place or on
any used or new car lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the ignition key from the vehicle and effectively setting the brake
thereon.
B. Key Removal By Officer: Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of
this section, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and to deliver the key to the police officer in charge of the police station.
(Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-22: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
A. Driving Through Crossings Restricted: No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade
crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
B. Blocking Crossings: No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such
a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes, except that this provision shall
not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator
of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-4-23: BICYCLES:
A. Appointment Of Bicycle Registrar: The chief of police shall be designated and appointed as the registrar of bicycles of the city.
B. Bicycle License Required: It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by human power upon any of the public
streets, alleys or public highways within the city without first obtaining a license required by division 16.7, commencing with section 39000, of the state
Vehicle Code.
C. Secondhand Bicycle Report: All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles within the city are hereby required to make a daily
report to the registrar of bicycles on report forms approved by the registrar, giving the name and address of the person from whom the bicycle was
purchased, the description of the bicycle, the frame number thereof and the number and symbols of the license indicia found thereon, if any. (Ord. 968,
2-6-1979)
8-4-24: COASTERS AND SKATEBOARDS1:
A. Use Restricted: No person shall coast or propel himself down, along, upon or over any sidewalk in or on any skateboard, rollerblades, in-line skates,
wagon, cart, hand wagon, coaster, bicycle or other vehicle in any business district, public park or recreation area.
B. Exception: Skateboarding and freestyle bicycling shall only be permitted in areas designated by the city. (Ord. 1112, 5-17-1988; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 5
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
8-5-1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
A. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except
when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device.
B. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code or the ordinances of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 188/581
places or at specified times. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-2: MAINTENANCE OF NO PARKING AREAS:
A. Authority: The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no
parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.
B. Compliance With Signs And Markings: When the curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle
adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-3: NO PARKING AREAS DESIGNATED:
Except as provided in section 8-5-4 of this chapter, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic
sign or signal:
A. Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings.
B. On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at the street.
C. In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or
property, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
D. In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when the area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb
surface.
E. Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon the track.
F. If any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property.
G. On any street or highway where the use of the street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or
highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other
than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size, and the parking of the vehicle would prohibit or interfere with the use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of no
parking are erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the effective time of the no parking.
H. At any place within twenty feet (20') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when the place is indicated by
appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
I. At any place within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district when the place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop.
J. Within twenty feet (20') of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. (Ord. 864, 12-17-1974)
8-5-4: PARKING WITHIN INTERSECTIONS PERMITTED:
Pursuant to the authority of California Vehicle Code section 22500(a), parking shall be permitted in "T" intersections opposite the street entrance except
where the curb opposite the street entrance is painted red. (Ord. 864, 12-17-1974)
8-5-5: STOPPING OR STANDING IN PARKWAYS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-6: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle may park the vehicle upon any
street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy two (72) hours. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5-7: PARKING TO DISPLAY VEHICLE FOR SALE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 189/581
A. Streets: No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street in the city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale,
unless authorized by resolution of the council. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
B. City Owned Parking Lots: No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any city owned or city operated parking lot for the principal purpose of
advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the council. (Ord. 981, 12-4-1979)
8-5-8: REPAIRING VEHICLES ON STREETS:
A. Repairing Or Greasing: No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle
or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public
street.
B. Washing Or Polishing: No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public
street in the city, when a charge is made for the service. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-9: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
A. Authority: The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property
when the parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. Compliance: When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle
in any such designated place. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-10: PARKING ON NARROW STREETS:
A. Authority: The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway
does not exceed twenty feet (20'), or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed
thirty feet (30').
B. Compliance: When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-11: PARKING ON GRADES:
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (3%) within any business or
residence district without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-12: FRONT AND SIDE YARD PARKING:
No person shall park or leave standing any unattended vehicle upon a residential property's front yard or side yard with the exception of the paved
driveway portion which is used for the vehicular passageway or parking for the occupants of the property and their guests. (Ord. 1281, 10-7-1997)
8-5-13: GOODS SOLD FROM WAGONS OR PUSHCARTS:
A. Prohibited; Exception: Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person shall stand or park any wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares,
merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, on any portion of any street
within the city, except that such wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed
ten (10) minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering the articles upon order of, or by agreement
with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. (Ord. 1473, 11-20-2012)
B. Transporting Property; Permit Required:
1. No person shall park or stand any vehicle used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting
patronage for the vehicle without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location
where the vehicle may stand.
2. Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall
park or stand any vehicle or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of the permit is convicted
in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, the permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city traffic engineer
upon the filing of the record of the conviction with the officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to the person until six (6) months have elapsed
from the date of the revocation. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
8-5-14: TEMPORARY EMERGENCY NO PARKING SIGNS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 190/581
A. Authority: Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings or functions or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be
erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on the streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer shall
direct during the time the temporary signs are in place. The signs shall remain in place only during the existence of the emergency and the city traffic
engineer shall cause the signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
B. Compliance: When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of the signs. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-15: DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES:
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon
any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two (2) flares or two (2) red lanterns or two (2) warning lights or reflectors,
which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the state department of highway patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is
disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within the city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street
lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet (200') during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately
placed at a distance of approximately one hundred feet (100') in advance of, and one hundred feet (100') to the rear of such disabled vehicle by the driver
thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four (4) approved class A - type I turn signal lamps, at least two (2) toward the front and at least two (2) toward
the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required
locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while the vehicle remains disabled upon the street or
highway. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-16: PARKING SPACE MARKINGS:
A. Authority: The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where
authorized parking is permitted.
B. Compliance: When the parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped,
left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-17: NO STOPPING; TOW AWAY ZONES:
A. Authority: The city traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping tow away zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that
stopping of vehicles is prohibited and that they will be towed away at owner's expense, and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.
B. Compliance: During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the
streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping tow away zones. (Ord. 912, 10-5-1976)
8-5-18: DISABLED VETERANS; RESTRICTED ZONES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any veteran who is entitled to either of the exemptions provided in section 9105 of the California
Vehicle Code and section 10783 of the California Revenue And Taxation Code, shall be allowed to park in restricted zones. This section shall not be
construed, however, to allow the stopping, parking or standing of a vehicle at the times and places that stopping, parking or standing of all vehicles is
prohibited absolutely by state law or local ordinance. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5-19: CURB PARKING:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "limited curb parking space" means an area open for lawful parking alongside of, and adjacent to a curb,
which area is not of sufficient length to permit two (2) or more vehicles to freely move for parking therein at the same time.
B. Right Of Way: Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a limited curb parking space, whose vehicle arrives at the parking space prior to any other
vehicle and who proceeds beyond the space a distance not to exceed ten feet (10') for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right
of way over any person driving or attempting to drive any other vehicle directly into the limited curb parking space or who in any manner obstructs the
limited curb parking space, and the driver of the other vehicle shall yield the right of way to the driver who first arrived at the parking space. (Ord. 659,
3-13-1967)
ARTICLE A. PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES
8-5A-1: STATE VEHICLE CODE PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article are expressly enacted under the State Constitution, article XI, section 11 together with provisions of the California Vehicle
Code, as amended. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 191/581
For the purpose of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
DWELLING UNIT: Any self-contained house, apartment, stock cooperative, condominium or accessory dwelling unit occupied solely for residential
purposes.
PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONE: A residential area with streets and boundaries designated by the City Council wherein vehicles displaying a permit
shall be exempt from parking restrictions established by this article.
RESIDENT: Any person who lives in a dwelling unit located in a preferential parking zone.
VISITOR: A person visiting residents living in a dwelling unit in a preferential parking zone. (Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017)
8-5A-3: DESIGNATION OF PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES:
The City Council may, after a recommendation of the Traffic Engineer, designate by resolution those areas satisfying the criteria established in section 8-
5A-4 of this article as preferential parking zones. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-4: DESIGNATION CRITERIA:
The criteria referred to in section 8-5A-3 of this article shall be based upon the following considerations established to the satisfaction of the Council:
A. Regular Interference: That "nonresident vehicles", defined as those vehicles owned and/or operated by persons who are not "residents" as defined in
section 8-5A-2 of this article, do or may substantially and regularly interfere with the use of the majority of available public street or alley parking spaces
in the proposed zone by adjacent residents;
B. Regular Intervals: That the interference by the nonresident vehicles referred to in subsection A of this section occurs in the proposed zone at regular
and significant daily or weekly intervals;
C. Noise: That the nonresident vehicles parked in the area of the proposed zone cause or are the source of unreasonable noise, traffic hazards,
environmental pollution, or devaluation of real property in the area of the proposed zone; and
D. Shortage Of Parking Spaces: That a shortage of reasonably available and convenient residential related parking spaces exists in the area of the
proposed zone. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-5: DESIGNATION PROCESS:
A. Petition Of Residents: Upon receipt and verification of a petition signed by residents living in fifty five percent (55%) of the dwelling units of the area
proposed for designation, or upon adoption of a motion by the City Council, the Traffic Engineer shall undertake such surveys or studies as are deemed
necessary to determine whether the area should be designated a preferential parking zone and shall report his findings to the Council.
B. Notify Affected Residents: Where a preferential parking zone is requested by the resident petition process, the residents requesting the designation
shall notify all affected residents prior to the presentation of the petition and shall present verification of such notification to the Traffic Engineer. (Ord.
1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-6: DISSOLUTION PROCESS:
Proceedings to dissolve a preferential parking zone shall be initiated upon receipt and verification of a petition signed by residents living in fifty five percent
(55%) of the dwelling units within the preferential parking zone or upon adoption of a resolution by the City Council. A dissolution shall be accomplished by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-7: PERMITS:
A. Issuance And Fees:
1. The Director of Public Works shall issue permits for preferential parking and the Director of Finance shall collect all fees.
2. Applicants shall present proof that they reside in a dwelling unit in a preferential parking zone, and proof that the vehicle for which a permit is sought
is registered at the same address as the applicant.
3. Applicants requesting more than three (3) permits for a dwelling unit may be granted additional permits by the Director of Public Works upon
showing that there are more than three (3) vehicles registered at the dwelling unit, and that sufficient off street parking is not available to the
applicant, and that to deny such additional permits would constitute a hardship.
4. Permit fees shall cover the cost of establishing and maintaining the preferential parking zone. The permit fees shall be set by City Council resolution
at the time a preferential parking zone is designated. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 192/581
B. Duration: Preferential parking permits issued pursuant to this section are effective for a period of two (2) years and any additional fraction thereof, and
may be renewed for a period of two (2) years, as long as the permit holder continues to reside in the dwelling unit, or until the preferential parking zone
for which the permit was issued is dissolved, whichever period of time is less. (Ord. 1507, 6-16-2015)
C. Visitor Permits: Any resident may purchase two (2) visitor permits per dwelling unit. Each such permit shall have a permit number imprinted on it which
corresponds to the address of the permit holder.
D. Availability Of Parking: A preferential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on street parking space within the
designated preferential parking zone.
E. Restrictions And Conditions: Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to each and every condition and restriction set forth in this
article and as further provided by resolution establishing the preferential parking zone for which it was issued. The issuance of such permit shall not be
construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of any provision of this code or any other law or regulation. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The following vehicles shall be exempt from parking restrictions pursuant to this article:
A. Utility: A vehicle owned or operated by a utility whether privately or publicly owned, when used in the course of business.
B. Governmental Agency: A vehicle owned or operated by a governmental agency when used in the course of official government business.
C. Highway Patrol: A vehicle for which an authorized emergency vehicle permit has been issued by the commissioner of the California highway patrol
when used in the course of business. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-9: AUTHORITY OF CITY STAFF:
A. Implement Program: The director of public works shall promulgate rules and administer policies designated to implement this program, including the
posting of traffic regulation signs on streets designated as preferential parking zones. These rules shall be submitted to and approved by the city
council.
B. Collection Of Fees: The director of finance shall promulgate rules and administer policies designated to implement the collection of fees for the
preferential parking permit system set forth herein. These rules shall be submitted to and approved by the city council.
C. Enforcement: The police chief shall have the authority to enforce violations of this article. (Ord. 1076, 11-5-1985)
8-5A-10: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Display Of Permit: On Monday through Friday, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M., and between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M., no vehicle shall be parked or stopped adjacent to any curb in a preferential parking zone in
violation of any posted prohibition or restriction, unless such vehicle shall have prominently displayed a duly issued permit on or by the left rear portion
of the rear bumper; or a visitor permit or special event permit to be displayed on the driver side dashboard.
B. Falsify Or Sell Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to forge, falsify, sell, rent, or lease, or cause to be forged, falsified, sold, rented, or leased for
any value or consideration any preferential parking permit.
C. Illegal Acquisition: It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any preferential parking permit, except as provided for
in this article. (Ord. 1206, 10-5-1993)
ARTICLE B. SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS
8-5B-1: TWENTY MINUTE PARKING:
A. Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day except Sundays.
B. When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. (Ord.
659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-2: FORTY MINUTE PARKING:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 193/581
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except
Sundays for a period of time longer than forty (40) minutes. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-3: ONE HOUR PARKING:
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except
Sundays for a period of time longer than one hour. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-4: TWO HOUR PARKING:
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except
Sundays for a period of time longer than two (2) hours. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-5: PARALLEL PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS:
A. Parallel Parking Allowed: Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches (18") of the left
hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting stopping or standing.
B. Sign Permitting Required: In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon the roadway,
no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting standing or parking.
C. Determine When Prohibited: The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left hand side of
any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two (2) or more
separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.
D. Exception: The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the
process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case the vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided; that, the vehicle does not extend
beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-6: DIAGONAL PARKING:
A. Manner Of Parking: On any of the streets or portions of streets and city owned parking lots and property established by resolution of the city council as
diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park
the vehicle except:
1. At the angle to the curb or bumper block or front limit painted line indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and
entirely within the limits of the allotted space;
2. With the front wheel nearest the curb or bumper block or front limit painted line within six inches (6") of the curb or bumper block or front limit painted
line.
B. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply when the vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight
or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in section 8-5B-5 of this article shall be complied with. (Ord. 1055, 9-6-1983)
8-5B-7: PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle or its trailer, having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of eleven thousand
(11,000) pounds for more for more than five (5) hours on any public street where a majority of the buildings situated on the property contiguous thereto are
used for residential purposes except:
A. With respect to any commercial vehicle making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on
the restricted streets or highways; or
B. With respect to any commercial vehicle delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any
building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways. (Ord. 1190, 12-15-1992)
8-5B-8: PARKING ON CITY PROPERTY:
A. Authority: Whenever the city manager determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on
city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city manager shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating
that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 194/581
B. Compliance: When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the direction or provisions of the signs. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5B-9: PARKING IN CITY OWNED PUBLIC PARKING LOTS:
No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle or its trailer, or any recreational vehicle or motor home having a manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating of eleven thousand (11,000) pounds or more, for more than five (5) hours on any city owned public parking lot. (Ord. 1190, 12-15-
1992)
8-5B-10: CORDS ASSOCIATED WITH OVERSIZED VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS ON PUBLIC
STREETS:
No person may run electrical cords, extension cords, hoses, cables, wires or other similar items across, above or on the parkway or sidewalk from a
residential or commercial property to an oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer parked on a public street or highway. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
ARTICLE C. LOADING AND UNLOADING
8-5C-1: DETERMINATION AND MARKING OF LOADING ZONES:
A. Determination: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
1. At any place in any business district;
2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
B. Limited Area: In no event shall more than one-half (1/2) of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
C. Loading Zones; Yellow: Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within the zones.
D. Passenger Loading Zones; White: Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones. (Ord. 659, 3-13-
1967)
8-5C-2: CURB MARKINGS:
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this Article, to place, and when required herein shall place the
following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth.
A. Red: "Red" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the California Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop
in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
B. Yellow: "Yellow" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except
Sunday for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not
consume more that three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes.
C. White: "White" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or for the purpose of
depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three (3) minutes, and the restrictions shall apply between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sunday and except as follows:
1. When the zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times.
2. When the zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when the theater is closed.
D. Blue: "Blue" indicates parking limited exclusively to vehicles which bear a special license or display a special placard issued under sections 9105 or
22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code.
E. Compliance: When the City Traffic Engineer, as authorized under this Article, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle adjacent to the legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 945, 12-6-1977)
8-5C-3: RESTRICTIONS AND TIME LIMITS:
A. Commercial Vehicles; Time Limit: Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only
to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 195/581
B. Commercial And Mail Deliveries: The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express
and parcel post packages and United States mail.
C. Passenger Loading And Unloading: Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading
or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.
D. Enforcement: Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this Section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and
reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-4: YELLOW LOADING ZONES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such
time as is permitted in Section 8-5C-2 of this Article. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-5: PASSENGER LOADING ZONES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such
time as is specified in Section 8-5C-2 of this Article. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-6: ALLEYS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley and in no case shall
block an alley to through traffic. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5C-7: BUS ZONES ESTABLISHED:
A. Authority: The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common
carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.
B. Area: Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
ARTICLE D. SPECIAL STOPS
8-5D-1: SIGN PLACEMENT:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which
vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City Traffic
Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other
intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained
at any entrance to an intersection when the entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be
placed as provided in, the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5D-2: STOP AT THROUGH STREETS OR STOP SIGNS:
A. Through Streets: Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes
of this Article.
B. Intersections: The provisions of this Section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as the entrances and intersections are
established by resolution of the Council.
C. Railroad Grade Crossings: The provisions of this Section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the
Council. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-5D-3: EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk
area extending across any alley way or driveway. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
ARTICLE E. PERMIT PARKING
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 196/581
8-5E-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California Vehicle Code section 22507, and any successor statute or regulation, to allow
permit parking in specified areas within the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
article:
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrative services director, or designee.
PERMIT STALL: A parking stall reserved for persons possessing a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this article.
SPECIFIED AREA: Locations within the city's jurisdiction designated by city council resolution as parking permit areas. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-3: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The time limitations on standing or parking in this code will not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the
California Vehicle Code or this code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-
2003)
8-5E-4: APPEALS:
Every person who is issued a notice of parking violation pursuant to this article may request review of that notice under California Vehicle Code section
40215 et seq. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-5: PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Time: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle on any street or structure in a
specified area for more than two (2) hours between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Monday through Friday, inclusive,
holidays excepted.
B. Parking Or Standing Vehicles: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle on any
street or structure in a specified area designated as "permit only" parking.
C. Exceptions: This section does not apply:
1. To any person parking in a permit stall who possesses a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this article;
2. To any person holding a valid handicap permit issued pursuant to this code or the California Vehicle Code; or
3. To any public emergency vehicle. (Ord. 1426, 2-17-2009)
8-5E-6: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to falsely represent themselves as eligible for a parking permit under this article or to furnish false information in an
application for a parking permit.
B. It is unlawful for any person to copy, produce, or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit.
C. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit, with intent to evade prohibitions or limitations on
parking in a specified area. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-7: PARKING PERMITS:
A. Persons holding a valid permit issued pursuant to this article may park a vehicle in a permit stall regardless of the time restrictions set forth above.
B. The administrator is authorized to issue parking permits pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-8: PARKING PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every person seeking a parking permit must file an application with the administrator containing the following:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 197/581
A. The applicant's name, address and phone number;
B. Additional information the administrator may reasonably require;
C. The applicant must sign an application under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-9: FEES:
A. Applicants for permits issued pursuant to this article must pay to the city a fee in an amount established by city council resolution.
B. Failure to pay the fee in accord with city council resolution, or policies and procedures promulgated by the administrator, results in the automatic
termination of a parking permit issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-10: ISSUANCE:
A. The administrator must issue a permit if:
1. The application was complete in accordance with this article;
2. The applicant paid all fees for the parking permit;
3. There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
4. The applicant accepts the permit in writing.
B. Use of any permit issued pursuant to this article must conform to the general permit conditions of this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-11: DURATION:
Parking permits are valid for ninety (90) days, six (6) months, or one year. Upon expiration, the applicant may apply for and be granted additional parking
permits if the applicant still qualifies under the conditions set forth in this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-12: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit must be denied if the administrator finds that:
A. The applicant is not a bona fide city resident or person employed by a business located within the city's jurisdiction;
B. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
C. The number of permits issued exceed the number of permit stalls available for use by permittees; or
D. The applicant violated any provision of this article. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-13: PERMIT FORM:
Permits issued pursuant to this article must be in a form prescribed by the administrator and will include the date of issuance and expiration date. (Ord.
1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-14: DISPLAY:
All permits must be placed so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of the vehicle. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-15: TRANSFERABILITY:
Permits issued pursuant to this article may not be transferred to persons other than an applicant's bona fide employee. Any transfer of a permit in violation
of this article renders the permit void. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
8-5E-16: NOTICE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 198/581
Signs giving reasonable notice of the prohibitions contained in this article must be erected within the specified areas as required by the California Vehicle
Code. (Ord. 1369, 11-18-2003)
ARTICLE F. CARSHARING PERMITS
8-5F-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California Vehicle Code section 22507.1, and any successor statute or regulation, in order
to regulate parking of vehicles participating in a carsharing program within the city's jurisdiction. The regulations enacted by this article are intended to
protect public health and safety by, among other things, facilitating the public's use of shared vehicles and reducing the impact of greenhouse gases and
traffic congestion. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
article:
CARSHARE BUSINESS: A public or private entity owning at least one hundred fifty (150) motor vehicles operating a carsharing program.
CARSHARE VEHICLE: A vehicle participating in a carsharing program and registered with a carshare business.
CARSHARING PROGRAM: A service operated by a carshare business that rents at least one hundred fifty (150) carshare vehicles that serve the city on
an hourly or daily rental rate and that has entered into an agreement with the city authorized by the city council. Vehicles must be allowed to be dropped
off and picked up at a minimum of twenty five (25) different locations in the city. The twenty five (25) locations must be on separate parcels of property or
be comprised of at least twenty five (25) public parking spaces. (Ord. 1495, 7-1-2014)
8-5F-3: ADMINISTRATION:
A. The police chief, or designee, is authorized to issue carsharing parking permits and permits pursuant to this article.
B. The city manager is authorized to promulgate administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations set forth in this article. (Ord.
1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-4: CARSHARING PARKING PERMITS:
A. Carshare vehicles with a valid permit issued pursuant to this article may be parked in all valid parking areas within the city notwithstanding time
restrictions for such areas established by this code or other applicable law including, without limitation, section 8-5-6 of this chapter or resolution 4162,
adopted May 16, 2000, as amended.
B. Nothing in this section authorizes carshare vehicles to park in areas where standing or parking is prohibited for some or certain times as identified by
this code or other applicable law including, without limitation, section 8-5-3 of this chapter or resolution 4162, adopted May 16, 2000, as amended.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-5: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The permissions for standing or parking carshare vehicles in this article do not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions of the California Vehicle Code or this code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-6: PARKING PERMITS; APPLICATION:
Every person desiring a carsharing parking permit must file an application with the police chief, or designee, containing the following:
A. The name, address and phone number of the carshare business;
B. The license number, make and model of designated carshare vehicles;
C. Additional information the police chief, or designee, may reasonably require;
D. The applicant must sign an application under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-7: FEES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 199/581
Unless otherwise provided by city council resolution, applications for carsharing permits may be submitted without charge. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-8: ISSUANCE:
A. The police chief will issue a permit if:
1. The application was complete in accordance with this article;
2. There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
3. The applicant accepts the permit in writing.
B. Use of any permit issued pursuant to this article will conform to the general permit conditions of this article. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-9: DURATION:
Carsharing parking permits are valid for a period of twelve (12) months, and may be renewed, if the applicant continues to meet the qualifications therefor.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-10: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit must be denied if the police chief finds that:
A. An applicant is not qualified to obtain a permit pursuant to this article; or
B. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-11: PERMIT FORM:
Permits issued pursuant to this article will be in a form prescribed by the police chief and should, at the police chief's discretion, include the license plate
number of the carshare vehicle to which it relates, and the date of issuance and the day of expiration. (Ord. 1495, 7-1-2014)
8-5F-12: DISPLAY:
All permits will be placed at the lower driver's side of the windshield of the carshare vehicle to which it relates so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of
the carshare vehicle. (Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
8-5F-13: NOTICE:
If required by law, signs giving reasonable notice of the provisions of this article will be erected within the city as required by the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 1478, 4-2-2013)
ARTICLE G. OVERSIZED VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND TRAILER PERMIT
PARKING
8-5G-1: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers, California constitution article XI, section 11 and California Vehicle Code sections 22507 and
22507.5, and any successor statute or regulation, to allow permit parking in specified areas within the city's jurisdiction. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-2: PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Public Streets And Highways: No person may park or leave standing any trailer, recreational vehicle or oversized vehicle on any public street or
highway in the city between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. through six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
B. Intersections: No person may park or leave standing any trailer, recreational vehicle or oversized vehicle on any public street or highway in the city
within twenty five feet (25') of any intersection.
C. Exceptions: The prohibition stated in subsection A of this section does not apply:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 200/581
1. To any trailer, recreational vehicle or oversized vehicle for which a valid oversized vehicle parking permit has been issued and is properly displayed,
in accordance with this article.
2. To any vehicle for which a valid oversized vehicle handicap parking permit has been issued and is properly displayed, in accordance with this article.
3. To any oversized vehicle or trailer for which an encroachment permit has been duly issued by the city.
4. To any trailers, recreational vehicles or oversized vehicles parked or left standing as a result of a mechanical breakdown so as to allow the
performance of emergency repairs on the vehicle for a period not to exceed twenty four (24) hours.
5. To any commercial vehicles making pick ups or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise, or while providing services to a residence, including, but
not limited to, yard maintenance, pool care and maintenance, repair and construction services.
6. To any tow trucks and similar vehicles that are in the course of providing services.
7. To any public or utility vehicles and trailers that are in the course of providing services.
8. To any motor coach or bus that is operated by a common carrier of passengers for hire that is associated with a hotel in the city and is parked
adjacent to the hotel.
9. To any public emergency vehicle.
10. During any state of emergency declared by the city council to exist within the city of El Segundo. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-3: OVERSIZED VEHICLE RESIDENT REGISTRATION PROGRAM:
The purpose of the oversized vehicle resident registration program is to have an index of all oversized vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers that are
owned by residents and parked within the city. The onetime registration is valid for the life of the vehicle and is signified by a sticker that is issued by the
police department. Registration alone does not allow an oversized vehicle, recreation vehicle or trailer to park at all times on city public streets or
highways. Rather, once such a vehicle has been registered with the city, the owner may apply for oversized vehicle parking permits pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-4: REGISTRATION OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OR TRAILERS:
A. Each person registering an oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer with the city must file with the police department a completed application
containing the following:
1. The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner of designated oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer;
2. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant for the permit;
3. Proof of residency, which must be current and must include the following: California driver's license or California identification card and one of the
following: property tax bill or public utility bill (telephone bills are not acceptable).
4. The registration from the California department of motor vehicles for the oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer that shows the oversized
vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer is registered to a resident of the city of El Segundo;
5. The license number, make, and model of designated oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer; and
6. Any additional information the police department may require.
B. The applicant must sign the application under penalty of perjury.
C. The applicant must pay any applicable fees in an amount set by city council resolution.
D. The police chief or designee must issue an oversized vehicle resident registration sticker to each person who submits a completed application, pays the
registration fee set by city council resolution, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. The registration sticker must be issued within ten
(10) working days from the date all requirements have been met.
E. The oversized vehicle resident registration sticker must be displayed on the left side of the rear bumper of the oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or
trailer that has been registered with the city. The sticker must be displayed in a manner so that it is clearly visible from the street. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-
2017)
8-5G-5: OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS:
A. The purpose of the oversized vehicle parking permits is to give owners of oversized vehicles, recreational vehicles and trailers the opportunity, for a
limited time, to park the oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer on a public street or highway adjacent to their residence, and to allow an out of
town visitor who owns an oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer to park on a public street or highway adjacent to the residence which the out
of town visitor is visiting for a limited time period. For purposes of this article, the phrase "adjacent to the residence" means as close as practicable to
the residence, but no more than four hundred feet (400') from the residence.
B. A duly issued oversized vehicle parking permit only allows an otherwise prohibited vehicle to lawfully park on a city street or highway from two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. for two (2) consecutive days. The permit does not allow the vehicle or trailer to be parked in an otherwise unlawful
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 201/581
manner. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-6: OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
A. Each person who seeks an oversized vehicle parking permit for an oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer that is currently registered with the
city must:
1. Have registered their oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer and permanently affixed the oversized vehicle residential sticker to their vehicle
or trailer in conformance with section 8-5G-4 of this article.
2. File with the police department a completed application form containing the following:
a. The dates for which the permit is requested;
b. The dates and duration of any and all oversized vehicle parking permits issued to the applicant within the immediately preceding ninety (90) day
period;
c. Any additional information the police department may require.
3. Pay any applicable permit fee set by city council resolution.
B. Each person who seeks an oversized vehicle parking permit for an oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer that is not currently registered with
the city must:
1. Be a guest of a resident of the city, and not a resident of the city.
2. File with the police department a completed application form containing the following:
a. The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner of designated oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer;
b. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant for the permit;
c. The registration from the California department of motor vehicles, or equivalent agency in another state, for the oversized vehicle, recreational
vehicle or trailer;
d. The name, address, and phone number of the resident that is being visited;
e. The license plate number, make, and model of designated oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer;
f. The dates for which the permit is requested;
g. The dates and duration of any and all oversized vehicle parking permits issued to the applicant during the current calendar year;
h. The dates and duration of any and all oversized vehicle parking permits issued to the resident being visited during the current calendar year; and
i. Additional information the police department may require.
3. Sign the application under penalty of perjury.
4. Pay any applicable permit fee set by city council resolution.
C. The police chief or designee must issue an oversized vehicle parking permit to each person who submits a completed application, pays the registration
fee set by city council resolution, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. Oversized vehicle parking permit(s) must be issued within two
(2) working days from the date all requirements have been met.
D. Oversized vehicle parking permits issued by the police chief or designee must include the license plate number of the designated oversized vehicle,
recreational vehicle or trailer, the date of issuance, and the day of its expiration.
E. Permits must be displayed in the vehicle for which it has been issued. The permit must be affixed on the lower driver's side of the windshield or the
driver's window so that it is clearly visible from the street and from the exterior of the vehicle. For those vehicles without windows, such as a trailer,
permits must be displayed on the side of the trailer so that it is clearly visible from the street, which is usually the left side of the trailer. (Ord. 1523, 2-
21-2017)
8-5G-7: OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS; DURATION:
A. For an oversized vehicle parking permit that is issued for a registered vehicle pursuant to subsection 8-5G-6A of this article, the permit is valid for two
(2) consecutive days. An oversized vehicle parking permit will allow an otherwise prohibited vehicle to lawfully park on a city street or highway from two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. one day and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day. Upon expiration of the
permit, the applicant may apply for and be granted additional oversized vehicle parking permits if the applicant still qualifies under the conditions set
forth in this article. An applicant may request no more than two (2) consecutive oversized vehicle parking permits (to allow an otherwise prohibited
vehicle to lawfully park on a city street or highway from 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. for 4 consecutive days) at one time. An applicant may request no more
than twelve (12) 2-day oversized vehicle parking permits per quarter. A "quarter" for purposes of this section is January through March, April through
June, July through September, and October through December of each calendar year.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 202/581
B. For an oversized vehicle parking permit that is issued for a vehicle that is not registered pursuant to subsection 8-5G-6B of this article, the permit is
valid for two (2) consecutive days. An oversized vehicle parking permit will allow an otherwise prohibited vehicle to lawfully park on a city street or
highway from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. one day and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day. Upon
expiration of the permit, the applicant may apply for and be granted additional oversized vehicle parking permits if the applicant still qualifies under the
conditions set forth in this article. The oversized vehicle parking permit must be associated with the residence being visited. An applicant may request
no more than two (2) oversized vehicle parking permits (to allow an otherwise prohibited vehicle to park from 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. for 4 consecutive
days) at one time. An applicant may request no more than twelve (12) 2-day permits per quarter and no more than forty eight (48) of such permits per
calendar year. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-8: OVERSIZED VEHICLE HANDICAP PARKING PERMITS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of authorizing the issuance of oversized vehicle handicap parking permits is to allow a handicapped person to park a designated
oversized vehicle on a street/highway directly in front of (or the side of the property if it is a corner lot) their residence.
B. Requirements: In order to be eligible to receive an oversized vehicle handicap parking permit, both of the following requirements must be met:
1. The applicant must be entitled to receive a handicapped placard or license plate pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code;
2. The oversized vehicle is the only vehicle owned by the resident and is required to meet the daily transportation needs of the resident. (Ord. 1523, 2-
21-2017)
8-5G-9: OVERSIZED VEHICLE HANDICAP PARKING PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
A. Each person desiring an oversized vehicle handicap parking permit must:
1. Have registered their oversized vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer and permanently affixed the oversized vehicle residential sticker to their vehicle
in conformance with this article.
2. File with the police department a completed city application form containing the following:
a. The name, address, and phone number of the registered owner and applicant of designated oversized vehicle;
b. The license number, make, and model of designated oversized vehicle;
c. The year for which the permit is requested;
d. The years of any and all previous oversized vehicle handicap parking permits issued to the applicant;
e. Additional information the police department may require.
3. Sign the application under penalty of perjury.
B. The police chief or designee must issue an oversized vehicle handicap parking permit to each person who submits a completed application and
otherwise meets the requirements of this article. Oversized vehicle handicap parking permit(s) must be issued within ten (10) working days from the
date all requirements have been met.
C. Oversized vehicle handicap parking permits issued by the police chief or designee must include the license plate number of the designated oversized
vehicle, the date of issuance and the day of its expiration.
D. Oversized vehicle handicap permits must be issued without any fees.
E. Permits must be displayed in the vehicle for which it has been issued. The permit must be affixed on the lower driver's side of the windshield or the
driver's window so that it is clearly visible from the street and from the exterior of the vehicle. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-10: OVERSIZED VEHICLE HANDICAP PARKING PERMITS; DURATION:
Oversized vehicle handicap parking permits are valid for a period of one year, so long as the permit holder meets the requirements of this section relating
to such permits. Permits may be renewed on an annual basis. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-11: PERMIT DENIAL:
A. An oversized vehicle parking permit or an oversized vehicle handicap parking permit must be denied if the police chief or designee finds that:
1. The applicant or the person the applicant is visiting is not a bona fide city resident;
2. The out of town visitor is not a guest of the resident;
3. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false; or
4. If the application is for an oversized vehicle handicap permit, the applicant is not entitled to receive a handicap placard or license plate under the
California Vehicle Code; or the oversized vehicle is not the applicant's only vehicle. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 203/581
8-5G-12: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; REVIEW REQUEST:
A. Unless otherwise specified, any person who violates any provision in this article is guilty of an infraction and will be subject to citation, towing, or both.
B. Every person who displays a fraudulent, forged, altered, or counterfeit oversized vehicle parking permit or permit number with the intent to avoid
compliance with this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Every person who displays a fraudulent, forged, altered, or counterfeit oversized vehicle handicap parking permit or permit number with the intent to
avoid compliance with this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Every person who displays a fraudulent, forged, altered, or counterfeit oversized vehicle resident registration sticker with the intent to avoid compliance
with this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.
E. Every person who forges, alters, or counterfeits an oversized vehicle parking permit, an oversized vehicle handicap parking permit, or an oversized
vehicle resident registration sticker is guilty of a misdemeanor.
F. Every person who is issued a notice of parking violation pursuant to this article may request review of that notice under California Vehicle Code section
40215 et seq. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-2017)
8-5G-13: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
A. The prohibitions in this article apply at all times, or at those times specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other
traffic or to comply with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
B. The time limitations on standing or parking in this article do not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the
California Vehicle Code or this code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
C. Nothing in this article may be construed to permit vehicle habitation on a public street as prohibited by section 7-6-1 of this code. (Ord. 1523, 2-21-
2017)
Chapter 6
PEDESTRIANS
8-6-1: CROSSWALK ESTABLISHMENT:
A. Pedestrian Crossings Indicated: The City Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by
appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the business district and at intersections outside the district, and at other
places within or outside the district where the City Traffic Engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway.
B. Prohibited Crossings: The City Traffic Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians
shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-6-2: CROSSING ROADWAYS:
A. Business Districts: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway in any business district other than at a crosswalk.
B. Crossing Roadway At Right Angle: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest
route to the opposite curb, except in a marked crosswalk. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-6-3: STANDING IN ROADWAY:
No person shall stand, sit or remain in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if the action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This provision
shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or to the employee of any public utility or of any franchise or permit holder holding a franchise or permit
from the City or from any of its authorized officers, when the person is necessarily upon a street and engaged in the performance of his necessary duty
therein, or to licensed surveyors or to members of their respective parties or crews, when actually and necessarily engaged in the performances of their
proper functions. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
8-6-4: OBSTRUCTING FREE PASSAGE OF PEDESTRIANS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 204/581
No person shall stop, stand or sit in or upon any sidewalk area or crosswalk in any manner so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians
thereon, nor shall any person annoy or molest the pedestrians. (Ord. 659, 3-13-1967)
Chapter 7
ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the abatement and removal as public nuisances of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles,
or parts thereof, from private property or public property, not including highways, and to enable the City to recover costs of administration thereof as
authorized by section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended:
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes
street.
OWNER OF LAND: The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
OWNER OF VEHICLE: The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: "Public property" does not include "highway".
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-3: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Exceptions Enumerated: This Chapter shall not apply to:
1. A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property; or
2. A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer, or a junk dealer; or
3. A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is located behind a wall or solid fence, six feet (6') in height and in good repair, which is not plainly visible from a
highway; or
4. A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of an automobile repair
garage; or
5. A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in a carport which serves as required off-street parking
for a residential use.
B. Nuisance Prohibited: Nothing in this Section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other
than chapter 10 (commencing with section 22650) of division 11 of the California Vehicle Code and this Chapter. (Ord. 956, 5-16-1978)
8-7-4: CHAPTER NONEXCLUSIVE:
This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in
addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-5: ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police. In the enforcement of this
Chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the
identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 821, 10-2-
1973)
8-7-6: CONTRACTOR AUTHORIZED TO ACT:
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 205/581
private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord.
821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-7: FIXING ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of any
vehicle or parts thereof under this Chapter. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-8: CHIEF OF POLICE AUTHORIZED TO ACT:
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the City, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed
herein. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-9: NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE:
A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of
the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The
notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF
AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of owner of the land)
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Title 8,
Chapter 7 of the El Segundo City Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle registered to , license number , which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Title 8, Chapter 7 of said Code.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this
notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed
to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of
this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Chief of Police within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police
shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a
public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of
a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not
required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement
as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.
Notice mailed (date)
s/
Chief of Police
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF
AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of last registered and legal owner of record of vehicle - notice should be given to both if different)
As last registered and legal owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, and license), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to
Title 8, Chapter 7 of the El Segundo City Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Title 8, Chapter 7 of
said City Code.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this
notice.
As registered and legal owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of
this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the Chief of Police within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police
shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
Notice Mailed (date)
s/
Chief of Police
(Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-10: REQUEST FOR HEARING BY OWNER; CITY ABATEMENT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 206/581
A. Hearing By Police Chief: Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the Chief of Police within ten (10) days after the
mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Chief of Police on the question of abatement and removal
of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the
cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.
B. Denial Of Responsibility: If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land
within such ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing
shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle
is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten
(10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof
as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-11: PUBLIC HEARING; FINAL DETERMINATION:
A. Denial And Reasons: All hearings under this Chapter shall be held before the Chief of Police who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent.
Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the
said private property or public property. The Chief of Police shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in
person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.
B. Conditions Imposed By Police Chief: The Chief of Police may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the
circumstances to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if in his opinion, the
circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Chief of Police may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed
of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order
requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if
available at the site.
C. Landowner Nonliability: If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he
has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Chief of Police shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the
property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.
D. Notify Landowner Of Decision: If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his
land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Chief of Police but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing
of the decision. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-12: APPEAL OF DECISION:
A. File Notice Of Appeal: Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
five (5) days after his decision.
B. Council Action: Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
C. Notice Of Time And Place Of Hearing: The City Clerk shall have written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons
specified in Section 8-7-9 of this Chapter.
D. Conduct Of Hearing: In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
E. Delay Action To Remove Pending Hearing: No action shall be taken to remove, destroy or dispose of any vehicle or parts thereof during the pendency
of an appeal from the decision of the Chief of Police to the City Council pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 956, 5-16-1978)
8-7-13: TIME FOR DISPOSAL:
Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, or five (5) days from the date of mailing of notice of
the decision if such notice is required by Section 8-7-11 of this Chapter, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal
following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been
removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-14: NOTICE TO STATE DMV:
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the State Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available,
including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
8-7-15: UNPAID COSTS; ASSESSMENTS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 207/581
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8-7-11 of this Chapter are
not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of
land pursuant to section 38773.5 of the California Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have
the same priority as other City taxes. (Ord. 821, 10-2-1973)
Chapter 8
USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS OF WAY FOR EVENTS
General
8-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California Vehicle Code section 21101(e), and any succeeding statute, for the purpose of
regulating parades, athletic events, block parties and public assemblies on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public rights of way that
obstruct, delay or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic, or which do not comply with applicable traffic laws or controls.
(Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
ATHLETIC EVENT: Any event where a group of persons collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise on or within a city street, parking facility,
sidewalk, or other public right of way, including, without limitation, jogging, running, walking, racing, bicycling, rollerblading, and rollerskating.
BLOCK PARTY: A noncommercial social gathering on a local, not arterial or collector, street or area requiring partial or complete street closure to vehicular
traffic and use of the street for the festival.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager or designee.
DIRECTOR: The city of El Segundo's director of recreation and parks, or designee.
EVENT: Any parade, athletic event, block party or public assembly that may require partial or complete street closure to vehicular traffic and use of the
street for the event.
FREE SPEECH: Activity protected by the first amendment of the United States constitution and/or article 1, section 2 of the California constitution provided
that such activity is a significant part of the event.
GROUP: Two (2) or more individuals.
IN WRITING: Telegram, facsimile or any other written document.
PARADE: Any organized march or organized procession of animals, vehicles or persons on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public
right of way.
PERMITTEE: A person or entity to which the city issues a permit pursuant to this chapter.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any group of people participating in an organized activity on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of
way, other than a group of people participating in an athletic event, block party or parade.
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER: Has the same definition as set forth in Government Code section 3301, and any successor statute. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-3: ADMINISTRATION BY DIRECTOR:
The director will receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise implement this chapter according to the procedures herein. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-
2003)
8-8-4: NOTICES:
A. Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant/permittee be served with notice, such notice will be deemed served when personally
delivered to such applicant/permittee or five (5) days following deposit in the first class U.S. mail, addressed to such applicant/permittee at the
applicant/permittee's last known address.
B. Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee/applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for such decision. (Ord.
1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 208/581
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor, or knowingly participate in any event on or within any city street, sidewalk, parking facility, or other
public right of way that obstructs or interferes with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or which does not comply with applicable traffic laws
or controls.
B. Activity in subsection A of this section is permissible when a permit for such an event is obtained pursuant to this chapter. A permit is not deemed
issued until the director receives the applicant's written acceptance in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-6: EXCEPTIONS:
A special event permit is not required for a parade consisting of a vehicular funeral procession or wedding procession. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-7: FEES:
A. Established: Except as otherwise provided by federal, state, or local laws, or other city council authorized restrictions, all fees applicable to this chapter
including, without limitation, fees for using public property, will be established by city council resolution.
B. Service Charges: Charges will be imposed for city services provided to a permittee other than public safety and emergency services. Such charges will
be determined by the applicable servicing city department(s) and will be based on the actual cost incurred by the city in providing such services. Such
service charges will include, without limitation, charges for labor, supervision, overhead, administration and the use of any and all city equipment,
supplies, and the like. Additional charges may be imposed to cover the cost of extraordinary permit investigation and staff costs, if the director
determines this necessary.
C. Traffic Control Fee: Permittee will pay the city a fee in an amount equal to the city's total estimated costs for providing all of the personnel and materials,
including, without limitation, public safety personnel, necessary to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular traffic for such event. Such fee will be
paid by the permittee before the director issues a permit. The traffic control fee may be waived by the director for any permit authorizing an event
involving an exercise of free speech rights. Such waiver may be granted only upon a showing of the applicant's inability to pay, which will be supported
by a financial declaration.
D. Fee Waivers: Upon an applicant's request, the director may, but is not required to, seek a fee waiver from the city council for an event. Fees may only
be waived for the following applicants:
1. Nonprofit groups with current internal revenue code 501(c)(3) status or 501(c)(6) status, government agencies, and public schools; or
2. Community service groups or organizations without current internal revenue code 501(c)(3) status or 501(c)(6) status where the city council, by
resolution, determines that the proposed event provides services that meet community needs and it is in the public interest to waive such fees. (Ord.
1362, 6-3-2003)
Administrative Appeals
8-8-8: RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative review of the director's decision pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-9: TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be commenced within five (5) days from the date on which written notice of the director's
decision is served on the applicant/permittee.
B. If the request is untimely, the director may, nevertheless, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-10: COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A request for administrative review will be on a form provided by the director and contain the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person making the request;
B. A description of the decision, determination or order which is the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was made or
issued;
C. A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 209/581
D. Such other information as may be required by the director. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-11: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. Upon request for administrative review being filed, the director will provide a copy of the notice to the city manager within two (2) business days.
B. Upon receiving a request for review from the director, the city manager will review the request and, within ten (10) days of receiving the request notice,
provide the appellant with a written notification that:
1. The director's decision is affirmed;
2. The director's decision is modified;
3. The director's decision is reversed and a permit is issued or issued without special conditions.
C. The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a time and place determined at the city manager's sole discretion.
D. In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any notification to the requester must set forth any modifications of the director's decision. (Ord. 1362, 6-
3-2003)
8-8-12: CITY COUNCIL APPEAL:
Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the city manager's decision to the city council within ten (10) days of that decision as provided
elsewhere in this code or by city policy and procedure. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
Permit Applications
8-8-13: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Permit applications will be filed by an individual.
B. Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the director and, for all events, will contain all of the following information:
1. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person filing the application;
2. If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the organization; and if requested
by the director, written documentation of the authority under which the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;
3. The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the person who will be present during, and responsible for, the event;
4. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone number of any workers to be employed during the event;
5. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone number of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the applicant
is unavailable;
6. The nature of the event;
7. The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the event;
8. The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries;
9. The estimated number of participants in the event;
10. The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and structures that will be used in the event;
11. A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed at the event;
12. The number, size, and material of construction of any signs or banners to be used in the event;
13. The parking requirements for the event;
14. The location of any water, first aid, or comfort stations to be provided at the event;
15. The type and number of any vendors who will sell food, beverages or other goods or services at the event for which a business license is required
by this code; and
16. The type of entertainment. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-14: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR PARADES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 210/581
In addition to the information required in this chapter, every application for a parade will include the following information:
A. The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble;
B. The proposed assembly point for the parade;
C. The proposed parade route;
D. The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade;
E. The estimated duration of the event; and
F. The number, types and size of floats. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-15: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR BLOCK PARTIES:
In addition to the information required by this chapter, every applicant for a block party will include the following information:
A. How many occupied houses are within the proposed block party boundaries;
B. Drawing of the street layout, block party boundaries and proposed barricades; and
C. Petition of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the property owners/residents on the street within the affected area must show their consent in writing. The petition
must clearly state the time, date, place and sponsor of the event. Petitioner information must include name, address, telephone and signature. (Ord.
1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-16: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR:
In addition to the information required in this chapter, applications for all permits authorizing an event will include such supplemental information which the
director may find reasonably necessary, given the nature of the event, in order to determine whether to approve or deny a permit authorizing such event in
the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
Action On Permit Applications
8-8-17: PERMIT APPLICATION; REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS:
A. After an event permit application is filed, the director will immediately forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively "reviewing officers"),
whose departments are affected by the proposed event for their recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without limitation:
1. The fire chief;
2. The police chief; and
3. The public works director.
B. Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers will consider the application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide the director with
written recommendations regarding:
1. Any special conditions for a permit;
2. Whether, based on the scope of the proposed event, a pre-event operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be necessary, the director
will notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting within a reasonable time before the event; and
3. Any additional recommendations.
C. The reviewing officers must complete their review within the time that the director must make a decision on the application. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-18: EVENT TIME REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit authorizing an event will be filed in the director's office at least:
1. Fifty (50) days before the date of such event to ensure administrative review and city council appeals;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 211/581
2. Thirty (30) business days before the date of such event, in which case the opportunity for a city council appeal is deemed waived; or
3. A lesser time period approved by the director provided that there is sufficient time to process the application pursuant to this chapter. Any applicant
submitting an application pursuant to this section less than thirty (30) days before an event is deemed to have waived the administrative review and
city council appeal.
B. Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit authorizing an event will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the
director within fifteen (15) business days after receiving the completed application. Following his/her decision, the director will promptly attempt to notify
the applicant orally, and will provide written notification to the applicant and the city manager.
C. Unless otherwise provided, the applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval must be received by the director within five (5) business
days after the applicant was served with notification of the decision. Failure of affected persons to receive actual notice of an event after permittee has
provided reasonable notice will not invalidate a permit. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-19: BLOCK PARTY TIME REQUIREMENTS:
A. Completed applications for a permit authorizing a block party:
1. Will be filed in the director's office at least fifteen (15) business days before the date of such event or ten (10) business days if the applicant wishes
to waive his/her administrative review rights;
2. Will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the director within seven (7) business days after receiving the application. The director will
promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally and provide written notification to the applicant and city manager.
B. Applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval must be received by the director within five (5) business days after the applicant is
served with notice. Failure to accept the decision or to timely file a request for administrative review will be deemed a withdrawal of the application.
C. If the applicant filed a completed application at least fifteen (15) business days before the event and the permit is denied or conditioned, the applicant
may request an administrative review to the director in writing within three (3) business days of being served with notice of the decision.
D. Applicant will be deemed to have waived his/her administrative review rights should the applicant fail to:
1. Submit a completed application at least fifteen (15) days before the event;
2. Fail to request review of the director's decision.
E. The director's decision is a final determination. There will be no right of city council appeal. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-20: FREE SPEECH EVENT TIME REQUIREMENTS:
A. Completed applications for a permit authorizing a free speech event:
1. Will be filed in the director's office at least two (2) business days before the date of such event to ensure an administrative review. The director may,
but is not required to, accept a completed application less than two (2) business days before an event upon good cause shown. Applications will not
be accepted less than twenty four (24) hours before an event.
2. Will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the director within one business day after receiving the application. The director will promptly
attempt to notify the applicant orally, and provide written notification to the applicant and city manager. Such notice will provide detailed facts and
reasons for any denial or conditional approval.
3. The director will consult with the city attorney's office before denying, or specially conditioning, a permit for a free speech event.
B. Applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval must be received by the director at least twenty four (24) hours before the event. Failure
to accept the director's decision or to timely file an administrative review request will be deemed a withdrawal of the application.
C. The applicant may appeal to the city manager in writing within one business day of either oral or written notification, whichever is first.
D. An administrative hearing will be held at a time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties cannot agree on the time or place, then it will
be held the next business day after the director's decision at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. in the city manager's office. The city manager will issue a decision
orally at the conclusion of the hearing and will also notify the applicant and the director in writing of the city manager's decision. Any notification will
describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision.
E. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There will be no right of city council appeal.
F. Applicant will be deemed to have waived his/her administrative review rights should the applicant fail to:
1. File a completed application at least two (2) days before an event;
2. Seek review of the director's decision; or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 212/581
3. Attend the administrative hearing personally or through an authorized representative. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-21: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A. The director will issue a permit if:
1. The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
2. There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
3. Applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in writing.
B. Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter will conform to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special permit
conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the director to protect public safety or welfare. Such special conditions may include, without limitation,
conditions for controlling pedestrian or vehicle traffic and for protecting public or private property. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-22: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
A. The application is incomplete;
B. The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application information requested by the director;
C. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
D. Applicant seeks approval for an event that is so close in time and location to another event scheduled for the same date as to cause unreasonable
traffic congestion or to overextend public safety or emergency services;
E. The event's time, route, or method will unreasonably interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site or route of the event;
F. The concentration of persons, animals, or vehicles at the event, or at the site of an assembly or disbanding, prevents public safety or emergency
services from reaching areas at or contiguous to the event;
G. The size of the event will overextend public safety or emergency services to the extent that the safety of event participants, attendees, or the remainder
of the city will be seriously jeopardized;
1. This provision does not authorize denying a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit
conditions can be imposed;
H. The event consists of a parade that will not move from its point of origin to its point of termination in four (4) hours or less, or an amount of time
otherwise approved by the director;
I. The location of the event will substantially interfere with construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along the city street,
parking facility, sidewalk or other public right of way to be occupied by the event;
J. The event will occur along a route or location adjacent to a hospital or extended care facility, and the noise created by the event would substantially
disrupt the operation of the hospital or extended care facility or disturb the patients within;
K. The event will occur at a time when a school is in session and along a route or at a location adjacent to the school or a class thereof, and the noise
created by the activities of the event will substantially disrupt the educational activity of such school or class;
L. The decorative material on parade floats is not fire resistive or flame retardant or motorized parade floats and towing apparatus are not provided with
portable fire extinguisher readily accessible to the operator, as provided in the latest adopted edition of the uniform fire code, or any similar provision in
subsequent revisions of such code;
M. The application is not timely submitted and there is insufficient time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the timelines herein. (Ord.
1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-23: ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER:
If the director denies a permit for an event that would be acceptable by changing the event's time, place, or manner, then the director will inform the
applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the alternative time, place, or manner then the director will issue a permit in accordance with
this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 213/581
Permit Conditions
8-8-24: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
Permittee will enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city which will, in part, indemnify city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any liability
arising from permittee's event in a form approved by the city attorney's office. Such agreement will be filed with the director before issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-25: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
A. Insurance Requirements: Permittee will obtain liability insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of California and
having a financial rating in "Best's Insurance Guide" of not less than "A VII". Such insurance will provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for
death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with such event. Such insurance will be based upon the size and
nature of the event, the risks foreseeably involved, and will be in the amount prescribed by city council resolution or city policy. Insurance will name the
city and the city's elected and appointed officials, officers, and employees as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. In addition, such
insurance will be primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to the city and will include a severability of interest (cross
liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability in an amount not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
B. Certificates Of Insurance: A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the city's risk
manager, must be filed with the director not less than five (5) business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before the date of the event
unless the director for good cause waives the filing deadline.
C. Waiver Of Insurance Requirements: The insurance required by this section must be waived by the director for any permit authorizing an event involving
an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-26: NOTICE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS:
The permittee will attempt to notify all affected persons, by any reasonable means, regarding the event's nature, date, and time as specified by the
director. Failure of the permittee to give such notice will not invalidate a permit. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-27: SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A. Grounds For Special Permit Conditions: The director may condition a permit with reasonable requirements concerning the time, place, or manner of
holding such event as necessary to protect the safety of persons and property or to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the site of the
event, provided that these requirements will not be imposed in a manner that will unreasonably restrict the exercise of free speech rights.
B. Conditions Included: Conditions may include, without limitation, the following:
1. Assembly or disbanding area for a parade;
2. Accommodating an event's pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including restricting events to city sidewalks, portions of a city street, parking facility, or
other public right of way;
3. Avoiding substantial interference with public safety and/or emergency service access;
4. The number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures to be displayed or used in the event;
5. Inspection and approval by city personnel of stages, booths, floats and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the event, in order to
ensure that such structures or vehicles are safely constructed and can be safely operated;
6. A cleaning deposit if the event includes using structures, displaying or using horses or other large animals, operation of water stations, food sales,
beverage sales, and/or sale of other goods or services;
7. Provision and use of traffic cones and barricades;
8. Provision and operation of first aid stations or sanitary facilities, including handicap accessible sanitary facilities;
9. Provision and use of garbage containers, and the cleanup and restoration of the site of the event at the termination of the event;
10. Use of sound amplification equipment, and restrictions on the amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of the
event;
11. The manner for providing notice of permit conditions to event participants;
12. Provision and use of emergency services;
13. Alternate sites, times, dates or modes for exercising free speech rights;
14. The manner of which alcohol sales and service, if any, will be conducted and proof of valid ABC license. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-28: SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 214/581
A. Grounds For Special Permit Subsequent Conditions: The director may condition previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts not
previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
B. Notice Of Special Permit Subsequent Conditions: Should subsequent conditions be required, the director will serve written notice on the permittee of
this decision. When acting upon information obtained twenty four (24) hours before an event, the director may orally inform the permittee, and city
personnel overseeing the event, of the new conditions.
C. Administrative Review By City Manager: Except where otherwise provided, a permittee may seek administrative review of imposition of subsequent
conditions to the city manager as provided in this chapter. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There will be no right of city council
appeal.
D. Hearing: Except where otherwise provided, an applicant conducting a free speech event may appeal the decision to impose subsequent conditions
through a hearing before the city manager. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There will be no right of city council appeal.
1. An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing provided the applicant appeals the director's decision within twenty four (24) hours of receiving notice
of such conditions and the event's purpose is for free speech.
2. The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the next business day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The city manager will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and will also notify the applicant and the director in writing
of the city manager's decision. Any notification will describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
Permit Revocation/Suspension
8-8-29: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A. The director will revoke an event permit upon learning or discovering facts requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
B. The director may revoke an event permit when the permittee or event violates the permit's terms and conditions, or when event participants violate
applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that this subsection will not authorize revoking a permit because of the need to protect participants
from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that the director will not revoke a permit without warning the permittee and allowing him/her to correct
the violation(s) within a reasonable time.
C. If the director revokes a permit before the date of the event, the director will immediately serve written notice of revocation on the permittee and will
provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged with carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If the director revokes a permit on the
day of the event after learning of facts justifying revocation less than twenty four (24) hours before the event commences, the director will announce
such action to the event participants, to those city officers and employees monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the person in charge
of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the event. Written notice will be delivered after such action to the permittee and city manager.
D. An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing before the city manager provided:
1. Applicant Appeal: The applicant appeals the director's decision within forty eight (48) hours of receiving notice of such conditions; and
2. Time Event Is Scheduled: The event is scheduled at least forty eight (48) hours after the hearing time.
3. Hearing: The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed
upon. The city manager will issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and will also notify the applicant and the director in writing of the
city manager's decision.
4. Content Of Notices Of Revocation: Any notification of action, whether oral or written, will describe with particularity the facts and the reasons for the
decision.
E. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There will be no right of city council appeal.
F. The director or city manager can only revoke a permit for a free speech event after consulting with the city attorney's office. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
8-8-30: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF AUTHORIZED EVENT:
The city manager and any sworn public safety officer may temporarily suspend an event whenever there is an emergency that requires such action to
protect public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and event participants will immediately comply with the suspending officer's instructions. The director
will immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and will notify the applicant and the city manager in writing, within twenty four (24) hours after the
suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the suspension. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
Conduct Of A Permitted Event
8-8-31: CORDONING OFF THE ROUTE OR SITE OF AN EVENT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 215/581
The director of public works, or designee, is authorized and directed to establish traffic and crowd control devices on or within the city's streets, parking
facilities, sidewalks, or other public rights of way, and to undertake other actions necessary to cordon off the route or site of an event. In addition, the
director of public works, or director, will, when appropriate, cause the route or site of such event to be posted as a no parking zone for the duration of the
event and sufficiently in advance thereof as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from parking along the route or at the site of the event. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-
2003)
8-8-32: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING AN AUTHORIZED EVENT:
A. Interference With Event: It is unlawful to physically obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by a permit or with any
person, animal or vehicle participating or used in such event.
B. Driving Through The Site Of Parade Or Athletic Event: It is unlawful to drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons traversing the route of a parade or
athletic event authorized by a permit when such vehicles or persons are in motion.
C. Prohibited Parking: It is unlawful to park along or within any portion of the route or site of an event authorized by a permit, when the route or site had
been posted as a no parking zone by the director in the manner authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1362, 6-3-2003)
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
9-1-1: TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE:
The Chief of Police shall have the right, authority and power at any time to close any street or any portion thereof temporarily to vehicular, pedestrian or
other traffic when in the opinion of the Chief of Police the public peace, health or safety requires the temporary closing; provided, however, that in all such
cases, suitable signs shall be conspicuously posted giving notice of the fact that the street or portion thereof is closed, or a police officer or person
designated by the Chief of Police is present thereat for the purpose of giving the notice. No person shall, in case the street or portion thereof is so closed,
enter into or upon the closed portion or drive any vehicle into or upon the same contrary to the notice of the order of the police officer or person so
designated. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as depriving the City Council or Street Superintendent from concurrent power to likewise
temporarily close any street or portion thereof within the City, but the delegation of power to the Traffic Authority herein made shall be construed as in
addition thereto. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 2
EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
9-2-1: WORK IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY; PERMITS, FEES AND DEPOSIT:
A. Permit Required; Fees: Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this Chapter, a permit shall be required for any work or encroachment in the
public right of way, and the permittee shall pay to the City a permit fee, a fee for subdivision plan checks or USA underground alert service, as
applicable. All fees shall be fixed and established by City Council from time to time by resolution.
B. Fees Additional To Deposit Or Bond: The fees shall be in addition to any cash deposit or bond for restoration which the permittee may be required to
make or furnish.
C. Deposit; Inspection Cost; Refund: In addition, permittee will be required to provide a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of inspection and any
unused portion thereof will be refunded to permittee.
D. Failure To Obtain Permit; Permit Fee Double: When work for which a permit is required by this Chapter is started and/or completed prior to obtaining
such permit, a special investigation fee shall be charged which shall be double the normal permit fee for the work. The payment of such double fee
shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the permit. (Ord. 1130, 1-3-1989)
9-2-2: PERMIT ISSUANCE; BOND:
The Street Superintendent shall issue a permit to any person to perform any act referred to in this Chapter when the same is necessary for building or
construction purposes or for the improvement of the street, alley, thoroughfare or place; provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued until the
person has given the City a good and sufficient bond, to be approved by the Street Superintendent indemnifying the City against any damage that may
arise by reason of the performance of any such acts and for any expense incurred by the City in restoring the street, alley, thoroughfare or place to its
proper condition. (Ord. 10, 2-28-1917)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 216/581
9-2-3: PROOF OF INSURANCE:
In addition to the requirement of Section 9-2-2 of this Chapter, no permit shall be issued until the person has provided the Street Superintendent for the
City proof of both general liability and workers' compensation insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance reflecting current insurance policies. The
City shall be named as additional insured under the general liability policy. The certificate of insurance shall provide that thirty (30) days' notice of
cancellation be furnished the City by registered or certified mail. (Ord. 1094, 2-3-1987)
9-2-4: STREET DAMAGE BY MOVING VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to drive, drag, propel or move, or cause to be moved upon any street, alley,
thoroughfare or place with a surface improved or finished by oiling or otherwise within the City, any plow, harrow or cutting or scratching instrument or any
heavy vehicle or machine liable to break the surface of, or do injury to the surface of the street, alley, thoroughfare or place, except in pursuance of a
lawful contract to improve the street, alley, thoroughfare or place, or a permit therefor granted by the City Council at its option in case of urgent necessity.
(Ord. 10, 2-28-1917)
9-2-5: PLANTING VEGETATION:
No person shall place or plant, or cause to be placed or planted, any tree, shrub or bush in any public street, alley, thoroughfare or place within the City,
without obtaining permission from the City Council. The City Council, upon the granting of any permit hereunder, shall specify the manner in which the acts
permitted thereby are to be performed and in case the permit shall be for the planting of trees, the same shall specify the place in which the same are to
be planted, the distance apart, the kind of trees and such other regulations as to the City Council shall seem best. (Ord. 10, 2-28-1917)
9-2-6: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS:
No person shall erect, construct, place, maintain, leave or abandon any building, fence, porch, steps, post, pole, track, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure
in whole, or in part, in or upon any street within the City; and no person shall place, affix, paint, maintain, leave or abandon any sign, placard, notice,
advertisement, seat, bench, table, stand, material or other obstruction in any street within the City, without a special permit in writing to do so first had and
obtained from the Chief of Police or the Street Superintendent or the City Council; provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply:
(Ord. 429, 9-30-1953; amd. 2000 Code)
A. To United States mail boxes;
B. To poles and facilities of public utilities lawfully using the public streets of the City;
C. To portable and usual garbage and rubbish receptacles when conforming to and placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the City; and
D. To notices, placards, posters or any of the other articles or means above mentioned or referred to, erected or placed by any City or other public officer,
official or employee acting within the scope of his office or employment, as a public officer, official or employee. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
9-2-7: EXCAVATING OR INJURING STREETS:
No person shall dig in, excavate, tear up, deface or injure any street without an express written permit to do so first had and obtained from either the
Superintendent of Streets or the City Council, and it is unlawful for any person to violate or permit or cause to be violated any of the terms or conditions
imposed in the permit if and when issued. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
9-2-8: LIGHTS ON OBSTRUCTIONS OR EXCAVATIONS:
No person placing or maintaining any obstruction or making any excavation in any street shall fail or neglect to provide, during the period between sunset
of any day and sunrise of the succeeding day, suitable and adequate lights to warn users of the street of the obstructions or excavations. (Ord. 429, 9-30-
1953)
9-2-9: TORCHES, SIGNS AND BARRIERS:
No person other than an officer or employee of the City and who is at the time acting in the line of employment as the officer or employee, shall handle,
interfere or tamper with, displace, remove, damage or extinguish any torch, light or lantern, whether illuminated or not, or any sign, obstruction or barrier,
when the torch, light, lantern, sign, obstruction or barrier is placed in, on, upon, near or about any excavation, embankment, improvement, cut, fill, earth,
material or flooded area in any public street, road, alley, easement, way or place within the City. (Ord. 429, 9-30-1953)
9-2-10: PERMIT VIOLATION:
Whenever any permit or special permit has been issued by either the Chief of Police, the Street Superintendent or the City Council, under or pursuant to
the provisions of this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person to violate, or cause or permit to be violated, or to fail or refuse to observe or perform any of the
requirements set forth in any of the terms or conditions imposed in the permit or special permit or subject to which the same is authorized or granted. (Ord.
429, 9-30-1953; amd. 2000 Code)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 217/581
Chapter 3
STREET TREES
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to article XI, section 7 of the California constitution for the purpose of enhancing public health, safety, and welfare by
regulating the planting and removal of trees, and other vegetation, located within the city's streets and public rights of way. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
DIRECTOR: The city manager, or designee.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path or any other "public way", as defined by Streets And Highways Code section
18609, and any successor statute.
PUBLIC STREET: Any city street or public right of way including, without limitation, the curb and gutter.
TREES: Collectively means trees, shrubs, and other vegetation. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-3: DIRECTOR'S AUTHORITY:
A. Tree Maintenance: The director may direct the manner in which trees, shrubs, and other vegetation are planted, trimmed, pruned, cut, removed, placed,
and otherwise maintained in and along all public streets.
B. Kind And Spacing Of Trees: The director will identify the type and variety of trees that may be placed in, upon, or along any street or portion thereof and
the distance apart at which such trees will be planted.
C. Improper Planting: Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the director may remove it in accordance with
this chapter. The cost of removal may be charged to the property owner responsible for the planting thereof.
D. Permits: The director will receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise implement this chapter according to the procedures herein.
(Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-4: DIRECTOR'S DUTIES:
A. Planting Trees: The director will cause trees to be planted in, upon, or along the streets of this city in accordance with all applicable laws and encourage
the planting, care, and preservation of all such desirable trees.
B. Records: The director will prepare and maintain all necessary maps, plans, and records relating to the various functions carried on under this chapter.
C. Reports: The director will report to the city council annually on the work and activities carried on under the provisions of this chapter. The director will
also prepare and properly submit all reports required by law in connection with the planting or maintaining of trees on the streets of this city.
D. Pest Control: The director will properly control and remedy, by recognized methods, all insect pests and diseases which, if untreated, may permanently
injure, disfigure, or kill any street tree or trees.
E. Tree Guards: Tree stakes or guards may be placed around trees, providing the same are near the tree for protecting or training such tree and providing
that no hazard to public safety is created.
F. Protection From Injury: No person will pile building material, or other material, around any tree, plant or shrub in a street in such a manner that will in any
way injure the tree.
G. Landscaping Plans: The director will review landscaping plans for proposed developments and may require that trees be planted in any of the streets,
parking lots, and other public places abutting the proposed development in accordance with the city tree policy.
H. Administrative Policies And Procedures: The director is authorized to promulgate administrative policies and procedures to implement this chapter.
(Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-5: TREE REMOVAL OR MAINTENANCE BY DIRECTOR:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 218/581
The director may remove or maintain trees from public streets if the director determines that one or more of the following conditions exist:
A. If a tree is dead, in severe physical decline; or if there is splitting or cracking of major limbs or the tree trunk; or if the tree appears dangerous or
obstructive to public safety or travel.
B. If the tree is incurably infected with a disease which will permanently injure, disfigure, or kill it.
C. If there is a conflict between tree roots and sewer lines when:
1. The street tree is located within ten feet (10') of the sewer lateral;
2. Tree roots are evidenced by photographs and/or physical inspection of the sewer line as verified by the director; and
3. Repair methods that allow sewer line repair/replacement to occur with minimal disruption to the tree are deemed inappropriate by the director.
D. If tree growth resulted in sidewalk, curb, or gutter disruption that cannot be reasonably repaired without removing the tree.
E. If the director determines that a specific tree is an inappropriate species, which was not permitted by the city, or conflicts with the city's tree master plan.
F. When the director determines that tree removal or maintenance is justified to otherwise protect public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-6: TREE REMOVAL OR MAINTENANCE BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
Private persons seeking to remove or maintain a tree from a public street must apply to the director for a tree permit. The director may issue a permit to
such private parties to remove or maintain a tree if all the following apply:
A. Tree removal or maintenance will occur under the direction of a certified arborist and completed by a licensed contractor. Tree removal or maintenance
must adhere to standards issued by the International Society Of Arboriculture;
B. Trees sought to be removed must meet the criteria set forth in this chapter for removal;
C. All removal or maintenance costs are borne by the permittee. A permittee must submit a refundable two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) security deposit
with the city to ensure compliance with this section;
D. A permittee must pay a permit fee to the city in an amount established by city council resolution;
E. A permittee is required to mail notice to homeowners within fifty feet (50') of the tree proposed for removal informing them of the intent and reason for
the removal. The persons have fourteen (14) days to protest the removal to the recreation and parks commission;
F. The permittee complies with all other permit conditions listed in this chapter including, without limitation, entering into a hold harmless agreement with
the city. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-7: PROHIBITIONS:
A. It is unlawful to attach or keep attached to any tree, tree guard, or tree stake located within a street, park, or other public place any wire, rope, sign or
any other matter without first obtaining a tree permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to plant, prune, deface, destroy, or remove or in any manner injure any tree on any street without first obtaining a tree
permit issued in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-8: COST RECOVERY:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, or when tree removal is requested by a permittee, the city will bear the cost of removing trees and other
vegetation under this chapter. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-9: PRIVATE TREES:
If any tree standing on private property, but overhanging or extending into any street, is dead, appears ready to fall, is dangerous or obstructive to public
safety or travel the director will have the tree or parts of it that are dangerous or obstructive, cut down and removed in accordance with the nuisance
abatement proceedings set forth in this code. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 219/581
9-3-10: TREE REPLACEMENT:
Whenever a tree is removed or destroyed pursuant to any tree permit, the permittee must plant another tree, of the kind and size specified in the permit, to
replace the one destroyed or removed, within forty (40) days after the permit was issued. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-11: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
The director may condition a tree permit on the following:
A. That the permittee plant another tree in the place of the one removed or destroyed.
B. That a particular species of tree, as determined by the city's approved street tree list, be used as a replacement. The director will select the species of
tree that may be planted.
C. That the permittee enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city which will, in part, indemnify the city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any
liability arising from the permittee's activities in a form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-12: HOUSE MOVING PERMIT:
No person will move any building or other object along any street in such manner that trees are injured without first obtaining a permit. If deemed
advisable, the director may require any person moving a building or other object into or along a street in this city to furnish a bond in an amount sufficient
to cover the damage to or destruction of trees or shrubs on any street. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-13: IMPROVEMENT APPROVAL:
No improvement will be installed or earth removed which may affect the root system of a street tree, if such improvement or earth removal is to be within
six feet (6') of such street tree, without first obtaining a permit. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-14: PAYMENTS AND CHARGES:
The director, subject to city council approval, will establish charges for obtaining permits under this chapter. Permit charges must be made at the time of
issuance. The charges to be made for a permit are to merely cover costs of investigation, supervision or inspection and may be reestablished periodically.
(Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-15: APPEALS:
The director's decisions in implementing this chapter may be appealed to the recreation and parks commission. A decision of that commission is final.
(Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
9-3-16: TREE TRUST FUND:
All fees, fines, or assessments as defined in this chapter or the tree policy will be deposited in a tree trust fund and reinvested into the city's community
forest. (Ord. 1466, 11-1-2011)
Chapter 4
NEWSRACKS
General Provisions
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted in accordance with California constitution article XI, section 7, for the purpose of establishing uniform regulations for allowing
newsracks to be placed within the public right of way. The city's intent in adopting this chapter is to establish reasonable time, place, and manner
restrictions on the commercial use of public rights of way in order to preserve public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 220/581
ADMINISTRATOR: The city manager or designee.
BLINDER RACK: Any opaque material placed in front of the harmful matter and within the publication vending machine which prevents exposure to public
view.
DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN AREA: The geographical area within the city's jurisdiction identified by the downtown specific plan adopted on or about
August 1, 2000, as amended.
DRIVEWAY: A surfaced area which crosses a sidewalk designed or used for vehicular access between a lot and a public street.
HARMFUL MATTER: Matter which when taken as a whole, predominantly appeals to the prurient interests of the average person, applying contemporary
statewide standards, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and which is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the
adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and lacks significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific
value for minors. When it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for
clearly defined deviant sexual groups, the predominant appeal of the matter must be judged with reference to its intended recipient group.
LOT: Lot has the same meaning as set forth in the zoning regulations of this code.
NEWSRACK: Any self-service coin operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser designed, used or maintained for the display or sale of any
written or printed material, including, without limitation, newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records.
PERMIT: A permit issued to a person pursuant to this chapter allowing a newsrack to be installed within a specifically designated portion of a public right of
way. "Permit" may also include a uniform newsrack permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
PERMITTEE: A person or entity to whom a permit was issued pursuant to this chapter.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path or any other "public way", as defined by California Streets and Highways
Code section 18609, and any successor statute.
PUBLIC STREET: Any city street or public right of way including, without limitation, the curb and gutter.
UNIFORM NEWSRACK: A newsrack of a style, size and color designated by council by resolution for permanent installation. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The administrator is authorized to receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise administer and implement this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-
2003)
9-4-4: PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to install, place or maintain a newsrack or uniform newsrack in any public right of way that violates any provision of this
chapter including, without limitation, failing to obtain a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-5: ENCROACHMENT PERMITS:
Persons who obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter are not required to also obtain an encroachment permit under this code to install newsracks. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-6: NOTICES:
A. Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant/permittee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when personally delivered
to the applicant/permittee; when deposited in first class United States mail, addressed to the applicant/permittee's last known address; or when sent via
facsimile to the applicant/permittee's last known facsimile number.
B. Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee/applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for such decision. (Ord.
1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-7: FEES:
All fees applicable to this chapter are established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
Permits
9-4-8: APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENT:
A. Permit applications must be filed by a natural person in the name of each applicant proposing to obtain a permit.
B. Every application must be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized representative, under penalty of perjury.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 221/581
C. Permit applications, and permits, will be in a form prescribed by the administrator and contain all of the following information:
1. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person filing the application;
2. The proposed location for the newsrack; and
3. Such additional information as the administrator may reasonably require to process the application.
D. Applications must be accompanied by an administrative fee for processing the application. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-9: CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION:
A. Whenever any change occurs in the information contained in the permit, the permittee must give the administrator written notice of the change within
thirty (30) days of the date that the change becomes effective.
B. If a permittee fails to give the administrator timely written notice of a change in the information contained in the application, the administrator may
charge the permittee an additional administrative fee. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-10: TIME FOR REVIEWING APPLICATION:
After receiving a completed application, the administrator must review the application and either issue or deny a permit within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1370,
12-2-2003)
9-4-11: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A. The administrator must issue a permit if:
1. The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
2. There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
3. The applicant accepts the permit in writing.
B. Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform to the permit conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-12: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit can be denied for the following reasons:
A. The application is incomplete;
B. The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application information requested by the administrator;
C. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
D. The application is submitted by a person with a suspended permit or whose permit was revoked; or
E. The application seeks authorization for a newsrack that is prohibited by this code or unlawful under any other local, state, or federal law. (Ord. 1370, 12-
2-2003)
9-4-13: NOTICE OF DENIAL:
Where the administrator denies a permit, the administrator must serve notice to the applicant. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-14: EXPEDITED REVIEW:
Pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8(c), and any successor statute or regulation, the permits under this chapter are designated
for expedited judicial review pursuant to the procedure set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8, or any successor statute or
regulation. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-15: TERM; RENEWAL:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 222/581
Unless suspended or revoked, permits issued pursuant to this chapter have a term of one year. Permits must be renewed not later than thirty (30) days
before they expire in order to be maintained. Should a permit expire, the permittee must comply with this chapter to obtain a new permit. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-
2003)
9-4-16: UNIFORM NEWSRACKS:
A. By resolution, the council may from time to time establish uniform newsrack locations. The council must first hold a public hearing for which notice must
be sent at least fifteen (15) days in advance to all persons requesting notice, or whose name and address appears on an existing newsrack in the
subject location, and after such hearing must find that the location carries a substantial volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, that uniform newsracks
are feasible at the location, and that it is in the public interest for such newsracks.
B. The resolution must describe the location; designate the particular point(s) at that location where uniform newsracks may be installed; specify the
maximum number of uniform newsracks to be allowed at the location; and specify the style, size, color or other attributes required of uniform newsracks
at the location. Such specification should not require uniform newsracks made by any particular manufacturer. The resolution may direct the
administrator to install a kiosk(s), pedestal(s), or other support structure to accommodate a stated number of newsracks.
C. No person may install a uniform newsrack at a uniform newsrack location without first obtaining a uniform newsrack permit from the administrator.
D. Upon the adoption of a resolution by council establishing a uniform newsrack location, interested persons may apply for such permit. The administrator
must hold all such applications for thirty (30) days after the date the resolution was adopted and may then issue all permits applied for up to the
maximum number established, if any, in the resolution.
E. No fee will be charged for the uniform newsrack permit.
F. A uniform newsrack permit will, in addition to all other provisions of this section, be conditioned with all other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1375, 4-
6-2004)
9-4-16-1: PRIORITY SYSTEM FOR UNIFORM NEWSRACK PERMITS:
A. Uniform newsrack permits are determined on a priority system as follows:
1. The administrator will give first priority to newspapers that are adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation in the city of El Segundo in
accordance with Government Code section 6020 et seq., when applicable law requires the city to publish its legal notices in such newspapers.
2. The administrator will give second priority to all other newspapers that are not adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation within the city of
El Segundo.
B. Should there be a conflict between newspapers within the same priority seeking the same uniform newsrack location, and there are insufficient uniform
newsrack locations to accommodate the competing newspapers after first filling as many uniform newsrack locations as possible by utilizing the criteria
set forth above, then the administrator will assign uniform newsrack locations at random by placing the names of all applicants for the remaining
spaces at a uniform newsrack location into a container from which the names will be drawn one at a time until the remaining uniform newsrack
locations are assigned. Such drawing is open to the public at a time and date designated by the administrator.
C. Applications remaining after assignment of all uniform newsrack locations must be denied. Where fewer applications are received than the maximum
number of spaces allowed by the resolution, permits for the remaining spaces may be allotted on a first come, first served basis.
D. Annually, during December, the administrator must use the above criteria for assigning uniform newsrack locations if the priorities of newspapers
change; newsracks are abandoned; or permittees fail to renew a permit. (Ord. 1375, 4-6-2004)
Permit Conditions; Newsrack Regulations
9-4-17: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter have the following general conditions:
A. Permittees must maintain a valid business license issued pursuant to this code.
B. Permittees must pay all fees required by this chapter.
C. Newsracks cannot unreasonably:
1. Interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Interfere with or impede ingress or egress from any residence or place of business located adjacent to a public right of way.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 223/581
3. Interfere with any public utility facility located within the public right of way or in close proximity thereto.
D. Except as otherwise provided, newsracks must be placed within the public right of way.
E. Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city which will, in part, indemnify city, its officers, employees, and agents, from any
liability arising from a permittee's activities in a form approved by the city attorney's office.
F. Permits are not transferable to another person or to another location.
G. The name, address, and telephone number of the permittee must be permanently affixed to newsracks.
H. Each newsrack must have affixed to it in a readily visible place a notice setting forth the name and address of the person responsible for maintaining
the newsrack and a working telephone number to call to report a malfunction, or to obtain a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin return
mechanism.
I. Each newsrack must be maintained in accordance with this code. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-18: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each newsrack must comply with each of the following requirements:
A. Size: No newsrack may exceed five feet (5') in height, thirty inches (30") in width, or two feet (2') in depth.
B. Placement: Newsracks may only be placed in a public right of way near a curb or adjacent to a wall of a building. The rear of newsracks placed near a
curb must be placed not less than eighteen inches (18") nor more than twenty four inches (24") from the face of the curb. The rear of newsracks placed
parallel to a wall or building must be placed not more than six inches (6") from the wall or building. No newsrack may be placed or maintained in a
public right of way opposite one or more newsracks.
C. Groups Of Newsracks: Newsracks may be placed next to each other; provided, that no group of newsracks must extend more than ten feet six inches
(10'6") along a curb or wall and a space of no more or less than three feet (3') must separate each group of newsracks from another group of
newsracks. There may be no more than three (3) of the above described groups of newsracks located on a public right of way within a block.
D. Anchoring: Each newsrack must be securely anchored to the ground or sidewalk.
E. Coin Return Mechanism: Each newsrack must be equipped with a working coin return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to obtain an
immediate refund in the event a person is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin return mechanisms must be maintained in good working
order. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-19: PROHIBITED AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no newsrack may be placed, installed, used or maintained as follows:
A. Within one foot (1') of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees.
B. Within three feet (3') of:
1. The entrance or exit to any building;
2. Any display window in any building abutting a sidewalk or public right of way. No newsrack may be located directly in front of any display window of
any building abutting a public right of way without the written consent of the person or entity legally in occupancy or otherwise in control of the
premises on which the display window is located. Proof of such consent must be included in the permit application. If such consent is withdrawn, any
newsrack placed in front of a display window must be removed within fourteen (14) days of the date of written notice from the city to the owner of
such newsrack.
C. Within five feet (5') of:
1. Any marked crosswalk.
2. The curb return of any intersecting public streets.
3. Any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or any other emergency facility.
4. Any designated bus stop area or any sign marking a designated bus stop.
5. Bus bench.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 224/581
6. Any curb painted blue, pursuant to the provisions of California Vehicle Code section 21458.
D. Within ten feet (10') of any driveway.
E. In any location whereby the clear passage on a sidewalk for pedestrian traffic is reduced to less than five feet (5').
F. Within any public street.
G. Within one hundred feet (100') of a newsrack containing the same edition of the same publication, except where bulk of a particular edition is such that
more than one rack is required, in which case said newsracks must be placed side by side.
H. Within three hundred feet (300') of a uniform newsrack location, except for any period, not to exceed thirty (30) days, during which a uniform newsrack
permit has been granted at the location but the applicant has been unable to obtain a uniform newsrack.
I. Chained or otherwise attached to any fixture. All newsracks must be permanently affixed to the pavement or otherwise anchored to a concrete base.
Newsracks anchored to concrete bases must have a minimum weight of one hundred (100) pounds empty. Uniform newsracks which have been
established and permitted pursuant to this chapter may be permanently affixed to the pavement or authorized support structures as established by city
council resolution.
J. Be used for advertising, selling or storing material other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publication sold therein.
K. No newsrack may remain empty for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-20: MAINTENANCE:
Each newsrack must be maintained in a clean and attractive condition and in good repair at all times, and no issue or edition of any publication may be
allowed to remain in any such newsrack for a period exceeding the publication period of the material offered for sale therein or thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days after the date of the initial issuance or publication of such material, whichever is lesser. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, each newsrack must be reasonably free of dirt and grease; be reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint; be reasonably free
of rust and corrosion; have no broken, cracked, dented, blemished or discolored plastic or glass parts; have no torn, peeling or fading paper or cardboard
parts or inserts; and have no broken or misshapen structural parts. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-21: HARMFUL MATTER:
Pursuant to California Penal Code section 313.1(d), any harmful matter displayed in a public place from which minors are not excluded must be concealed
with blinder racks, so that the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
Appeals
9-4-22: RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative review of the administrator's decisions pursuant to this chapter including, without
limitation, decisions regarding permit denial. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-23: TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be commenced within five (5) days from the date on which written notice of the administrator's
decision is served on the applicant/permittee.
B. If a request is untimely, the administrator may, nevertheless, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown, but in no event may a
request be filed more than thirty (30) days after notice was served. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-24: COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. A request for administrative review must be on a form provided by the administrator and contain the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person making the request;
2. A description of the decision, determination or order which is the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was made
or issued;
3. A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
4. Such other information as may be required by the administrator.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 225/581
B. A request for administrative review must be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined by city council resolution. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-25: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. Upon request for administrative review being filed, the administrator will provide a copy of the notice to the city manager within two (2) business days.
B. Upon receiving a request for review from the administrator, the city manager will review the request and, within ten (10) business days of receiving the
request notice, provide the appellant with a written notification that:
1. The administrator's decision is affirmed;
2. The administrator's decision is modified;
3. The administrator's decision is reversed and a permit is issued. Under such circumstances, the fee collected for an appeal must be returned to the
permittee within thirty (30) days of the city manager's decision.
C. The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a time and place determined at the city manager's sole discretion. In the event of a
hearing, the rules of evidence will not apply. The city manager may consider such evidence as the city manager may deem reliable. The city manager
may adopt such additional reasonable rules of procedure that may facilitate the progression of such a hearing. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-26: CITY MANAGER DECISION FINAL:
The city manager's decision is final. There is no right to appeal a decision to the city council. Any court challenge must be filed within ninety (90) calendar
days of the city manager's decision in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
Enforcement
9-4-27: MINOR VIOLATIONS:
In the case of minor violations of this chapter that can be corrected at the site, any city employee, as an alterative to removing the newsrack, is authorized
to correct the violation summarily. The permittee will bear the cost of any such correction. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-28: NOTICE OF HEARING FOR NEWSRACK REMOVAL:
A. Action To Remove: Upon discovering a newsrack that lacks a permit or otherwise violates this chapter, the administrator may take action to remove
such a newsrack in accordance with this chapter.
B. Written Notice: To initiate proceedings for removing newsracks, the administrator will cause written notice to be mailed and conspicuously posted on the
newsrack. Notice must be titled in letters at least one inch (1") in height and read substantially as follows:
Removal Hearing Notice
On , 20 , the City of El Segundo will determine whether this Newsrack should be removed in accordance with the El Segundo Municipal Code
("ESMC"). If the Newsrack is found to violate the ESMC and is not promptly removed by the owner, then the City may remove it and impound it at the
owner's expense. If the City removes the Newsrack, all costs associated with such removal, impoundment, and storage, must be paid by the owner
before the Newsrack is returned.
The alleged violations consist of the following:
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should attend a hearing to be conducted by the City, to be held at on , at the hour of .m.,
when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration.
Dated:
Administrator
C. Mailing/Posting: Notice of the hearing will be served by posting the newsrack and by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the
newsrack owner. The notice must be posted on the newsrack and mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing date. Proof of posting and mailing
will be by declaration. Failure of any person to receive the notice will not affect the validity of any provision set forth in this chapter.
D. Confirmation: The administrator is not required to wait ten (10) days to proceed if the intent to permanently abandon or vacate a newsrack or uniform
newsrack location is confirmed in writing by the owner of such newsrack. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 226/581
9-4-29: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. The hearing must be conducted by a hearing officer selected by the administrator. At the time set for such hearing, the hearing officer will conduct a
hearing to determine, based upon the evidence presented, whether the newsrack violates this chapter. At the hearing, the hearing officer will accept
reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the issue of whether the newsrack violates this chapter. The hearing officer is authorized
to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations under the Code of Civil Procedure section 2093(a). Based upon the evidence
submitted including, without limitation, any written staff reports regarding alleged violations, the hearing officer will determine whether or not the
newsrack violates this chapter and should be removed.
B. As soon as is practicable following the close of such hearing, the hearing officer will render a decision on the matter. If the newsrack is found to violate
this chapter, the hearing officer will issue an order requiring the newsrack to be removed within a reasonable time and manner as set forth in the order.
The hearing officer will promptly give written notice to the responsible person and any other interested person who requests, in writing, notice of such
decision, including, a copy of the order. The order issued by the hearing officer will be deemed a final order and may be judicially reviewed pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. There is no right to a city council appeal. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-30: COMPLIANCE WITH REMOVAL ORDER:
At no cost to the city, the newsrack will comply with all of the provisions of a removal order. If the newsrack owner fails, for any reason, to comply with a
removal order within the time required in the order, the administrator, will cause the newsrack to be removed and impounded by city forces or by private
contractor. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-31: RECOVERING CITY EXPENSES:
The administrator will keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of removing, impounding, and storing such newsracks. Newsrack
owners must pay the city all reasonable costs associated with the noticing, removal, and storage of the newsrack before regaining possession of such
newsracks. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-32: EMERGENCY REMOVAL:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever the administrator determines that a newsrack constitutes an immediate threat or hazard or
danger to persons or property, the administrator, without observing procedures set forth in this chapter with reference to newsrack removals, will
immediately cause such a newsrack to be removed in such manner as the administrator determines is reasonably required. If the administrator deems it
feasible, the administrator may attempt to give the newsrack owner verbal notice of the danger and the proposed timing and removal of the newsrack.
Where such removal is ordered, the administrator will, after completing the removal of the newsrack, comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1370,
12-2-2003)
9-4-33: ABANDONMENT; DISPOSAL:
The owner of any impounded newsrack who fails to obtain the release of the newsrack within thirty (30) days after impoundment, is deemed to have
abandoned the newsrack, and the newsrack may be disposed of by the administrator in the time and manner prescribed by law, for the disposal of
abandoned personal property. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-34: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, violations of a permit may be enforced as follows:
1. Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the city attorney's discretion.
2. Abated as a public nuisance.
3. Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed to nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the permittee
operates.
B. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-35: CITY ATTORNEY ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to the city attorney by this code or California law, the city attorney is authorized to:
A. Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for violations of this chapter including, without limitation, administrative or judicial nuisance
abatement and suits for injunctive relief;
B. Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties, forfeitures, and other money accruing to the city under this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-36: LIABILITY FOR FINES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 227/581
All fines, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this chapter are civil debts owed to the city by the person fined. In the event that judicial action
is necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the city, the person or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs of suit and attorney fees
incurred by the city to collect the fine. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
Preexisting Newsracks
9-4-37: EXISTING NEWSRACKS:
A. Any person who owns or is entitled to possession of any newsrack located within a public right of way upon the effective date of this chapter, must
either remove the newsrack or obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter within one calendar year after the effective date of this chapter.
B. If any such newsrack remains in place without a permit after the time period, the administrator may begin removal proceedings as provided in this
chapter.
C. If the newsrack owner does not comply with the administrator's notice of removal, or does not appeal it, within the time set in such notice, the
administrator may remove and impound the newsrack. The owner or other persons entitled to possession of the newsrack may obtain possession of
such impounded newsrack in the time and manner set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
9-4-38: NEWSRACKS WITHIN THE DOWNTOWN SPECIFIC PLAN AREA:
Persons possessing a valid newsrack permit issued before the effective date of this chapter and who had a newsrack located within the city's downtown
specific plan area, must comply with all of the following before installing newsracks:
A. If the person removed newsracks from the public right of way in accordance with the city's direction before the effective date of this chapter, the person
must obtain a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or, if applicable, a uniform newsrack permit, before installing newsracks within the downtown
specific plan area;
B. If the person has existing newsracks that were not removed at the city's direction before the effective date of this chapter, the person must obtain a
permit within one calendar year after the effective date of this chapter for the continued use of such newsracks. (Ord. 1370, 12-2-2003)
Chapter 5
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE, MINIMUM CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: Also referred to as "Cable Television System", "Cable System", "CATV System", or "Community
Antenna TV System", means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment,
that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community but such
term does not include:
A. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
B. A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility
uses any public right of way;
C. A facility of common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers; or
D. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.
CABLE SERVICE: The total of the following:
A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 228/581
B. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.
CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of
delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
CITY: The City of El Segundo as represented by the City Council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form to another.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of El Segundo.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successor.
FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued by the City, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
FRANCHISE FEES: Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the City on an operation or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their
status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
A. Any tax fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their
services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against the franchisee or cable subscribers);
B. Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by franchisee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
C. Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
D. Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
FRANCHISEE OR OPERATOR: Any "person" operating a cable television system within the City of El Segundo pursuant to a franchise.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of services.
LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL: Any channel where the operator or its designated agent is the primary programmer, and provides video programs to
subscribers.
PAY-CABLE, PAY-TELEVISION OR PAY-PER-VIEW: The delivery to subscribers, over the cable communications system, of television signals for a fee or
charge to subscribers over and above the charge for basic cable service, on a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or organizational entity.
RESIDENT: Any person residing in the City as otherwise defined by applicable law.
SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services provided by an operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the operator.
STATE: The State of California.
STREET: Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by
others and located within the City limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights of way and similar public
property and areas that the franchisee shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the operator by
means of or in connection with the cable communications system. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-2: SUBSCRIBER BILLINGS:
Any operator itemization of franchise fee costs on subscribers' bills shall be in accordance with Federal law. If an operator elects to indicate the franchise
fee as a separate item on the subscriber billing, it shall also itemize, at a minimum, the five (5) cost items representing the largest recurring operational
costs to the operator. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-3: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The cable communications system shall comply at all times with FCC technical quality and performance guidelines. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-4: TESTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Test And Compliance Procedure: Every operator shall submit, within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof, a detailed test plan describing the
methods and schedules for testing its cable system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the provisions of Section 9-5-3 of this Chapter.
Subsequently, the testing for compliance with the technical standards shall be performed at intervals no greater than twelve (12) months. City
representatives may witness the testing, and written test reports shall be submitted to the City. If more than ten percent (10%) of the locations tested
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 229/581
fail to meet the technical standards, the operator shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been taken, and the entire test shall be
repeated. A second failure of more than ten percent (10%) may result, at the City's option, in imposition of the remedies set forth at Section 9-5-22 of
this Chapter. Following a second failure to meet the technical standards, each day the operator does not meet the technical standards shall be deemed
a separate violation of this Chapter.
B. Special Tests: In addition to the annual testing described at subsection A of this Section, at its discretion, the City may require additional tests, full or
partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the
basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the
particular matter in controversy. The City shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience
to the operator or to the subscriber.
C. Cost Of Tests: The operator shall bear the cost of all tests required by this Chapter. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-5: BUSINESS AND SERVICE OFFICE:
Each operator shall maintain a business and service office (the "office") within five (5) miles of the City limits. The office shall have the necessary facilities,
equipment and personnel to provide the following services under normal conditions of operation:
A. Toll-free telephone lines.
B. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time and the time required to transfer the call, not to exceed thirty (30)
seconds for ninety percent (90%) of callers. The operators shall have no more than six (6) months after the effective date hereof to comply with this
requirement.
C. The number of rings before a call is answered by automated answering and distributing equipment shall not exceed four (4).
D. Customers shall receive a busy signal during normal business hours less than three percent (3%) of the total time that the cable office is open for
business.
E. Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty four (24) hour basis, including weekends and holidays.
F. The operator shall procure and maintain automatic telephone monitoring equipment capable of measuring performance in accordance with subsection B
and D of this Section. A monthly report of this performance shall be submitted to the City.
G. Open to the public nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Mondays through Thursdays, and from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. Fridays except for holidays, and at least four (4) additional hours weekly outside of the above hours.
H. Adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-6: STAFFING LEVELS:
Every operator shall maintain the following minimum staffing levels:
A. An agency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty four (24) hour basis.
B. An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber within seven (7) days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder
cable have been activated.
C. An installation staff capable of scheduling all appointments with subscribers for installation of service within a specified four (4) hour time period. (Ord.
1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-7: REQUEST FOR CABLE SERVICE AND REPAIR STANDARDS:
A. Efficient Service: Every operator shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system,
preferably between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of
access and reproduction, shall be maintained for all service interruptions and requests for cable service as required by Section 9-5-13 of this Chapter.
B. Repair Force: Every operator shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the
following time frames:
1. System Outage: Within two (2) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a system outage of sound or
picture of one or more channels, affecting at least twenty five percent (25%) of the subscribers of the system.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 230/581
2. Partial System Outage: Within eight (8) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls which identify a partial system outage of sound or
picture of one or more channels, affecting at least twenty (20) subscribers.
3. Isolated Outage: Within twenty four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or
picture for one or more channels, affecting an individual subscriber.
4. Inferior Reception Quality: Within forty eight (48) hours, including weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning
picture or sound quality.
C. Response By Operator: An operator shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this Section when a technician
arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, response shall
be deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of arrival.
D. No Charge: No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless the service request can be demonstrated to be both repeated and
noncable system in origin, or to involve subscriber negligence. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-8: INSTALLATION PRACTICES:
Consistent with Section 9-5-6 of this Chapter, no service connection to a subscriber's home or business shall be installed without scheduling an
appointment with the subscriber beforehand. Further, no conduit or equipment shall be installed or work performed on the building or property of the
subscriber without the subscriber's express approval of the manner of installation. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-9: VERIFICATION OF STANDARDS:
Upon reasonable notice, each operator shall demonstrate compliance with any or all of the standards required in Sections 9-5-5 through 9-5-8 of this
Chapter. The operator shall provide sufficient detail to permit the City to verify the extent of compliance. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-10: COMPLAINTS:
A. Complaints To Operator: Each operator shall establish a written procedure for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without
intervention by the City. The operator's procedures shall be filed with the City within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof. The written procedures
shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing that the operator has violated any provision of this
Chapter, or the terms and conditions of the subscriber's contract with grantee. At the conclusion of operator's investigation of a subscriber complaint,
but in no event more than ten (10) business days after receiving the complaint, operator shall notify the subscriber and the City in writing of the results
of the investigation and its proposed action or resolution, if any. The operator shall also notify the subscriber of the subscriber's right to file a complaint
with the City in the event the subscriber is dissatisfied with the operator's decision. No other proceedings to resolve subscriber complaints shall be
undertaken until the complaint procedure established by this Chapter has been exhausted.
B. Complaints To City: A subscriber who is dissatisfied with operator's proposed decision or who was not provided with a written decision within the ten
(10) business day period shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the City. The subscriber shall initiate the review by filing a written
complaint together with the operator's written decision, if any, with the City and by the City notifying the operator of the filing. The subscriber shall make
such filing and notification within twenty (20) days of receipt of operator's decision or, if no operator decision has been provided, within thirty (30) days
after filing the original complaint with operator. The City may extend these time limits for reasonable cause. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-11: REVIEW BY OPERATOR:
A. City Determination: The City shall determine, solely upon a review of a subscriber complaint and the operator's decision, if any, whether further action is
warranted. In the event the City does not initiate further proceedings within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the complaint, the operator's proposed action
or resolution shall be final.
B. Further Investigation: If the City decides to initiate further investigation, the City shall require the operator and the subscriber to submit, within ten (10)
days of notice thereof, a written statement of the facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. The operator or the subscriber may
request in such statement that a hearing be conducted by the City.
C. Hearing: A hearing if requested shall be conducted the by City following notice in writing specifying the time and place of such hearing. The hearing
shall be conducted informally by the City Manager or his designee, and the parties may offer any evidence pertinent to the dispute.
D. Additional Evidence: The parties shall produce any additional evidence, including testing reports from the operator, which the City may deem necessary
to an understanding and determination of the dispute.
E. Council Decision: The City shall issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written statements or, if a hearing is requested, within
fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the hearing, setting forth the basis of the decision. The decision may be appealed to the City Council. The
Council's decision shall be final. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-12: ESCROW ACCOUNT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 231/581
The City shall establish an escrow account wherein a subscriber may deposit a disputed portion of the subscriber's monthly service charge. If a subscriber
either continues to make full and timely payment of all monthly service charges to operator or deposits any disputed portion of such monthly service
charges to said escrow account, operator shall not discontinue service during the pendency of a complaint submitted under the provisions of this Chapter.
Any amounts deposited in the escrow account shall be paid to the operator or subscriber in accordance with a final determination of a complaint. (Ord.
1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-13: COMPLAINT FILE AND REPORTS:
A. Complaints: Each operator shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. Complete records of
the operator's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept. These files and records shall remain open to the public during normal business hours,
so that individuals are able to inspect their own files.
B. Summaries And Logs To City: Each operator shall also maintain a summary of service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and
their disposition, for each month. In addition, each operator shall maintain a log and summary of all service interruptions. Such summaries and logs
shall be submitted to the City by the tenth day of the succeeding month. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-14: OPERATING POLICIES:
A. Provide Information To Subscribers: When subscribers are connected or reconnected to the cable system, and at least once annually thereafter, each
operator shall provide each subscriber with written information concerning the procedures for making inquires or complaints, including the name,
address and local telephone number of the employee or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and also furnish information
concerning the City office responsible for administration of the franchise with the name and telephone number of the office. The notice shall also
indicate the operator's business hours, legal holidays and procedures for responding to inquiries after normal business hours.
B. Notice Of Policy Changes: Each operator shall provide all subscribers and the City written notice no less than thirty (30) days prior to any proposed
change in these policies. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-15: RATES AND SERVICES:
A. Notice Of Rate Changes: Each operator shall provide all subscribers and the City with at least thirty (30) days' written notice prior to the implementation
of any change in rates or programming services.
B. Copies To City: Copies of all notices provided to subscribers shall be filed concurrently with the City. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-16: IDENTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES:
Every employee of each operator or its contractors or subcontractors dealing with the public shall be clearly identified on sight to the public as a
representative of the operator. Every vehicle of each operator or its contractors or subcontractors shall be similarly identified. Each operator's telephone
number shall also be clearly marked on all such vehicles. Each operator's employees and agents shall also wear an identification badge with the employee
or agent's name and photograph. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-17: QUALITY OF SERVICE:
The City may evaluate the overall quality of service provided by operator to subscribers at any time, based upon the number of subscriber complaints
received by the operator and the City, and operator's response to those complaints. The City's evaluation that service quality is inadequate may lead to
direction to the operator to cure the inadequacies. The operator shall commence corrective action within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice.
(Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-18: TENANT RIGHTS:
It is the City's intent that tenants not be discriminated against in the ability to subscribe to cable services. Each operator shall be required to provide
service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing facility with all services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so long as the
owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by operator, to the following:
A. To operator's providing the service to units of the facility;
B. To reasonable conditions and time for installation, maintenance, and inspection of the system on the facility premises;
C. To reasonable conditions promulgated by operator to protect operator's equipment and encourage widespread use of the system; and
D. To not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants who receive cable service and those who do not. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 232/581
9-5-19: OPERATOR RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Each operator shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the operator to exercise it rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to
each and all of its customers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter or
applicable State and Federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-20: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
A. Discrimination Prohibited: The operator shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG access channel users,
or general citizens on the basis of income, race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Operator shall comply at all times with all other applicable
Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated
and made part of this Chapter by reference.
B. Comply With Federal Law: The operator's policy with regard to personally identifiable information shall be consistent with Federal law.
C. Fairness: The entire system of the operator shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities,
equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other entities having a legitimate use for the system,
and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-21: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY:
A. Subscriber Right:
1. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the operator are honored. In the
event that the operator elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the City give notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this
franchise, the operator shall act so as to ensure that all subscribes receive continuous, uninterrupted service.
2. In the event of a change of operator, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original operator shall cooperate with the City and the
new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, the original operator shall be entitled to the revenues for any
period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.
B. Failure Of Operator: In the event operator fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the City or without just
cause, the City may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as operator restores service under conditions acceptable
to the City or a permanent operator is selected. If the City is required to fulfill this obligation for the operator, then during such period as the City fulfills
such obligation, the City shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the operator shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs or
damages in excess of the revenues collected by the City that are the result of the operator's failure to perform. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-22: VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
A. Remedies For Violations: Any breach of the provisions of this Chapter is subject to any or all of the following remedies:
1. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
2. The City may enforce the provisions of this Chapter by civil action, including injunctive relief.
3. Any private citizen may enforce this Chapter by civil action.
4. Any material violation of a provision of this Chapter is subject to administrative assessment of penalties and order to remedy the violation pursuant to
subsection B of this Section.
5. Any material violation of a provision of this Chapter is declared a nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to subsection C of this Section.
6. Revocation of the franchise.
B. Administrative Adjudication Of Violations Of Consumer Protection Standards: The City may prosecute administratively any material violation of this
Chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth at subsections D and E of this Section. The hearing officer shall have the authority to: 1) order the
operator to undertake remedial action to cure any breach of its obligations under this Chapter; 2) levy a penalty upon the operator up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per day, per violation; and 3) find that the operator has not violated any of its obligations under this Chapter.
C. Nuisance Abatement: The City may prosecute any material violation of this Chapter as a nuisance pursuant to the procedure set forth at Sections 9-5-
23 through 9-5-25 of this Chapter.
D. Procedure For administrative Adjudication Of Violation Of Chapter:
1. Notice Of Violation: The City Manager may notify the operator of any violation of this Chapter. The notice may be by telephone or telecopy and shall
be confirmed in writing and establish a reasonable time to cure the violation. The period to cure shall be a minimum of five (5) working days (except
in cases of emergency where a shorter time may be prescribed consistent with the nature of the emergency).
2. Operator Response: Upon receiving the City Manager's notice of a breach of this Chapter, the operator shall investigate the alleged breach, and
within the time period established in the notice, notify the City Manager in writing of the results of the investigation and its action to cure the violation,
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 233/581
if any. In the event the City Manager does not refer the matter to the City Council or to an administrative hearing as provided under subsection E of
this Section within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the operator's response, the operator's proposed action or resolution shall be final. (Ord. 1159, 2-
5-1991)
E. Administrative Hearing Procedures:
1. The City Manager shall select an independent hearing officer.
2. The hearing shall be conducted according to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1280 et seq. (the "General Arbitration Act").
3. Any failure of the operator to comply with the final order of the hearing officer shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise.
4. The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991; amd. 2000 Code)
9-5-23: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
A. Commencement Of Nuisance Abatement Proceedings; Notice: Whenever the City Manager reasonably believes a public nuisance under this Chapter
exists, he may commence abatement proceedings. The City Manager shall cause a written notice to be issued to abate such nuisance.
1. The notice shall contain a description of the nuisance. It shall refer to this Section and the violation of this Chapter at issue, and shall direct
compliance by removal or correction of the condition which is in violation of the provisions of this Chapter within the time period set forth at
subsection 9-5-22D1 of this Chapter. The notice shall further describe the consequences of failure to comply as prescribed in this Section.
2. The notice shall be served on the operator by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. Delivery by first class mail shall be used when
delivery by registered or certified mail is refused. Such notice by mail shall be sufficient for purposes of this Chapter.
3. Failure of any person to receive a notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this Chapter.
B. Voluntary Abatement Of Public Nuisances: The operator may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period. The City Manager shall be
advised of the abatement and shall inspect the system to ensure that the nuisance has in fact been abated.
C. Involuntary Abatement: Upon failure of the operator to correct the condition as described in the notice by the date specified, the City Manager shall
cause an administrative hearing to be held to determine whether a nuisance exists. The City Manager shall give the operator at least fourteen (14)
days' written notice of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to subsection 9-5-22E of this Chapter, and the hearing officer may order
the nuisance abated and/or assess penalties up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation until the nuisance is abated. The operator shall
be liable for all costs of abatement as provided for at California Government Code section 38773.5. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-24: ASSESSMENT LIEN:
A. Special Assessment; Notice: The total cost for abatement of the nuisance and any resulting penalties, as confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute
a special assessment against the operator's land and, upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on
the property for the amount of the assessment.
B. Add To Tax Billing: After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the notice of lien may be turned over to the tax collector to add the amounts of the
assessments to the next regular tax bill levied against the operator. Thereafter the assessment amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. After recordation, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and
means provided by law. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
9-5-25: ALTERNATE ACTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing
any other means available to it under provisions of applicable ordinances or State law to correct hazards or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as
alternatives to the proceedings set forth herein. (Ord. 1159, 2-5-1991)
Chapter 6
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
9-6-1: INTENT:
The city finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the
residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city further finds that the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the
city shall designate. Consistent with federal and state law, it is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means
to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include
this finding as an integral part thereof. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-2: SHORT TITLE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 234/581
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF EL SEGUNDO CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-
1991)
9-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM (Also Referred To As CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CATV SYSTEM, Or
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TV SYSTEM): A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community,
but such term does not include:
A. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
B. A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility
uses any public right of way;
C. A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers; or
D. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.
CABLE SERVICE: The total of the following:
A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and
B. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.
CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of
delivering a television channel as defined by the federal communications commission.
COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION: That time and date when construction of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced, which
shall be when the first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding of cables is initiated.
COMMENCE OPERATION: That time and date when operation of the cable communications system is considered to have commenced which shall be
when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full services to a dwelling unit located within the franchise area and
such services are actually offered to a resident of the franchise area.
COMMERCIAL USE CHANNEL: The channel capacity designated for commercial use as defined and required by federal law.
COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION: That point in time when all distribution facilities specified in the franchise agreement have been installed by the
grantee so as to permit the offering of cable service to all of the potential subscribers in the franchise area, as well as the provision, in an operational state,
of any facilities required by the franchise agreement.
CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form to another.
COUNCIL: The governing body of the city of El Segundo.
FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed or elected successor.
FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise award ordinance, or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted,
including referenced specifications, franchise applications, franchise requirements ordinances and other related materials.
FRANCHISE FEES: Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising authority or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable
subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
A. Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their
services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against grantee or cable subscribers);
B. Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 235/581
C. Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
D. Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
GRANTEE: Any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor,
transferee or assignee.
GRANTOR OR CITY: The city of El Segundo as represented by the city council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS ANNUAL RECEIPTS: The annual gross revenues received by the grantee from all sources of operations of the cable communications system,
excluding refundable deposits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes collected for direct pass through to local, state or federal government shall not
be included.
INITIAL SERVICE AREA: The area of the city which will receive service initially, as set forth in the franchise agreement.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service.
LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL: Any channel where the grantee or its designated agent is the primary programmer, and provides video programs to
subscribers.
PAY CABLE, PAY TELEVISION OR PAY PER VIEW: The delivery to subscribers, over the cable communications system, of television signals for a fee or
charge to subscribers over and above the charge for basic cable service, on a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or organizational entity.
PROGRAMMER: A person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital,
or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES OR PEG ACCESS FACILITIES: The total of the following:
A. Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use; and
B. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
RESIDENT: Any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable law.
SCHOOL: Any accredited nonprofit educational institution including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private.
SECTION: Any section, subsection, or provision of this franchise chapter.
SERVICE AREA OR FRANCHISE AREA: The entire geographic area within the city designated in a franchise agreement to receive cable service.
SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee.
STATE: The state of California.
STATE FRANCHISEE: Any holder of a state issued video franchise operating in the city, as defined in Public Utilities Code section 5830(p).
STREET: Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by
others and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights of way and similar public
property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by
means of or in connection with the cable communications system. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991; amd. Ord. 1418, 4-1-2008)
9-6-4: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
A. Grant:
1. In the event that grantor shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct, a cable
communications system within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing franchise, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation
to provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise
agreement shall include those provisions of the grantee's "application for franchise" that are finally negotiated and accepted by the grantor and
grantee.
2. Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained herein shall be consistent with federal laws and regulations and State general laws
and regulations. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the grantor can
grant a franchise, the general law and/or statutory requirements shall, without exception, control.
3. Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise
shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the other codes and ordinances of the grantor regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of
construction.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 236/581
B. Franchise Required: No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets in the franchise area or be allowed to operate
without a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Establishment Of Franchise Requirements: The grantor may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or franchise renewals, and may
modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions and state of art in the cable industry. Such requirements shall not be
retroactive to franchises then in effect, except as set forth in Section 9-6-7 of this Chapter, but shall become applicable when the franchise is renewed.
D. Authority To Grant Franchise: The grantor may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the City. The service area shall be the entire area
defined in the franchise agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the franchise area scheduled to receive initial service, as stated in
the franchise agreement.
E. Use Of Public Streets And Ways: For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the franchise area, and subject to the
provisions of subsection 9-6-15J of this Chapter, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over, under,
upon, across, and along the public streets and ways within the franchise area such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments, and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable
communications system. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate grantor agencies and
local utility companies, and receive written approval before proceeding. Grantee shall in any event comply with all applicable grantor construction
codes and procedures.
F. Duration: The term of any new franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established in the franchise
agreement, unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided.
G. Franchise Nonexclusive: Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate; provided, however, that such additional grants shall not operate to materially
modify, revoke or terminate any rights previously granted to any grantee.
H. New Franchise Applications: Applicants for a new franchise shall submit to the grantor written applications utilizing the standardized format provided by
the grantor, at the time and place designated by the grantor for accepting applications, and including the application fees designated by grantor.
I. Grant Procedure: All new franchise applications when filed shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the grantor. No later than
ninety (90) days after the final date for filing applications, one or more public hearings shall be held on the applications. A decision shall be made by the
grantor not later than ninety (90) days after the conclusion of all such public hearings based upon an evaluation of the application, the hearings, and
other information that the grantor may deem relevant. Grantor may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 1165, 6-
4-1991)
9-6-5: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL:
A. Transfer Of Franchise: Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Said franchise cannot in any event
be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or
other means without the prior written consent of the grantor, and then only under such reasonable conditions as the grantor may establish. Such
consent as required by the grantor shall be given or denied no later than ninety (90) days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
B. Ownership Or Control: The grantee shall promptly notify in writing the grantor of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party
of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by any person or group of
persons of ten percent (10%) or more of the beneficial ownership interest of the grantee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee
shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have consented in writing thereto, which consent shall be given or
denied no later than ninety (90) days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall
consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the
grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry.
In seeking the grantor's consent to any change in ownership or control, the grantee shall have the responsibility:
1. To show to the satisfaction of the grantor whether the proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the "proposed transferee"), which in the case of
a corporation, shall include all directors and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent (5%) or more of its voting stock:
a. Has ever been convicted of any felonious acts including, but not limited to, any violation of Federal, State or local law or regulations, or is presently
under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts;
b. Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of competent
jurisdiction; or
c. Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system.
2. To establish, to the satisfaction of the grantor, the financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data for the
proposed transferee which the grantee was required to submit in its franchise application and such other data as the grantor may request. Financial
statements shall be audited, certified and qualified by a certified public accountant or a financial officer of the proposed transferee.
3. To establish to the satisfaction of the grantor that the financial and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to
maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing franchise terms.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 237/581
C. Financial Institution: The grantor agrees that any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the
construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control
and operate the cable communications system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also
submit a plan for such operation that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial
institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless
extended by the grantor in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another
grantee. If the grantor finds that such transfer after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the
applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the
grantor to such transfer shall be given or denied no less than ninety (90) days after any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
D. Grantor Rights To Streets: The consent or approval of the grantor to any transfer by the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of
the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise.
E. Completion Of Construction: In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the grantor shall not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise
prior to completion of initial construction of the cable system.
F. Successor Signature: In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the
franchise agreement. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-6: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
Franchise renewal shall be as prescribed by applicable law. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-7: POLICE POWERS:
A. Right Subject To Police Powers: In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the
grantor to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general
laws and ordinances enacted by the grantor pursuant to such power.
B. Conflicting Provisions: Any conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and any other present or future lawful exercise of the grantor's police powers
shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to any
cable communications system franchise which contains provisions inconsistent with this Chapter shall prevail only if upon such exercise the grantor
finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-
1991)
9-6-8: FRANCHISE FEE:
A. Annual Franchise Payment: A grantee of a franchise hereunder shall pay to the grantor an annual fee in an amount as designated in the franchise
agreement. Such payment shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise or any renewal date. The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be
furnished a statement within sixty (60) days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant
or certified by a financial officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross receipts and all payments, deductions and computations for the
period covered by the payment. Upon ten (10) days' prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee's
records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent (2%)
or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit.
B. Acceptance By Grantor: No acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the
grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the
grantee.
C. Failure To Make Required Payment: In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified
herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation:
1. An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the average rate of return on invested funds of the City during the
period for which payment was due.
2. If the payment is late by forty five (45) days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent (5%) of the amount due in order to defray those additional
expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent payment.
D. Fee Payments: Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement.
E. Itemization Of Costs: Any grantee itemization of franchise fee costs on subscribes' bills shall be in accordance with Federal law. If grantee elects to
indicate the franchise fee as a separate item, it shall also itemize, as a minimum, the five (5) cost items representing the largest recurring operational
costs to grantee. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-9: FORFEITURE OR REVOCATION:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 238/581
A. Grounds For Revocation: If the grantee has been given due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure, the grantor reserves the right to revoke any
franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall
represent a default under this Chapter and a material breach of the franchise:
1. If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of its material obligations under this Chapter or under such documents, agreements and other
terms and provisions entered into by and between the grantor and the grantee, subject to the provisions of subsection 9-6-20C of this Chapter.
2. If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the security fund or bonds as
required herein.
3. If any court of competent jurisdiction, or any Federal or State regulatory body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any material
provision of the franchise documents, including this Chapter, the franchise agreement and grantee's proposal is invalid or unenforceable prior to the
commencement of initial system construction.
4. If the grantee ceases to provide all services for any reason within the control of the grantee over the cable communications system.
5. If the grantee wilfully violates any of the material provisions of this Chapter or the franchise agreement or attempts to practice any fraud or deceit
upon the grantor.
6. If the grantee becomes insolvent, or upon listing of an order for relief in favor of grantee in a bankruptcy proceeding.
B. Procedure Prior To Revocation:
1. The grantor may make written demand that the grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or correct
any action deemed cause for revocation. In the event the stated violation is not reasonably curable within ninety (90) days, the franchise shall not be
terminated or revoked, or damages assessed, if the grantee provides within the said ninety (90) days a plan, satisfactory to the grantor, to remedy
the violation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period exceeding ninety (90) days following receipt of such written
demand by the grantor, the grantor may place its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The grantor shall
cause notice to be served upon such grantee, at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of this intent to request
such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least once, ten (10) days before such meeting in a
newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area.
2. The grantor shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, within ninety (90) days, based upon the preponderance of the evidence,
whether the grantee has committed a material breach of this Chapter or the franchise agreement, and, if so, whether such breach was wilful.
3. If the grantor determines that the grantee has wilfully committed a material breach, then the grantor may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of
such grantee shall be terminated and security fund and bonds forfeited, or the grantor may, at its option and if the material breach is capable of being
cured by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as the
grantor shall determine are reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-10: PROCEDURES UPON TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION:
A. Disposition Of Facilities: In the event a franchise expires, is revoked, or otherwise terminated, the grantor may order the removal of the above-ground
system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable period of time as determined by the grantor or require the original grantee to maintain and
operate its cable system for a period not to exceed twenty four (24) months as indicated in subsection D of this Section.
B. Restoration Of Property: In removing its plant, structures, and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made
by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment without affecting
the electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The liability, indemnity and insurance, and the security fund and bonds provided shall continue
in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this Section.
C. Restoration Grantor, Reimbursement Of Costs: In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work required by subsection A of this Section
and/or subsection B of this Section or any other work required by grantor by law or ordinance, within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice, and
to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the cost thereof within thirty
(30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the grantor may recover such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by grantee.
The grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Section.
D. Extended Operation: Upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise, the grantor may require the grantee to continue to operate the cable
communications system for a defined period of time not to exceed twenty four (24) months from the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee
shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the cable communications system under the terms and conditions of this Chapter and
the franchise agreement and to provide the regular cable service and any of the other services that may be provided at that time. The grantor shall be
permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Section.
E. Grantor's Right Not Affected: The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the grantor under any provision of
law. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-11: RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE:
A. Receivership Or Bankruptcy: Any franchise granted shall, at the option of the grantor, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or
unless:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 239/581
1. Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this Chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall
have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and
2. Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approve by the Court having jurisdiction on
the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise
agreement.
B. Foreclosure Or Involuntary Sale: In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or any part
thereof, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the franchise and rights and
privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless:
1. The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner in this Chapter provided; and
2. Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-12: FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS:
A. Costs Involved: For either a new franchise award, franchise renewal or transfer, costs to be borne by the grantee which receives the new franchise
award, renewal or transfer shall include, but shall not be limited to, all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting provided for pursuant
to a franchise, development and publication of relevant ordinances and franchise agreement, fees, and any cost not covered by the application fees,
incurred by the grantor in its study, preparation of proposal solicitation documents, evaluation of all applications, including, but not limited to, consultant
and attorney fees.
B. Processing Costs Additional: These franchise processing costs are over and above the construction inspection and permit fees specified in subsection
9-6-15K1a and the franchise fee specified in Section 9-6-8 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-13: REGULATION OF FRANCHISE:
A. Regulatory Authority: The grantor shall exercise regulatory authority under the provisions of this Chapter and applicable law. If the franchise area served
by the cable communications system also serves other contiguous or neighboring communities, grantor may, at its sole option, participate in a joint
regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related communications.
B. Preemption Of Regulatory Authority: If any areas of local regulatory authority are preempted by State, Federal or judicial action, and such preemption is
later lifted and no longer in effect, the grantor shall have the authority to reassert regulation at any time thereafter, so long as such regulation is not in
conflict with the provisions of any existing franchise agreement.
C. Regulatory Responsibility: The grantor, acting alone or acting jointly with other grantors, may exercise or delegate the following regulatory responsibility:
1. Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable communications system franchise.
2. Coordination of the operation of public, educational and government (PEG) access channel and facilities.
3. Providing technical, programming and operational support to public agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care
institutions.
4. Establishing jointly with the grantee, or as otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated
to public use and sharing of public facilities, if provided for in any franchise agreement.
5. Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services.
6. Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with other local, State or national telecommunications networks.
7. Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy.
D. Public Usage Of System: If so specified in the franchise agreement, the grantor may utilize a portion of the cable communications system capacity, and
associated facilities and resources, to develop and provide noncommercial cable services that will be in the public interest. In furtherance of this
purpose, the grantor may establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to receive and allocate facilities, support funds and other
considerations provided by the grantor, the grantee, and/or others. Such an entity, if established, may be delegated the following responsibilities:
1. Receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel capacity, facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for public usage of the
cable communications system.
2. Review the status and progress of each service developed for public benefit.
3. Reallocate resources jointly with the grantee on a periodic basis to conform with changing priorities and public needs.
4. Report to the grantor and the grantee annually on the utilization of resources, the new public services developed and the benefits achieved for the
grantor and its residents.
E. PEG Access Facility Management:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 240/581
1. Intent: It is the intent of the grantor to ensure that PEG access facilities provided for in any franchise agreement shall be managed in the best public
interest so that programming using such facilities will be open to all residents, and available for all forms of public expression, community information
and debate of public issues. Pursuant to these objectives, the grantor may delegate the responsibility for PEG access facility management to a
nonprofit entity which may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
a. A nonprofit public corporation.
b. A PEG access facility management commission or committee, appointed by grantor, and representing a broad spectrum of the community.
c. An established nonprofit entity with special cablecasting capability, such as a local or regional community college.
2. Functions: The entity designated to manage the PEG access facilities shall have the following functions:
a. Responsibility for program production for and management of the public access facilities as may in the franchise agreement be designated for
community-based programming. Community channels may include public, educational and government access channels, as designated in the
franchise agreement.
b. To assure that the PEG access facilities are made to all residents of the franchise area on a nondiscriminatory, first-come, first-served basis.
c. To assure that no censorship or control over program content of the PEG access facilities exists except as necessary to comply with Federal
prohibition of material that is illegal.
d. To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations, and procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the PEG access facilities.
e. To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such regular or special reports as may be required or desirable.
f. To hire and supervise staff.
g. To make all purchases of materials and equipment that may be required.
h. To develop sources of funding, such as foundation or Federal or State grants, to further community programming.
i. To perform such other functions relevant to the PEG access facilities as may be appropriate.
j. Establishment of budgets on an annual basis, and utilization of funds and resources received from the grantor or the public usage entity designated
in subsection D of this Section, for the purpose of PEG access programming.
3. Access Rules: The PEG access facility management entity shall complete a set of rules for the use of the PEG access facilities which shall be
promptly forwarded to the grantor. The rules shall be prepared in cooperation with the grantee, and confirmed by agreement between the PEG
access facility management entity and the grantee. The rules shall, at a minimum, provide for:
a. Access on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis for all residents of the franchise area.
b. Prohibition of commercial use by public access programming producers.
c. Prohibition of any presentation of obscene material.
d. Public inspection of the log of producers, which shall be retained by the PEG access facility management entity for a period of four (4) years.
e. Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule may be prevented from further access to the facilities.
f. Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time, cablecasting facilities, and technical support as are provided for in the agreement between
the PEG access facility management entity and the grantee.
4. PEG Access Facility Management Entity Reports To Grantor: The PEG access facility management entity shall provide a report to the grantor and
the grantee, at least annually, indicating achievements in community-based programming and services.
F. Reservation By Grantor: The grantor reserves the right, at its discretion, from time to time, to determine if the entities described in subsections D and E
of this Section are performing their purposes in a manner satisfactory to the grantor, and if they are not, the grantor may receive and reallocate all or a
portion of the channel capacity, operations appropriation, and capital appropriation, including any facilities and equipment purchased previously with
such appropriation, to another entity. A new entity shall be required to comply in all respects with the legal responsibilities described in subsections D
and E of this Section.
G. Rates: The grantee shall establish rates for its services that must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area. The grantor
retains the right to institute rate regulation to the extent permitted by applicable law.
H. Annual Review Of Performance And Quality Of Service: At grantor's sole option, within ninety (90) days of the first anniversary of the effective date of
each franchise, and each year thereafter throughout the term of the franchise, the grantor may hold a public hearing at which the grantee shall be
present and shall participate, to review the performance and quality of service of the cable communications system. The reports required in Section 9-
6-21 of this Chapter regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests and the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis for
review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be
considered.
1. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, grantor shall issue a report with respect to system performance and quality of
service. If areas of franchise noncompliance are found, grantor may direct grantee to correct the noncompliance within a reasonable period of time.
2. Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the noncompliance shall be considered a breach of the franchise, and grantor may, at its sole
discretion, exercise any remedy within the scope of this Chapter considered appropriate.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 241/581
I. System And Services Review: To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the state of the art of cable communications, to
facilitate renewal procedures, to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system, and to achieve a continuing, advanced modern system,
the following system and services review procedures are hereby established:
1. At grantor's sole option, the grantor may hold a public hearing on or about the fifth anniversary date of the franchise agreement at which the grantee
shall be present and shall participate, to review the cable communications system and services. Subsequent system and services review hearings
may be scheduled by the grantor each five (5) years thereafter.
2. Sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled system and services review hearing, grantee shall submit a report to grantor indicating the following:
a. All cable system services reported in cable industry trade journals that are being commonly provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and
demonstrations, to communities in the United States with comparable populations, that are not provided to the grantor.
b. Any specific plans for provision of such new services by the grantee, or a justification indicating why grantee believes that such services are not
feasible for the franchise area.
3. Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review hearing shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided, feasibility of
providing new services, application of new technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights or
privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding processes, developments in the law, and regulatory constraints.
4. Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any review hearing.
5. Not later than sixty (60) days after the conclusion of each system and service review hearing, grantor shall issue a report, including specifically a
listing of any cable services not then being provided to the grantor that are considered technically and economically feasible. Grantor may request
grantee to provide such services within a reasonable time, under reasonable rates and conditions. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-14: GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS:
A. Construction Bond:
1. Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a new franchise, or a renewal which requires significant system construction, and prior to the
commencement of any construction work by the grantee, the grantee shall file with the grantor a construction bond in the amount specified in the
franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and any other person who may claim damages as a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee
assured by such bond.
2. Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the grantor and shall, among other matters, cover the cost of removal of any
properties installed by the grantee in the event said grantee shall default in the performance of its franchise obligation.
3. In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages.
4. Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and security fund
specified, respectively in subsections B and C of this Section.
5. Upon completion of construction, any construction bonds then in force shall be released.
B. Performance Bond:
1. In addition to the construction bond set forth above, the grantee may be required, at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of operation, to
file with the grantor a performance bond in the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and an other person who may be
entitled to damages as a result of any occurrence in the operation or termination of the cable communications system operated under the franchise
agreement and including the payments required to be made to the grantor hereunder.
2. Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form approved by the grantor and shall among other matters cover the cost of removal of any
properties installed by the grantee in the event said grantee shall default in the performance of its franchise obligation.
3. In no event shall the amount of said bond be construed to limit the liability of the grantee for damages.
4. Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this requirement, or permit consolidation of the performance bond with the construction bond and security fund
specified, respectively in subsections A and C of this Section.
C. Security Fund:
1. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall deposit into a bank account, established by the grantor and maintain
on deposit through the term of this franchise, the sum specified in the franchise agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the
provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults under this Chapter, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the grantor which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the system.
Subject to the provisions of subsection C4 of this Section, the security fund may be assessed by the grantor for purposes including, but not limited to,
the following:
a. Failure of grantee to pay grantor sums due under the terms of the franchise.
b. Reimbursement of costs borne by the grantor to correct franchise violations not corrected by grantee, after due notice.
c. Monetary remedies or damages assessed against grantee due to default or violation of franchise requirements.
2. At grantor's sole option, some portion of the security fund may be provided in the acceptable form of an irrevocable letter of credit, in lieu of a cash
deposit.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 242/581
3. Within thirty (30) days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the grantor from the security fund pursuant to subsection C1 of this
Section, the grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the amount required by the franchise agreement.
4. If the grantee fails, after thirty (30) days' written notice to pay to the grantor any franchise fee or taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to pay to the grantor
within such thirty (30) days, any damages, costs or expenses which the grantor shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the
grantee in connection with the franchise; or fails, after thirty (30) days' notice of such failure by the grantor to comply with any material provision of
the franchise which the grantor reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security fund, the grantor may thereafter withdraw
the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the grantor shall notify the grantee of the amount
and date thereof.
5. The security fund deposited pursuant to this Section shall become the property of the grantor in the event that the franchise is revoked for cause by
reason of the default of the grantee in accordance with the procedures of Section 9-6-9 of this Chapter. The grantee, however, shall be entitled to the
return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit no later than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the term of the franchise;
provided, that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. The grantee shall be entitled to any interest accrued on the cash portion
of the security fund.
6. The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the grantor whether reserved by this Chapter
or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall constitute an election of remedies or a
waiver of any other right the grantor may have.
D. Indemnification:
1. The grantee shall by acceptance of any franchise granted indemnify, defend and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions,
agents, and employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments for damages or other relief, costs and attorney fees in any way arising out of or
through or alleged to arise out of or through:
a. The act of the grantor in granting the franchise; and
b. The acts or omissions of grantee, its servants, employees, or agents including, but not limited to, any failure or refusal by grantee, its servants,
employees or agents to comply with any obligation or duty imposed on grantee by this Chapter or the franchise agreement.
c. The exercise of any right or privilege granted or permitted by this Chapter or the franchise agreement. Such indemnification shall include, but not
be limited to, all claims arising in tort, contracts, infringements of copyright, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or otherwise.
2. In the event any such claims shall arise, the grantor or any other indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the grantee. Provided,
however, that the grantor in its sole discretion may participate in the defense of such claims at its expense, and in such event, grantee shall not
agree to any settlement of claims without grantor approval.
3. The grantee shall not be required to indemnify the grantor for negligence or wilful misconduct on the part of grantor's officials, boards, commissions,
agents or employees.
E. Insurance:
1. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise insurance in amounts at least as follows:
a. Workers' Compensation Insurance: In such coverage as may be required by the workers' compensation insurance and safety laws of the State
and amendments thereto.
b. Comprehensive General Liability: Comprehensive general liability insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily injury and property
damage shall be maintained at the sum specified in the franchise agreement.
c. Comprehensive Automobile Liability: Comprehensive automobile liability including, but not limited to, nonownership and hired car coverage as well
as owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage shall be maintained at the sum specified in the franchise agreement.
2. The grantee shall furnish the grantor with copies of such insurance policies or certificates of insurance.
3. Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as additional insured,
and shall be primary to any insurance carried by grantor, and shall contain the following endorsement; or one substantially similar:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety or the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City by registered mail or written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew.
4. The minimum amounts set forth in the franchise agreement for such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the grantor
under the franchise issued hereunder to the amounts of such insurance.
5. All insurance carriers providing coverage under subsection E1 of this Section shall be duly licensed to operate in the State. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-15: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS:
A. System Design: The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the design requirements contained in the franchise
agreement.
B. Geographical Coverage: The grantee shall design and construct the cable system in such a manner as to have the capability to pass by every singlefamily
dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, school and public agency within the franchise area. Service shall be provided to subscribers in
accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the franchise agreement. Cable system construction and provision of service
shall be nondiscriminatory, and grantee shall not delay or defer service to any section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference.
C. Cablecasting Facilities: The grantee shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with the requirements of the franchise agreement.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 243/581
D. System Construction Schedule:
1. The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.
2. As required by the franchise agreement, the grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating progress schedule, area construction maps,
test plan, and projected dates for offering service. In addition, the grantee shall update this information on a monthly basis, by submitting a copy of its
normal internal progress reports, showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the reasons for any delay.
E. Remedies For Delay In Construction: The grantor may, at its sole option, apply any or all of the remedies in connection with delays in system
construction as specified in Section 9-6-20 of this Chapter.
F. Provision Of Service: After service has been established by activating trunk and distribution cables for any area, the grantee shall provide service to any
requesting subscriber within that area within thirty (30) days from the date of request.
G. Undergrounding Of Cable: The undergrounding of cable is encouraged. In any event, cables shall be installed underground at grantee's cost where
utilities are already underground, or where required by law. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded and relocated in concern with other
utilities, when such other utilities convert from aerial to underground construction.
H. New Development Undergrounding:
1. In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, upon request by the grantee, the developer or
property owner shall give grantee at least seventy two (72) hours' notice of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for grantee's
installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults to be provided at grantee's expense. Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching.
2. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if
grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults within five (5) working days of the date the trenches are available, as designated in the
notice given by the developer or property owner, then should the trenches be closed after the five (5) day period, the cost of new trenching is to be
borne by grantee.
I. Underground At Multiple-Dwelling Units: In cases of multiple- dwelling units serviced by aerial utilities, grantee shall make every effort to minimize the
number of individual aerial drop cables giving preference to undergrounding of multiple drop cables between the pole and the dwelling unit.
J. Street Occupancy:
1. Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible and economically feasible, and shall not construct or install any
new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately-owned property until the written approval of
the grantor is obtained.
2. Grantee shall notify the grantor at least ten (10) days prior to the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The grantor
shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required, providing such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not unduly
interfere with the use of such streets and that proposed construction shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the ordinances of
the grantor.
3. All transmission lines, equipment and structure shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and
repair. The grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or
other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other
fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.
4. Grantee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the grantor, restore to grantor standards and specifications any damage or
disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operations or construction on its behalf.
5. Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the grantor to remove any of the grantee's facilities, no charge
shall be made by the grantee against the grantor for restoration and repair.
6. Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to
the supervision and direction of the grantor.
7. Upon receipt of thirty (30) days' written notice, the grantee at its expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any
property of grantee when, in the opinion of the grantor the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or
street grade, separation or realignment, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other
types of structure or improvements by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or
public improvement, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings, redevelopment, or any general program under which the grantor shall
undertake to cause any such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property
of grantee and grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder.
8. After receipt of thirty (30) days' written notice, upon failure of grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the
provisions of this Chapter to be done in any street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may, at its option,
cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the grantor the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the grantor to grantee
within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report.
9. The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely necessary, and only after written permission has been given by the grantor.
10. Grantor reserves the right to require conduit for underground cabling in special areas.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 244/581
K. Construction And Technical Standards:
1. Construction Standards:
a. Grantor Codes And Permits: Grantee shall comply with all applicable grantor construction codes and permits procedures. Grantor shall be entitled
to charge reasonable permit and inspection fees to recover the special nonrecurring inspection costs imposed by the construction of the cable
system.
b. Compliance With Safety Codes: All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of Federal and State occupational
safety and health acts and any amendments thereto as well as all State and local codes where applicable.
c. Compliance With Electrical Codes: All installation of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with
the provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, and all applicable State and local codes.
d. Antennas And Towers: Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be designed for the proper loading as specified in Electronics Industry
Association's R.S.222-A specifications, and provisions of the Uniform Building Code, as modified.
e. Compliance With Aviation Requirements: Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance
with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable State or local codes and regulations.
f. Construction Standards And Requirements: All of the grantee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend and
distribution system towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances shall be installed, located,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices,
performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere in any manner with the rights of any
property owner, or to hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
g. Safety, Nuisance, Requirements: The grantee shall at all times employ professional care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted
methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
2. Technical Standards: The cable communications system shall meet all technical and performance standards contained in the franchise agreement.
3. Test And Compliance Procedure: The grantee shall submit, within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a detailed test
plan describing the methods and schedules for testing the cable communications system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the
provisions of the franchise agreement. The tests for basic cable services shall be performed at intervals no greater than twelve (12) months. The
tests may be witnessed by representatives of the grantor, and written test reports shall be submitted to the grantor. If more than ten percent (10%) of
the locations tested fail to meet the performance standards, the grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been taken, and
the entire test shall be repeated. A second failure of more than ten percent (10%) may result, at the grantor's option, in appropriate remedies.
4. Special Tests: At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different
test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional tests will be made on the basis of complaints
received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the particular matter
in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or
to the subscriber.
5. Cost Of Tests: The cost of all tests required by subsections K3 and K4 of this Section and retesting as necessary, shall be borne by the grantee.
L. Areawide Interconnection:
1. Interconnection: The grantor may request grantee to interconnect public usage channels of the cable communications system with any or all other
cable systems in adjacent areas. Interconnection of systems shall permit interactive transmission and reception of program material, and may be
done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method.
2. Interconnection Procedure: Upon receiving the request of the grantor to interconnect, the grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the
other affected system or systems, and shall report to the grantor the results of such negotiation no later than sixty (60) days after initiation.
3. Relief: The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the grantor may rescind its request to interconnect upon
petition by the grantee to the grantor, if the grantor finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the
system or systems of the proposed interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in
subscriber rates.
4. Cooperation Required: The grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or City, County, State or
Federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection
of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the franchise area.
5. Initial Technical Requirements To Assure Future Interconnection Capability:
a. Every grantee receiving a franchise to operate a cable communications system within the franchise area shall use the same frequency allocations
for commonly provided television signals so far as is technically and economically feasible.
b. Grantee shall make a reasonable effort to provide local origination and access equipment that is compatible throughout the area served by the
cable system. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-16: SERVICE PROVISIONS:
A. Services To Be Provided: The grantee shall initially provide, as a minimum, the services listed in the franchise agreement. Services shall not be reduced
without at least thirty (30) days' prior notification to grantor and subscribers.
B. Basic Cable Service: The basic cable service shall include any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television signals. This service
shall be provided to all subscribers at the established monthly subscription rates.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 245/581
C. Local Origination Channel: If local origination programming is provided, the grantee shall operate any cablecasting studios on a high-quality,
professional basis for the purpose of providing cablecast programming responsive to local needs and interests.
D. Public, Educational And Government (PEG) Access Facilities: The grantee shall provide the PEG access facilities including channel capacity,
necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation as specified in the franchise agreement.
E. Cable Channels For Commercial Use: The grantee shall designate channel capacity for commercial use as required by applicable law. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-
1991)
9-6-17: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Open Books And Records:
1. The grantor, upon reasonable notice, shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans,
service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise and are
maintained at the local office required by Chapter 5 of this Title; provided, that the grantor shall maintain the confidentiality of any trade secrets or
other proprietary information in the possession of the grantee; and provided further, that records shall be exempt from inspection pursuant to this
subsection to the extent required by applicable law regarding subscriber privacy and to the extent such records are protected by law regarding
subscriber privacy and to the extent such records are protected by law against discovery in civil litigation.
2. If any of such books or records are not kept in the local office, or upon reasonable request made available to the grantor, and if the grantor shall
determine that an examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of grantor's duties, then all travel and
maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by grantee.
B. Records Required: In any event, the grantee shall at all times maintain:
1. The complaint file required by Chapter 5 of this Title.
2. A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built maps showing the exact location of all cable communications system equipment installed or in
use in the franchise area, exclusive of subscriber service drops. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-18: RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR:
A. Right Of Inspection Of Construction: The grantor shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of
the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise and other pertinent provisions of
law.
B. Right Of Intervention: The grantor shall have the right of intervention in any suit or proceeding involving the cable system franchise to which the grantee
is party, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the grantor. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-19: RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTEE:
In the event of any dispute between grantee and grantor over this Chapter or the franchise agreement, or with respect to any rights or obligations arising
therefrom, grantee shall first pursue and exhaust any available administrative remedies. Thereafter grantee may pursue any appropriate legal action. (Ord.
1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-20: FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS:
A. Remedies For Franchise Violations: If the grantee fails to perform any material obligation under the franchise, or fails to do so in a timely manner, the
grantor may at its option, and in its sole discretion:
1. Assess against the grantee monetary damages up to the limits established in the franchise agreement for material franchise violations, said
assessment to be levied against the security fund, hereinabove provided, and collected by grantor after completion of the procedures specified in
subsection B of this Section. The amount of such assessment shall be deemed to represent liquidation of damages actually sustained by grantor by
reason of grantee's failure to perform. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under
the franchise or under applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and
expenses, including actual attorney fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the
franchise. This provision for assessment of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from grantor's right to enforce the provisions
of the construction and performance bonds provided for in Section 9-6-14 of this Chapter and is intended to provide compensation to grantor for
actual damages.
2. Terminate the franchise, for any of the causes stated in Sections 9-6-4 through 9-6-12 of this Chapter.
3. No remedy shall be imposed by grantor against grantee for any violation of the franchise without grantee being afforded due process of law, as
provided for in subsection B of this Section. Grantor may impose any or all of the above enumerated measures against grantee, which shall be in
addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any applicable law.
B. Procedure For Remedying Franchise Violations: In the event that the grantor determines that the grantee has violated any material provision of the
franchise, the grantor may make a written demand on the grantee that it remedy such violation. If the violation is not remedied, or in the process of
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 246/581
being remedied, to the satisfaction of the grantor within thirty (30) days following such demand, the grantor shall determine whether or not such
violation by the grantee was excusable or inexcusable, in accordance with the following procedure:
1. An administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged violation. If this hearing does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or the grantee
requests a public hearing, then a public hearing shall be held, and the grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30)
days' written notice to the grantee of the time and the place of the hearing provided and the allegations of franchise violations.
2. If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation by the grantee was
excusable as provided in subsection C of this Section, the grantor shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time,
in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the grantor may reasonably direct.
3. If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full public proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation was inexcusable, then
the grantor may impose a remedy in accordance with subsection A of this Section.
C. Force Majeure; Grantee's Inability To Perform:
1. In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to any
cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or
sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided grantee has notified grantor in writing within thirty (30) days of its discovery of the
occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited
to, acts of God and civil emergencies.
2. Grantor and grantee, in the franchise agreement, may mutually define those conditions deemed subject to force majeure application. (Ord. 1165, 6-
4-1991)
9-6-21: REPORTS:
A. Annual Reports: Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of grantee's fiscal year, the grantee may be required to submit a written annual
report, in a form requested by the grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information:
1. A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including,
but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of service.
2. A revenue statement, audited by an independent certified public accountant, or certified by an officer of the grantee.
3. A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two (2) years.
4. A list of grantee's officers, members of its boards of directors, and other principals of grantee.
5. A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent (5%) or more of the voting interest in the grantee and its parent, subsidiary and
affiliated corporations and other entities, if any, unless the parent is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available.
6. To the extent that money, other than profits, is paid to a parent, subsidiary, or other person affiliated with the grantee, the amounts of such payments
and the basis for computation of such amounts (e.g., the basis for computing any management fees or share of "home office" overhead).
B. Plant Survey Report: At the grantor's request, grantee shall submit to the grantor an annual plant survey report which shall be a complete survey of the
grantee's plans and a full report thereon. Said report shall include, but not be limited to, a description and as-built maps of the portions of the franchise
area that have been cabled and have all services available, an appropriate engineering evaluation including suitable electronic measurements
conducted in conformity with such requirements, including supervision, as the grantor may prescribe. Said report shall be in sufficient detail to enable
the grantor to ascertain that the service requirements and technical standards of the franchise are achieved and maintained. If grantor has reason to
believe that portions or all of the system do not meet the technical standards incorporated into the franchise agreement, at grantor's request, but no
more often than once per three (3) years, the grantee and the grantor shall agree upon the appointment of a qualified independent engineer to evaluate
and verify the technical performance of the cable system. The cost of such evaluation shall be borne equally by the grantee and the grantor.
C. Copies Of Federal And State Reports: The grantee, upon request, may be required to submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings, applications,
notifications, communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions
by, any Federal, State and local courts, regulatory agencies and other government bodies relating to its cable television operations within the franchise
area. Grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a grantor request. The grantee hereby waives
any right to claim confidential, privileged or proprietary rights to such documents unless such confidential rights are determined to be confidential by
law or by the practices of Federal or State agencies. Such confidential data exempt from public disclosure shall be retained in confidence by the
grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection.
D. Public Reports: A copy of each of grantee's annual and other periodic public financial reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated
corporation and other entities, as the grantor requests, shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request.
E. Complaint File And Reports: An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of any and all complaints regarding the cable system. A
procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the
satisfaction of the grantor. Complete records of grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept. These files and records shall remain open
to the public during normal business hours, so that individuals are able to inspect their own files.
1. A summary of service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and their disposition, upon grantor request, shall be completed for
each month and submitted to the grantor by the tenth day of the succeeding month.
2. A log and summary of all service interruptions.
3. If requested by the grantor, the results of an annual opinion survey report which identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable
communications services offered by the grantee shall be submitted to the grantor no later than two (2) months after the end of grantee's fiscal year.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 247/581
The surveys required to make said report shall be in a form that can be transmitted to subscribers with one or more bills for service, such as postagepaid
self-addressed post cards. At the grantor's option, the grantor may prepare the survey form and request its inclusion with a monthly bill to
subscribers.
F. Miscellaneous Reports: Grantee shall submit to the grantor such other information or reports in such forms and at such times as the grantor may
reasonably request or require.
G. Inspection Of Facilities: The grantee shall allow the grantor to make inspections of any of the grantee's facilities and equipment at any time upon at
least ten (10) days' notice, or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice, to allow grantor to verify the accuracy of any submitted report.
H. Public Inspection: All reports subject to public disclosure shall be available for public inspection at a designated grantor office during normal business
hours.
I. Failure To Report: The wilful refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee to file any of the reports reasonably required, or such other reports as the grantor
reasonably may request, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are
available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
J. False Statements: Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and wilfully by the grantee in any report required
under the franchise may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are
available to the grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
K. Cost Of Reports: One copy of all reports and records required under this or any other Section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee.
(Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-22: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the State and
Federal Government or any administrative agencies thereof. Provided, however, if any such State or Federal law or regulation shall require the grantee to
perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms
of the franchise or any law or regulation of the grantor, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the grantor of the
point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the grantor or the franchise. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-23: SEPARABILITY:
A. Nonmaterial Provisions: If any provision of this Chapter or any related agreements is held by any court or by any Federal, State, or local agency of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal, State or local law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such
court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, and if said provision is considered
nonmaterial by the grantor, said provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this Chapter, and such holding shall not
affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded,
amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision hereof or thereof which has been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law,
rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding on the parties hereto;
provided, that the grantor shall give the grantee thirty (30) days' written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision.
B. Material Provisions: If any material section of this Chapter, as determined by the grantor and the grantee, is held to be invalid or preempted by Federal,
State or County regulations or laws, resulting in a material adverse consequence to either party, the grantor and grantee shall attempt to negotiate
appropriate modifications to the franchise to provide reasonable relief to the grantor or grantee from such invalidity or preemption, including the
payment of damages. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on such modifications, then the dispute shall be submitted to a mutually agreeable
arbitrator, in accordance with state law, who shall determine what modifications and/or liquidated damages are appropriate. The arbitrator's decision
shall be binding on the parties; provided, that no decision of the arbitrator shall require the grantor or grantee to be in violation of any federal or state
law or regulation. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-24: NOTICES:
Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise a local address for service of notices by mail. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-25: CAPTIONS:
The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-26: ENFORCEMENT OF FRANCHISE:
A. No Recourse Against Grantor: The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or
employees for any loss, costs, expenses, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the
franchise.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 248/581
B. Nonenforcement By Grantor: The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any
failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. 1165, 6-4-1991)
9-6-27: STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES:
A. PEG Fee Established: In accord with Public Utilities Code section 5870(n), any grantee of a franchise, or state franchisee, must pay the city a fee for
the support of PEG channel facilities.
1. The amount of the PEG fee established by this section is two percent (2%) of gross revenues, as defined in this code, the applicable city issued
franchise, or Public Utilities Code section 5860(d).
B. Franchise Fee Established: For any state franchisee, the amount of the franchise fee imposed by Public Utilities Code section 5840(q) is five percent
(5%) of gross revenues, as defined in Public Utilities Code section 5860(d).
1. In accord with Public Utilities Code section 5860(a), the city manager, or designee, will prepare and provide to state franchisees all necessary
documentation supporting the percentage franchise fee paid by the incumbent cable operator serving the city.
C. Notices From State Franchisees: Any notice a state franchisee is required to deliver to the city by Public Utilities Code section 5840(m) must be
delivered to the city manager, or designee.
D. No Intention To Limit Or Restrict Tax, Fee, Or Charge: Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or restrict in any way the imposition of any existing or
future generally applicable, nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral tax, fee, or charge to a state franchisee, city franchisee or the services the
franchisees provide.
E. Customer Service Provisions For State Franchisees:
1. All state franchisees must comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations regarding customer service and customer protection.
2. The city manager, or designee, may review the performance of state franchisees for compliance with the customer service requirements specified in
Public Utilities Code section 5900 (the "customer service standards").
3. If the city believes a material breach of the customer service standards has occurred, the city manager must give the state franchisee written notice
of any alleged material breach(es). The state franchisee must remedy the specified material breach(es) not later than thirty (30) days from receipt of
the notice.
4. If the state franchisee fails to remedy the specified material breach(es) within thirty (30) days, the city manager, or designee, may impose monetary
penalties as set forth in this section.
F. Monetary Penalties: The city manager, or designee, may impose monetary penalties as provided by this section as follows:
1. Up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each
occurrence of a material breach.
2. For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve (12) months, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material
breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.
3. For a third or further material breach of the same nature within twelve (12) months, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each
material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.
4. Any monetary penalty imposed under this section may be appealed by the state franchisee to the city council. Appeals must be received in writing by
the city clerk within sixty (60) days of imposition of the penalty. The state franchisee may present any relevant written or oral evidence of its choice.
The city council may uphold or reverse, in whole or in part, the imposition of the monetary penalties.
G. Compatible Format: The city manager, or designee, must ensure PEG transmissions, content, and programming provided by the city to a state
franchisee is in a format compatible with the state franchisee's system. In the alternative, the transmissions, content, and programming may be
provided in an industry standard format, in accord with Public Utilities Code section 5870(g)(1).
H. Unsatisfied Obligations: For the duration of any city issued franchise, if that franchisee has existing unsatisfied obligations under the franchise to pay to
the city any cash payments for the ongoing costs of public, educational, and government access channel facilities or institutional networks, the fee
payable by each city and state franchisee is the franchisee's pro rata per subscriber share of the cash payment required to be paid by the city
franchisee to the city for the costs of PEG channel facilities.
1. Within forty five (45) days after receiving notice required by Public Utilities Code section 5840(n), each city and state franchisee must provide to the
city manager, or designee, a written statement of the number of its subscribers within the franchisee's service area in the city.
2. Within forty five (45) days after receiving all franchisee subscriber number statements, the city manager, or designee, must calculate the division of
the cash payments among all city and state franchisees, and provide written notice to each franchisee of the franchisee's share of the cash payment.
This amount may be expressed as a percentage of gross revenue or as an amount per subscriber, per month, or otherwise.
I. Interconnection: To properly serve the city's interest in PEG programming, each state franchisee and city franchisee must comply with the PEG system
interconnection requirements of Public Utilities Code section 5870. The city manager, or his or her designee, may make any interconnection
determinations of the city under Public Utilities Code section 5870, including requiring interconnection where the city franchisee and state franchisee
fail to reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement. (Ord. 1418, 4-1-2008)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 249/581
Chapter 7
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
9-7-1: CITY HALL:
A. Designation: That certain one story brick building located upon the following described real property situated within the City:
Lots 1 to 5, both inclusive, Block 42, El Segundo Sheet No. 3, as per map recorded in Book 20, Pages 22 and 23 of Maps, on file in the office of the
County Recorder of Los Angeles County, is hereby named and designated as the City Hall in and for the City.
B. Main Entrance: The main entrance to the City Hall designated by the preceding subsection is hereby fixed and designated as 350 Main Street in the
City.
C. Council Chamber: That certain room in the extreme west side of the City Hall designated in subsection A of this Section is hereby named and
designated as the chamber of the City Council. (Ord. 472, 12-21-1955)
9-7-2: PUBLIC LIBRARY:
There is hereby established in and for the City, a public library to be known as the "El Segundo Public Library". (Ord. 660, 3-13-1967)
Chapter 8
PERMITS AUTHORIZING EVENTS CONDUCTED IN CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating public events conducted in city parks and facilities that are operated and maintained by the city
recreation and parks department. This chapter is intended to ensure that such events are safe, do not unreasonably interfere with the general public's use
of parks and park facilities, and do not damage public property beyond ordinary wear and tear. In addition, this chapter is intended to require any person or
organization sponsoring or conducting an event to compensate the general public for all costs incurred in connection with operating and maintaining the
parks or park facilities reasonably attributable to that event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
BASIC RATE: The fee established by city council resolution for using park property or facilities. The basic rate is based on a fair share of that part of the
overall cost of operating and maintaining the city's parks and facilities reasonably attributable to a permittee's use of city park facilities.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager or designee.
DIRECTOR: The recreation and parks director, or designee.
EVENT: Any of the following:
A. Any activity in a park that is planned for, or carried out in a manner to attract, more than one hundred (100) people to attend or participate in the
activity;
B. Any activity in which the persons participating in or viewing the activity are charged a fee or solicited for donations;
C. Any activity which includes the sale of food, beverages or merchandise, and/or the rental of equipment or other things; and
D. Any activity where the nature of the activity necessitates reservation of a park, or portion thereof, before the activity for the applicant's exclusive use
or where a permit applicant otherwise seeks to reserve a park, or portion thereof, before the activity for the applicant's exclusive use.
"Event" does not mean any of the following:
A. Any activity conducted in a park or portion of such park that is sponsored or carried out by another public agency, a private organization, or an
individual pursuant to a lease or other agreement between the city and such public agency, private organization, or individual;
B. Filming at a park where the person filming possesses a filming permit issued pursuant to this code; and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 250/581
C. Special events that use a park where the person conducting or sponsoring the special event possesses a special event permit issued pursuant to
this code.
FREE SPEECH: Activity protected by the first amendment of the United States constitution and/or article 1, section 2 of the California constitution provided
that such activity is a significant part of the event.
IN WRITING: A telegram, facsimile, or any other written document.
PARK: Any city park or park facility operated or maintained by the recreation and parks department including, without limitation, baseball fields and
playgrounds, but does not include golf courses.
PERMITTEE: A person or entity to which the city issues a permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-3: ADMINISTRATION BY RECREATION AND PARKS DIRECTOR:
The city's recreation and parks director is authorized to receive applications, issue and revoke permits, and otherwise implement this chapter. (Ord. 1363,
6-3-2003)
9-8-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct an event in a park unless authorized by a permit issued by the director
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-5: NOTICES:
A. Where the provisions of this chapter require that an applicant/permittee be served with notice, such notice is deemed served when personally delivered
to the applicant/permittee; when deposited in first class U.S. mail, addressed to the applicant/permittee's last known address; or when sent via
facsimile to the applicant/permittee's last known facsimile number.
B. Unless otherwise provided, written notification to a permittee/applicant of a permit decision will state with particularity the basis for such decision. (Ord.
1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-6: ESTABLISHING FEES:
All fees applicable to this chapter including, without limitation, the basic rate, are established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-7: APPLICATION FEE:
Applications for a permit authorizing an event in a park must be accompanied by an application fee based on the estimated administrative costs incurred
by the city for processing applications and issuing permits. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-8: FREE SPEECH EVENT FEE:
The director must waive any fee required by this chapter for any permit authorizing a free speech event upon proof of the applicant's inability to pay, which
must be supported by a financial declaration. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-9: BASIC RATE:
A condition of issuing a permit is that the permittee pay the city the basic rate as follows:
A. Category 1 permittees do not pay the basic rate. Permittees in this category are individuals who reside within the city using parks for personal use (but
not for profit) or nonprofit organizations with a primary place of business within the city's jurisdiction. Nonprofit organizations must provide evidence of
their status to the director's satisfaction. Examples of such evidence include, without limitation, articles of incorporation, bylaws, or proof of internal
revenue code section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(6) status. Nonprofit organizations may use parks for fundraising activities which will not be considered a for
profit event.
B. Category 2 permittees pay the basic rate. Permittees in this category are commercial businesses with a primary place of business within the city's
jurisdiction.
C. Category 3 permittees pay the basic rate plus ten dollars ($10.00) or such other amount as may be determined by the director as authorized by council
resolution. Permittees in this category include nonresident individuals and nonprofit organizations with a primary place of business outside the city's
jurisdiction.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 251/581
D. Category 4 permittees pay the basic rate plus an amount determined by the director as authorized by council resolution. Permittees in this category are
commercial businesses with a primary place of business outside the city's jurisdiction.
E. Category 5 permittees pay the full basic rate plus twenty five percent (25%) of gross receipts or a negotiated flat fee. Included in this category are
permittees, whether located inside or outside the city's jurisdiction, using parks commercially and for financial gain. In determining whether an event is
commercial and for financial gain, the director may rely upon any reasonable evidence including, without limitation, advertisements, documentation of
entrance fees, or requests to restrict public access to the event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-10: ADDITIONAL USE FEE:
A condition of issuing a permit is that the permittee must pay the city additional park use fees equal to the city's total estimated cost for providing city
personnel and/or equipment, if any, needed to monitor an event or otherwise provide city services for, or in connection with, the event. These fees will be
determined by the director based on the estimate of the police chief, fire chief, and/or director as to the number and hours of employment of city personnel
necessary to control the event or otherwise provide city services for or in connection with such event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-11: TIME FOR DEPOSITING FEES:
A permit is not valid unless, in addition to the other conditions contained in this chapter, the permittee pays all additional use fees to the city within five (5)
business days after a permit is issued. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-12: REFUNDS:
A. The director will refund all fees submitted pursuant to this chapter, except for the application fee, if a permittee cancels a permit more than ten (10)
business days before the date of an event.
B. If a permittee cancels a permit less than ten (10) business days before the event, the director will refund fifty percent (50%) of the basic rate fees and all
other fees excluding the initial application fee and any fees for canceled services such as security, police or insurance incurred by the city. (Ord. 1363,
6-3-2003)
9-8-13: APPLICATION TIME REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit authorizing an event must be filed in the director's office at least:
1. Fifty (50) days before the date of such event to ensure administrative review and city council appeal;
2. Twenty (20) business days before the date of such event, in which case the opportunity for a city council appeal is deemed waived; or
3. A lesser time period approved by the director provided that there is sufficient time to process the application pursuant to this chapter. Any applicant
submitting an application pursuant to this section less than twenty (20) days before an event is deemed to have waived the administrative review and
city council appeal.
B. Except as provided in this chapter, completed applications for a permit authorizing an event will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the
director within seven (7) business days after receiving the completed application. Following his/her decision, the director must promptly attempt to
notify the applicant orally, and will provide written notification to the applicant.
C. Unless otherwise provided, the director must receive the applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval within five (5) business days
after the applicant was served with notification of the decision. Failure to receive actual notice does not invalidate the permit. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-14: FREE SPEECH EVENT APPLICATION TIME REQUIREMENTS:
A. Completed applications for a permit authorizing a free speech event must be filed in the director's office at least:
1. Thirty five (35) days before the date of such event to ensure administrative review and city council appeal;
2. Two (2) business days before the date of such event in which case the opportunity for a city council appeal is deemed waived; or
3. A time period less than two (2) business days before the date of such event upon good cause shown. Applications will not be accepted less than
twenty four (24) hours before an event.
B. Completed applications will be denied, approved, or conditionally approved by the director within one business day after receiving the application. The
director must promptly attempt to notify the applicant orally, and provide written notification to the applicant and director. Such notice must provide
detailed facts and reasons for any denial or conditional approval. The director must consult with the city attorney before denying, or specially
conditioning, a permit for a free speech event.
C. The director must receive applicant's acceptance of the approval or conditional approval at least forty eight (48) hours before the event. Failure to
accept the director's decision or to timely file an administrative review request is deemed a withdrawal of the application. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 252/581
9-8-15: APPLICATION FORM AND CONTENT:
Permit applications will be in a form prescribed by the director and contain all of the following information:
A. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person filing the application;
B. If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the organization; and, if requested by
the director, written documentation of the authority under which the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;
C. The name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number of the person who will be present during, and responsible for, the event;
D. The name, mailing address, and daytime and evening telephone number of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the applicant is
unavailable;
E. The nature of the event;
F. The estimated duration of the event;
G. The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the event, including assembly and removal;
H. The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries and activity locations;
I. The estimated number of participants in the event;
J. Unless the use is prohibited by this code, the type and estimated number of vehicles, animals and/or structures that will be used in the event;
K. A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed at the event;
L. The number, size, and material of construction of any signs or banners to be used in the event;
M. The event's parking requirements;
N. The location of any water, first aid, or comfort stations to be provided at the event;
O. The type and number of any vendors who will sell or prepare food, beverages or other goods or services at the event for which a business license is
required by this code;
P. Whether alcohol will be served at the event; and
Q. The type of entertainment. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-16: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIRECTOR:
In addition to the information required in this chapter, applications for all permits authorizing an event must include such supplemental information which
the director may find reasonably necessary, given the nature of the event, in order to determine whether to approve or deny a permit. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-
2003)
9-8-17: PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW BY CITY OFFICERS:
A. After an event permit application is filed, the director will promptly forward the application to directors, or designees (collectively "reviewing officers"),
whose departments are affected by the proposed event for their recommendations. The reviewing officers may include, without limitation:
1. The fire chief;
2. The police chief; and/or
3. The public works director.
B. Upon receiving an application, the reviewing officers will consider the application, conduct any necessary investigation, and provide the director with
written recommendations regarding:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 253/581
1. Any special conditions for a permit;
2. Whether, based on the scope of the proposed event, a pre-event operational meeting is required. Should such a meeting be necessary, the director
will notify the applicant of the time and place of the meeting within a reasonable time before the event; and
3. Any additional recommendations.
C. The reviewing officers should complete their review before when the director must make a decision on the application. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-18: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A. The director must issue a permit if:
1. The application was complete in accordance with this chapter;
2. There are no grounds for denying the permit; and
3. The applicant accepts the permit approval or conditional approval in writing.
B. Use of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter must conform to the general permit conditions of this chapter and, if applicable, special permit
conditions reasonably deemed necessary by the director to protect public safety, and/or welfare. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-19: PERMIT DENIAL:
A permit may be denied for the following reasons:
A. The application is incomplete;
B. The applicant failed to provide reasonable supplemental application information requested by the director;
C. Information submitted by the applicant is materially false;
D. The event's time and/or method will unreasonably interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site of the event;
E. The concentration of persons, animals, and/or vehicles at the event prevents public safety and/or emergency services from reaching areas at or
contiguous to the event;
F. The size of the event will overextend public safety and/or emergency services to the extent that the safety of event participants, attendees, and/or the
remainder of the city will be seriously jeopardized; provided, however, that this does not authorize denying a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others;
G. The location of the event will substantially interfere with previously scheduled construction or maintenance work at the event site;
H. The application was not timely submitted and there is insufficient time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the timelines herein;
I. The proposed event conflicts or interferes with an event previously permitted, or about to be permitted, for the same location, date, and time; or
J. The nature or size of the event threatens to cause significant damage to a park or park property, including, without limitation, landscaping or natural
vegetation; provided, however, this does not authorize denying a permit because of threatened damage to a park or park property caused by the
actions of persons not conducting such event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-20: ALTERNATIVE TIME, PLACE, OR MANNER:
If the director denies a permit for an event that would be acceptable by changing the event's time, place, or manner, then the director will inform the
applicant of such alternatives. Should the applicant accept the alternative time, place, or manner then the director will issue a permit in accordance with
this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-21: NOTICE OF DENIAL:
Where the director denies a permit, the director will serve notice to the applicant and provide copies to the city attorney. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-22: INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 254/581
Permittees must enter into a hold harmless agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, with the city which will, in part, indemnify city, its officers,
employees, and agents, from any liability arising from permittee's event. Such an agreement will be filed with the director before a permit is issued. (Ord.
1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-23: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
A. Insurance Requirements: Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, permittees must obtain public liability insurance from an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state of California and having a financial rating in "Best's Insurance Guide" of not less than "A:VII". Such insurance must
provide "occurrence" coverage against liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with such event.
The amount of such insurance will be based upon the city's insurance guidelines and reflect the size and nature of the event and the risks foreseeably
involved. Such insurance will name the city and the city's officers, employees, and agents as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. In
addition, such insurance must be primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to the city and will include a severability of
interest (cross liability) clause. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability in
an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
B. Certificates Of Insurance: A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the city's risk
manager, must be filed with the director not less than ten (10) business days, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, before the date of the event
unless the director for good cause waives the filing deadline. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-24: WAIVER OF INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
The insurance required by this section must be waived by the director for a free speech permit. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-25: SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A. The director may condition a permit with reasonable requirements concerning the time, place, or manner of holding such event as necessary to protect
the safety of persons and property or to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the site of the event, provided that these requirements
are not imposed in a manner that will unreasonably restrict the exercise of free speech rights.
B. Conditions may include, without limitation:
1. Accommodating an event's pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including restriction of events to a particular park;
2. Avoiding substantial interference with public safety and/or emergency service access;
3. Limiting the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures to be displayed or used in the event;
4. Having city personnel inspecting and approving stages, booths, and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the event, in order to
ensure that such structures or vehicles are safely constructed and can be safely operated;
5. Providing the city a security deposit for repair and/or additional maintenance if the event uses structures, displays or uses large animals, operates
water stations, food sales, beverage sales, and/or sales of other goods or services;
6. Providing and using traffic cones and barricades;
7. Providing and operating first aid stations or sanitary facilities, including sanitary facilities accessible to the disabled;
8. Providing and using garbage containers, and cleaning and restoring the event site upon termination of the event;
9. Using sound amplification equipment, and restricting the amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of the event;
10. The manner for providing notice of permit conditions to event participants;
11. Providing and using emergency services;
12. Obtaining any and all licenses or permits required by this code or California law for the sale or distribution of food, beverages, or other goods or
services at the event, including, without limitation, a valid health permit as required by California Health and Safety Code section 113920, and any
successor statute or regulation, if food is distributed to the public more than three (3) days in any ninety (90) day period;
13. Providing electricity, gas, and water for the event;
14. Providing signage and barricades that may be necessary to avoid conflicts between persons participating in the event and other persons using the
park in and around the site of the event or which may be necessary to protect the park, landscaping, or natural vegetation in and around site of the
event;
15. Providing monitors and security personnel that may be necessary to safely carry out the event;
16. Permitting access to the site of the event through park gates at times when gates are normally closed in order to prepare for an event or to clean up
and remove equipment and structures at the conclusion of the event;
17. Permitting overnight camping by persons engaged in preparing for the event or providing overnight security for equipment and structures utilized in
such event; and
18. Providing for the manner in which alcohol sales and service, if any, are conducted. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 255/581
9-8-26: SUBSEQUENT CONDITIONS:
A. The director may add additional conditions to previously issued permits upon learning or discovering facts not previously disclosed or reasonably
discoverable.
B. Should subsequent conditions be required, the director must serve written notice on the permittee of this decision. When acting upon information
obtained twenty four (24) hours before an event, the director may orally inform the permittee, and city personnel overseeing the event, of the new
conditions.
C. Except where otherwise provided, a permittee may seek review of imposition of subsequent conditions to the director as provided in this chapter. The
city manager's decision is a final determination. There is no right of city council appeal.
D. Except where otherwise provided, an applicant conducting a free speech event may appeal the decision to impose subsequent conditions through a
hearing before the city manager. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There is no right of city council appeal.
1. An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing provided the applicant appeals the director's decision within twenty four (24) hours of receiving notice
of such conditions and the event's purpose is for free speech.
2. The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the next business day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise
agreed upon. The city manager must issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and also notify the applicant and the director in writing of
the city manager's decision. Any notification will describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-27: RIGHT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Except as otherwise provided, an applicant may request administrative review of the director's decision pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-28: TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. Except as otherwise provided, a request for review must be commenced within five (5) days from the date on which written notice of the director's
decision is served on the applicant/permittee.
B. If the request is untimely, the director may, nevertheless, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-29: COMMENCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A request for administrative review must be on a form provided by the director and contain the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person making the request;
B. A description of the decision, determination or order which is the subject of the review, and the date such decision, determination or order was made or
issued;
C. A brief description of all grounds for making the request; and
D. Such other information as may be required by the director. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-30: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. Upon request for administrative review being filed, the director must promptly provide a copy of the notice to the city manager.
B. Upon receiving a request for review from the director, the city manager must review the request and, within ten (10) days of receiving the request notice,
provide the appellant with a written notification that:
1. The director's decision is affirmed;
2. The director's decision is modified;
3. The director's decision is reversed and a permit is issued or issued without special conditions.
C. The city manager may, but is not required to, conduct a hearing at a time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. If the parties cannot agree on the
time or place, then it will be held the next business day at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. at the city manager's office.
D. In addition to other provisions of this chapter, any notification to the requester must set forth any modifications of the director's decision. (Ord. 1363, 6-
3-2003)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 256/581
9-8-31: CITY COUNCIL APPEAL:
Unless otherwise provided, an applicant may appeal the city manager's decision to the city council within ten (10) days of that decision as provided
elsewhere in this code or by city policy and procedure. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-32: FREE SPEECH EVENTS:
A. The applicant may seek, in writing, administrative review by the city manager within one business day of the director's oral or written notification,
whichever is first, of a denial, revocation, or subsequent conditioning. An administrative hearing will be held at a time and place mutually agreeable to
the parties. If the parties cannot agree on the time or place, then it will be held the next business day after the director's decision at four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. in the city manager's office. The city manager may issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing, but must notify the applicant and the
director in writing of the city manager's decision. Any notification will describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons supporting the decision.
B. The city manager's decision:
1. Is a final determination without right to city council appeal if applicant waived the applicant's right to city council appeal as provided in this chapter;
2. If the right to city council appeal is not waived, may be appealed to the city council in writing within two (2) business days of either oral or written
notification of the city manager's decision, whichever is first.
C. Applicant will be deemed to have waived administrative review rights should the applicant fail to:
1. File a completed application at least two (2) days before an event;
2. Seek review of the director's decision; or
3. Attend the administrative hearing personally or through an authorized representative. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-33: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A. The director may revoke a permit upon learning or discovering facts requiring permit denial not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable.
B. The director may revoke an event permit when the permittee and/or event violates the permit's terms and conditions, or when event participants violate
applicable laws or regulations; provided, however, that this subsection will not authorize revoking a permit because of the need to protect participants
from the conduct of others; and, provided further, that the director will not revoke a permit without warning the permittee and allowing him/her to correct
the violation(s) within a reasonable time.
C. If the director revokes a permit before the date of the event, the director must immediately serve written notice of revocation on the permittee and
provide copies of the notice to all city personnel charged with carrying out any responsibility under this chapter. If the director revokes a permit on the
day of the event after learning of facts justifying revocation less than twenty four (24) hours before the event commences, the director must announce
such action to the event participants, to those city officers and employees monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the person in charge
of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the event. Written notice must be delivered after such action to the permittee and director.
D. An applicant is entitled to an appeals hearing before the city manager provided:
1. The applicant appeals the director's decision within forty eight (48) hours of receiving notice of such conditions; and
2. The event is scheduled at least forty eight (48) hours after the hearing time.
3. The hearing will be at the city manager's office at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed upon. The
city manager must issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and also notify the applicant, and the director in writing of the city
manager's decision.
E. The city manager's decision is a final determination. There is no right of city council appeal.
F. The director or city manager can only revoke a permit for a free speech event after consulting with the city attorney. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-34: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF EVENT:
The city manager and any sworn public safety officer may temporarily suspend an event whenever there is an emergency that requires such action to
protect public safety. Should this occur, the permittee and event participants must immediately comply with the suspending officer's instructions. The
director will immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and will notify the applicant and the city manager in writing, within twenty four (24) hours after
the suspension, citing with particularity the facts and the reasons for the suspension. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-35: CORDONING OFF THE SITE OF AN EVENT:
The city manager, or designee, is authorized and directed to establish traffic and/or crowd control devices on or within the city's streets, parking facilities,
sidewalks, or other public rights of way, and to undertake other actions necessary to cordon off the site of an event. In addition, the city manager, or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 257/581
director, will, when appropriate, cause the route or site of such event to be posted as a no parking zone for the duration of the event and sufficiently in
advance thereof as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from parking along the site of the event. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
9-8-36: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING EVENTS:
A. Interference With Event: It is unlawful to physically obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by a permit or with any
person, animal, or vehicle participating or used in such event.
B. Prohibited Parking: It is unlawful to park vehicles along or within any portion of the site of an event authorized by a permit, when the route or site had
been posted as a no parking zone by the director in the manner authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1363, 6-3-2003)
Title 10
PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapter 1
PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
10-1-1: DEFINITION:
"Public park" means and includes public parks, public playgrounds, public recreation centers or areas and other public areas created, established,
designated, maintained, provided or set aside by the City for the purposes of public rest, play, recreation, enjoyment or assembly, and shall include all
buildings and structures located thereon or therein. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944)
10-1-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person to comply with and observe each and all of the following rules and regulations relating to public parks within the City,
which are hereby promulgated, designated, fixed and established in this Chapter. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944)
10-1-3: APPLICATION FOR RESERVATION:
A. Contents Of Application: Reservations for tables, space or facilities in public parks may be obtained on written application to the Director of Recreation
and Parks or his authorized representative, stating or showing:
1. The purpose for which the permit is requested;
2. The day and the hours between which the use for which permit is sought, will be made; and
3. A truthful estimate of the number of persons anticipated to be present and the name of the person, company, society, organization, gathering or
group to whom the permit is to be issued, if granted.
B. Grant Or Denial: Permits or reservations applied for may be granted or withheld by the Director of Recreation and Parks or his authorized
representative in his discretion, and may contain such terms or conditions as the Director of Recreation and Parks or his authorized representative may
impose with reference thereto, and no permit or reservation shall be valid unless the same is applied for and granted as contemplated in this Section.
All reservations shall be subject to cancellation as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 766, 6-28-1971)
10-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Park Rule One; Animals And Fowl: No person within any public park shall hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal or fowl of any kind; provided,
that this shall not apply to dogs when led by a cord or chain not more than six feet (6') long.
B. Park Rule Two; Riding Or Driving Animals Or Vehicles: No person within any public park shall ride or drive any horse or other animal, or propel any
vehicle, cycle or automobile, except in designated areas. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944)
C. Park Rule Three; Consumption Or Possession Of Intoxicating Liquor: No person shall drink any intoxicating liquor or possess an open container of an
alcoholic beverage upon any street, sidewalk or parkway, park, playground, or in any public place, or in any place open to the patronage of the public,
which premises are not licensed for the consumption of liquor on the premises. (Ord. 700, 7-22-1968)
D. Park Rule Four; Injuring Structures, Vegetation: No person within any public park shall cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock,
building, cage, pen, monument, sidewalk, paved area, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property; or, pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any
shrub, bush, plant or flower; or, mark or write upon, paint or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench, sidewalk, paved area or
other structure.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 258/581
E. Park Rule Five; Removing Vegetation, Gravel: No person within any public park shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or
fertilizer.
F. Park Rule Six; Water Restrictions: No person within any public park shall swim, fish in, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain, pond, lake or
stream; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the use for the purpose intended of any casting pool, wading
pool or bathing pool, specially provided for the particular use.
G. Park Rule Seven; Use Of Fires: No person within any public park shall make or kindle a fire except in picnic stoves or fireplaces provided for that
purpose.
H. Park Rule Eight; Camping: No person within any public park shall camp or lodge therein, except by permission in writing from the City Council.
I. Park Rule Nine; Cooking: No person within any public park shall cook, prepare, serve or eat any lunch, barbecue or picnic except at the places provided
therefor.
J. Park Rule Ten; Waste Liquid Disposal: No person within any public park shall wash dishes or empty salt water or other waste liquids elsewhere than in
the sinks provided for such purposes.
K. Park Rule Eleven; Refuse Disposal: No person within any public park shall leave any garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than in
the receptacles provided therefor.
L. Park Rule Twelve; Playing Games: No person within any public park shall play or engage in any baseball, softball, football, soccer ball, volley ball or
other game excepting at such places as shall be especially designated or set apart for that purpose.
M. Park Rule Thirteen; Gambling: No person within any public park shall play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on
with cards, dice or other device for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative of value, or maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other
instrument of gambling or gaming.
N. Park Rule Fourteen; Indecent Conduct; Disturbing Peace: No person within any public park shall indulge in riotous, indecent conduct, or abusive,
threatening, profane or indecent language or operate any radio or musical instrument in such a manner as to disturb in any manner any picnic,
meeting, services, concert, exercise or exhibition.
O. Park Rule Fifteen; Disturbing Concerts, Meetings: No person within any public park shall disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, services, concert,
exercise or exhibition.
P. Park Rule Sixteen; Distribution Of Handbills, Matter: No person within any public park shall distribute any handbills or circulars, or post, place or erect
any bills, notice, paper or advertising device or matter of any kind. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944)
Q. Park Rule Seventeen; Hours Of Operation: No person shall remain, stay or loiter in any public park between the period commencing at ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. on any day and ending one hour before sunrise of the following day, except by special written permission of either the City Council or the
Director of Recreation and Parks. (Ord. 766, 6-28-1971)
R. Park Rule Eighteen; Permission To Hold Meetings, Concerts: No person within any public park shall hold any meeting, service, concert, exercise or
exhibition without first obtaining written permission from the City Council to do so.
S. Park Rule Nineteen; Permission For Certain Groups: No person, company, society, organization, gathering or group of more than twenty five (25)
persons shall hold or conduct any picnic, celebration, parade, service, exercise, gathering, assembly or meeting in any public park within the City
without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Recreation and Parks Department, and no person shall attend, take part in or be a participant in
any such picnic, celebration, service, exercise, gathering, assembly or meeting in the public park, unless such permission has been first obtained.
T. Park Rule Twenty; Women's Restroom Restricted: No male person over eight (8) years of age shall enter or use any toilet or restroom for women in any
public park.
U. Park Rule Twenty Two; Reserved Signs, Removal: No person within any public park shall remove from any park equipment any sign indicating that the
equipment is reserved.
V. Park Rule Twenty Two; Reserved Tables, Space Or Facility: No person within any public park shall use or attempt to use or interfere with the use of any
table, space or facility in the park which at the time is reserved by written reservation then in effect issued to or for any other person; provided,
however, that all the reservations shall specify the period covered by same and shall be subject to cancellation by the Recreation and Parks
Department. Unless the actual use of the table, space or facility referred to in any reservation is commenced within thirty (30) minutes after the period
covered by the reservation begins, the reservation shall thereupon be void and all rights under the reservation may be cancelled by the Recreation and
Parks Department. (Ord. 279, 7-19-1944; amd. 1969 Code)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 259/581
Chapter 2
WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING1
(Rep. by Ord. 1514, 12-1-2015)
Chapter 3
BEACH REGULATIONS
10-3-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all ocean beaches in the city as defined in section 10-3-2 of this chapter, which are maintained for the use of
the general public by the state, the county, and the city, or by any department thereof, or by any other public body. This chapter does not apply to any
parks. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol
by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
BEACH: All that area lying adjacent to the Pacific Ocean within the city of El Segundo, described as follows:
A strip of land of variable width lying westerly of the westerly line of Lot 1, Tract 1314, recorded in Map Book 20, Page 161 in the office of the County
Recorder of the County of Los Angeles, and lying westerly of the westerly line of Lot 22, Tract 2356, recorded in Map Book 28, Page 42, in the office of
said County Recorder; extending from the northerly City boundary line (said line also being the westerly prolongation of the northerly line of said Lot 1,
Tract 1314) to the southerly City boundary line (said line also being the westerly prolongation of the southerly line of property described by deed recorded
August 10, 1954, in Map Book 45398, Page 396, of said County Recorder).
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city of El Segundo and his duly authorized officers.
LOITERING: To idle, to loaf, to stand idly by, or to walk, drive or ride about aimlessly without lawful purpose.
VESSEL: Includes every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on
water. "Vessel" includes a raft, but does not include a surfboard, paddleboard, or a standard surf mat. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A person shall not enter, be, or remain on any beach unless he complies with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such beach, and
with all other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-4: EXERCISE OF POWER BY OFFICIALS:
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the chief of police, or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty performed
by a deputy of the officer or by a lifeguard or other person authorized, pursuant to law, by the chief of police, or other public officer, unless this chapter
expressly provides otherwise. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. In order to protect public beach areas bordering the Pacific Ocean from damage and in
order to preserve the peace therein, the chief of police may issue citations in accordance with section 853.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973;
amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-6: NONLIABILITY OF COUNTY OR CITY:
A person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this chapter does so at his own risk without liability on the part of the county or city for any injury to
person or property resulting therefrom. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to acts performed:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 260/581
A. In an emergency, for the purpose of protecting life or property;
B. By employees of the city, county or by employees of the state or other public body maintaining a beach, for the purpose of performing their duties; (Ord.
803, 3-12-1973)
C. For the purpose of giving instruction, training or exhibitions, when specific permission to give such has been received from the chief of police;
D. When special permit has been issued by the city council. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-8: HAZARDOUS AREAS:
Whenever any county lifeguard finds that because of extra high surf, riptide, or other hazardous conditions, it is unsafe for the average person to swim or
bathe within a certain area of the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter, during the time such hazardous conditions
exist such lifeguard may instruct all persons not to swim or bathe in such area. All persons shall comply with such instructions. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-9: MEASUREMENTS FROM SHORE:
In subsections 10-3-11D, E and T of this chapter, and whenever elsewhere, a distance from shore is specified, it means the distance measured at right
angles to the tangent of the actual line between the water and the unsubmerged beach as it exists at the time of measurement. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
10-3-10: MOTOR VEHICLES:
If the chief of police finds that at certain times, or under specified restrictions, or at designated places a person can so operate a motor vehicle so as not to
interfere in any way with the use of any beach, he may grant such person permission so to operate such motor vehicle. No person shall bring to, or
operate on, any beach any motor vehicle except as permitted by the Chief of Police and subject to all of the conditions which are a part of such
permission. If permission to operate a motor vehicle is granted, a person shall park such motor vehicle only in those areas designated by the Chief of
Police for parking. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
10-3-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Alcoholic Beverages; Intoxication:
1. Possession Or Consumption Prohibited: No person shall enter, be or remain on any beach while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling,
giving away or consuming any alcoholic beverage.
2. Intoxicated Persons: An intoxicated person in an intoxicated condition shall not enter, remain on, or be on any beach.
B. Animals:
1. Bringing To Beach Prohibited: No person shall maintain or bring on any beach nor bring into the waters of the Pacific Ocean adjacent to any beach,
any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, dog, cat or other animal of any kind, whether such animal is leashed or unleashed.
2. Riding Horses, Other Animals: No person shall ride a horse, mule, burro, or donkey, or other similar animal, or lead such animal on, upon, along any
beach or in or along the waters of the Pacific Ocean adjacent to any beach.
C. Ball Regulations: No person shall cast, toss, throw, kick, or roll any ball, tube or any light object other than inflated rubber balls not less than ten inches
(10") in diameter upon or over any beach regulated by this Chapter or upon or over any waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite such beach.
D. Bathing, Swimming: No person shall swim, bathe, or immerse himself in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter
more than two hundred (200) yards from shore except:
1. A person who is the owner of a vessel, or who acts at the request of such owner while engaged in servicing or repairing such vessel, and then only
in the immediate area of such vessel.
2. A person engaged in the sport commonly known as aquaplaning, water skiing, or any derivations thereof; provided, that such person is at all times
wearing a safety belt approved by the Director.
3. A skin diver equipped with swim fins and a face plate if at all times he maintains within fifty (50) yards of himself a boat or a surf mat, paddleboard or
surfboard upon which there is a rectangular flag twelve inches by fifteen inches (12" x 15"), orange-red in color with a white diagonal stripe three
inches (3") wide running from one corner to the diagonally opposite corner. The flag shall be flown high enough so as not to touch the water.
4. No person shall surf more than fifty (50) yards beyond the farthest breaking wave when such farthest breaking wave is more than one hundred fifty
(150) yards from shore.
E. Boating: No person shall operate any vessel within three hundred (300) yards of the shoreline of any beach regulated by this Chapter except when
necessary in taking it to or from its lawful mooring place or when necessary in the case of emergency, or upon special permit issued by the City
Council.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 261/581
F. Disturbance: No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any beach by:
1. Any unduly loud or unusual noise; or
2. By tooting, blowing, or sounding any automobile siren, horn, signal or noise-making device; or
3. By any tumultuous conduct; or
4. By the use of any vulgar, profane or indecent language.
G. Fires: No person shall light or maintain any fire on any beach.
H. Flora And Turf: No person shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate, or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion thereof, growing on
the beach. No person shall remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from the beach.
I. Glass, Bottles: No person shall place, throw, leave, keep or maintain any bottle, glass, crockery, sharp or pointed article or thing in such a manner that
any person on a beach is or may be cut, pricked, or in any way injured thereby.
J. Guy Wires: No person shall fasten or maintain any guy wire, guy rope or exterior bracing or support of any tent, lodge, shelter or structure between it or
any portion thereof, and any structure, stake, rock or thing outside of such tent, lodge, shelter or structure.
K. Inflated Equipment: No person shall use in the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter, any inflated equipment of any kind except a
standard surf mat which is:
1. Constructed of a durable material with a nonslippery surface;
2. So constructed that, when inflated for use, it will not fold in any direction;
3. Not smaller than twenty four inches by forty inches (24" x 40");
4. Not larger than thirty inches by sixty inches (30" x 60");
5. Equipped with a safety rope.
L. Loitering: No person shall loiter on any beach at any time between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
M. Overnight Use And Camping: No person shall camp on or use for overnight sleeping purposes any beach or bring a house-trailer or similar vehicle onto
any beach.
N. Pollution:
1. Oil:
a. No person shall deposit, place, throw, divert, or in any manner dispose of, or cause or permit to be deposited, placed, thrown, diverted, or in any
manner disposed of, any crude petroleum, refined petroleum, engine oil, or any oily byproduct thereof or any tar or any product containing tar, or
any oily substance into the waters of the Pacific Ocean, or into or upon the waters of any lagoon, bay, inlet, or tributary thereof; or deposit, place,
throw, divert, or in any manner dispose of any crude petroleum, refined petroleum, engine oil, or any oily byproduct thereof, or any tar, or any
product containing tar, or any oily substance upon any beach, tideland, or submerged land, or any portion thereof.
b. No person shall deposit, place, throw, divert, keep, maintain, or in any manner dispose of, or cause or permit to be deposited, placed, thrown,
diverted, kept, maintained, or in any manner disposed of any crude petroleum, refined petroleum, engine oil, or any oily byproduct thereof, or any
tar, or any product containing tar or any oily substance into, along, or upon any land, premises, or place in such a manner that the same, or any
portion thereof, may run or be transferred or carried to, or be in any manner deposited upon or conveyed to any beach, tideland or submerged
land, or any portion thereof, or into or upon the waters of the Pacific Ocean, or into or upon the waters of any lagoon, bay, inlet, or tributary thereof.
2. Other: No person shall deposit, place, throw, or in any manner dispose of any dead animal or any portion thereof, or any vegetable or animal matter,
or any offal, night soil, manure, rubbish, trash, garbage, or any decaying or putrid matter, material or substance which might decay or become putrid,
or any matter, material or substance which is or might become injurious to health or which is or might become a nuisance or offensive to the senses
of any person coming in proximity thereto, into the waters of the Pacific Ocean, or into the waters of any lagoon, bay, inlet or tributary thereof, of, in,
upon, or along any beach, tideland, or submerged land, or any portion thereof, or keep or maintain or cause or permit to be kept or maintained upon
any premises or in or at any place, any article, substance, or thing hereinabove in this Section enumerated, in such manner that any such article,
substance or thing, or any portion thereof may be transferred or carried to, or be in any manner deposited upon or conveyed to any beach, tideland,
or submerged land, or any portion thereof, or into or upon the waters of the Pacific Ocean, or into or upon the waters of any lagoon, bay, inlet or
tributary thereof. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973)
O. Buildings And Structures:
1. Recreation Building: No person shall use any recreation building at any time except between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight of any day except upon written permit from the Chief of Police.
2. Structures And Facilities: No person, other than a duly authorized employee of the City, in the performance of his duties shall:
a. Cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any rock, building, cage pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment or property on a
beach, or any portion thereof;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 262/581
b. Mark or place thereon or on any portion thereof, any mark, writing, or printing;
c. Attach thereto any sign, card, display or other similar device.
P. Rubbish: No person shall throw, place or dispose of any garbage refuse, or can in any place on a beach or into or upon the waters of the Pacific Ocean
other than into a garbage can or other receptacle maintained there for that purpose. No person shall throw, place or dispose of, any waste paper or
combustible refuse in any place on a beach or into or upon the waters of the Pacific Ocean other than into a receptacle maintained for that purpose.
Q. Shelters: No person shall erect, maintain, use or occupy on a beach any tent, lodge, shelter or structure unless such tent, lodge, shelter or structure
shall have two (2) sides thereof entirely open, and unless there shall be an unobstructed view into such tent, lodge, shelter, or structure from the
outside thereof on at least two (2) sides thereof.
R. Shooting: No person shall discharge or shoot any firearms, air gun, slingshot or bow and arrow anywhere on a beach.
S. Solicitation: No person shall solicit in any manner or for any purpose, or sell or offer for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise, or distribute or pass out
any handbills, advertising matter or literature on a beach.
T. Surfboards, Surf Mats, Paddleboards:
1. Waters Restricted:
a. No person shall use, possess or operate in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter any object commonly
known as a surfboard, paddleboard or similar device (but not including surf mats and belly boards) at such times when said waters are restricted
for swimming and bathing only.
b. Such restrictions shall be effective when a yellow flag having dimensions of not less than two feet by two feet (2' x 2') and having a solid black
circle in the center (commonly known as a "blackball flag") is prominently displayed from a lifeguard tower, lifeguard station, pier or similar
structure under the control of the City. At such times as the blackball flag is displayed, swimming and bathing only shall be permitted in the waters
of the Pacific Ocean opposite those areas of the beach within two hundred (200) yards of the point of display of said blackball flag; provided,
however, that where said blackball flag is displayed from consecutive operational lifeguard towers, lifeguard stations and similar structures under
the control of the City along a beach regulated by this Chapter, then all waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite said beach shall be restricted to
swimming and bathing only.
c. Such restrictions shall also be indicated by pairs of red flags put in place by the chief of police. At such times as said red flags are displayed,
swimming and bathing only shall be permitted in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite those areas of the beach lying between a given pair of
such red flags.
2. Distances From Shore: No person shall use, possess or operate in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter any
object commonly known as a surf mat, paddleboard, belly board, surfboard, or similar device except within two hundred (200) yards from shore or
seventy five (75) yards seaward of the point at which the average wave is breaking, whichever distance is greater, or when used by a skin diver to
hold a flag required by subsection D of this section.
3. Near Other Persons: No person shall bring or permit or allow in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter any
object commonly known as, or used as, a paddleboard or surfboard, within one hundred feet (100') of any person in the waters thereof who was not
at the time using or possessing a similar object.
4. Area For Exclusive Use: Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the chief of police may from time to time designate certain areas to be used
exclusively by persons using surfboards and paddleboards. Such designation may be revoked at any time and the area covered by any such
designation may be enlarged or reduced at any time. No person shall swim or bathe in the waters of the Pacific Ocean included in an area so
designated except while using a surfboard or paddleboard or as is necessary in order to use a surfboard or paddleboard.
5. Leaving Area During Restriction: A person in violation of the restrictions set forth in this subsection shall not fail, refuse or neglect to leave the waters
of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter when such restrictions are in force. (Ord. 803, 3-12-1973; amd. 2000 Code)
U. Nudity And Disrobing:
1. No person shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk, change clothes, disrobe or be on any beach in such manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic
symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below
the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view, except in those portions of a comfort station, if any, expressly
set aside for such purpose.
2. This subsection shall not apply to persons under the age of ten (10) years, provided such children are sufficiently clothed to conform to accepted
community standards.
3. This subsection shall not apply to persons engaged in a live theatrical performance in a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is
primarily devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 1047, 2-15-1983)
V. Smoking Prohibited: It is unlawful to smoke on any public beach within the city of El Segundo. For the purpose of this section, "smoking" means
inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe. For the purpose of this section, "beach" does not include parking lots or
roadways. (Ord. 1385, 8-2-2005)
Chapter 4
SKATEBOARD PARKS1
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 263/581
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and California Health & Safety Code section 115800, and any succeeding or related statutes,
for the purpose of protecting the city from claims arising from use of public skateboard parks. Skateboarding is an inherently dangerous recreational
activity and persons using skateboards should do so at their own risk. (Ord. 1372, 6-15-2004)
10-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
DIRECTOR: The city of El Segundo's director of recreation and parks, or designee.
SKATEBOARD PARK: City owned and operated property designated by the city council to be used for skateboarding purposes. (Ord. 1372, 6-15-2004)
10-4-3: PROTECTIVE GEAR REQUIRED:
Any person skateboarding at a skateboard park must wear protective equipment consisting of, at a minimum, a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads. (Ord.
1372, 6-15-2004)
10-4-4: SIGNS:
A. The director will provide notice regarding the requirements of this chapter to individuals using the skateboard park by use of signs that state the
following:
THIS SKATEBOARD PARK IS NOT SUPERVISED. SKATEBOARDING IS HAZARDOUS. THE EL SEGUNDO MUNICIPAL CODE REQUIRES
PERSONS USING THIS SKATEBOARD PARK TO WEAR A HELMET, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEEPADS. FAILURE TO COMPLY IS UNLAWFUL.
B. These signs must be posted in at least one conspicuous location, be made of a durable material, and posted in a permanent manner. (Ord. 1372, 6-15-
2004)
10-4-5: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of section 10-4-3 of this chapter will be prosecuted as infractions in accord with section 1-2-1 of this code. (Ord. 1372, 6-15-2004)
Chapter 5
WATER CONSERVATION
10-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Water Code section 375 for the purpose of establishing permanent water conservation requirements. In the event of
water shortages, this chapter also establishes contingency measures in the event of water shortages. The provisions of this chapter are mandatory unless
it is found that the use of water is necessary to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by a state or federal agency, or is otherwise exempt by
this chapter. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A constructed or modified surface that cannot effectively percolate water. The term includes, without limitation, sidewalks,
driveways, gutters, and roads.
PERSON: A natural or corporate person who receives potable water service from the city.
PROGRAMMED: A weather based or sensor based irrigation controller that was programmed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and site
specific conditions.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person responsible for daily operations of each residential or commercial premises located within the city's jurisdiction
including, without limitation, the property owner.
SENSOR BASED IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: An irrigation controller that operates based upon input received from any combination of sensors such as
rain, light, and soil moisture, installed within or around an irrigated landscape area.
WEATHER BASED IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: An irrigation controller that operates based on evapotranspiration rates and historic or real time weather
data. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 264/581
10-5-3: WATER CONSERVATION PROGRAM:
All water customers are required to adopt and put into use at the earliest possible date drought water conservation programs. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff.
1-1-2010)
10-5-4: REPAIR OF PLUMBING, SPRINKLER AND IRRIGATION SYSTEM:
Responsible persons must, as soon as practicable, but not later than forty eight (48) hours after such person first discovers water leaks, commence repair
of any leaking pipes, faucets, plumbing fixtures, other water service appliances, sprinklers, watering or irrigation systems, or distribution systems and
promptly complete such repair work, unless a waiver is obtained from the city. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-5: WATERING; IRRIGATION:
Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is unlawful for any person to water their lawn or landscaping or permit their lawn or landscaping to be
watered between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. It is unlawful for any person to water their lawn or landscaping or permit
their lawn or landscaping to be watered for a period longer than fifteen (15) minutes per station each day. Notwithstanding these prohibitions, the following
is permitted:
A. Persons may operate an irrigation system between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. for the purpose of installing, repairing or routine
maintenance of the same;
B. Persons may water between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. using any of the following methods:
1. Properly programmed weather based and/or sensor based irrigation controllers;
2. Drip irrigation;
3. By hand, using a bucket; or
4. By hand, using a hose with an automatic shutoff nozzle.
C. Commercial nurseries and commercial grower's products may irrigate before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. only. Watering is
permitted at any time with a handheld hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle, a bucket, or when a drip/micro-irrigation system/equipment is used.
Irrigation of nursery propagation beds is permitted at any time. Watering of livestock is permitted at any time. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-6: MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS:
The following are unlawful for any person:
A. Allowing grass, lawns, ground cover, shrubbery, and open ground to be watered at any time while it is raining or within forty eight (48) hours after
measurable rainfall.
B. Operating landscape irrigation system(s) that allow overspray or excess runoff onto impervious surfaces (such as sidewalks, driveways, V-ditches,
gutters and roadways).
C. To use a water hose to wash any vehicle including, without limitation, cars, trucks, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, or campers, or any other aircraft,
tractor, or any other vehicle, or any portion thereof, unless the hose is equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle. Except for individual residential
vehicle washing, all wash water from vehicle washing/cleaning activity must be prevented from discharging to the stormwater drainage system. (Ord.
1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-7: COMMERCIAL CAR WASHES:
A. It is unlawful for commercial car wash facilities to permit the washing of any boat or vehicle in such facility or on its premises, other than by the following
methods:
1. Use of mechanical automatic car wash facilities utilizing water recycling equipment or utilizing recycled water;
2. Use of a hose that operates on a timer for limited time periods and shuts off automatically at the expiration of the time period;
3. Use of a hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle; or
4. Use of bucket and hand washing.
B. All wash/rinse water must be captured and recycled or discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
C. All new commercial conveyor car wash facilities must be equipped with a water recycling system. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 265/581
10-5-8: WASHING OF EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY:
It is unlawful for any person to use a water hose to wash any type of equipment or machinery, or any portion thereof, unless the hose is equipped with an
automatic shutoff nozzle. All wash water from such washing/cleaning activity must be prevented from discharging to the stormwater drainage system.
(Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-9: CLEANING OF STRUCTURES:
It is unlawful for any person to use water through a hose to clean the exterior of any building or structure unless such hose is equipped with a shutoff
nozzle. All wash water from such activity must be prevented from discharging to the stormwater drainage system. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-10: CLEANING OF SURFACES:
It is unlawful for any person to use water through a hose to clean any sidewalk, driveway, roadway, parking lot, or any other outdoor paved or hard
surfaced area. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-11: WATER SPILLAGE:
Every person must minimize water spillage into streets, curbs, or gutters and minimize runoff beyond the immediate area of use. Every person is deemed
to have under his/her control at all times his/her water distribution lines and facilities, and to know the manner and extent of his/her water use and excess
runoff. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-12: SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS:
It is unlawful for any person to empty and refill a swimming pool or spa except to prevent or repair structural damage or to comply with public health
regulations. Discharge of pool water, other than directly to the sanitary sewer system, must be consistent with this code with regard to stormwater.
Discharge of pool filter backwash water to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited. All pools and spas must be equipped with a water recirculation
device. The use of a pool/spa cover is encouraged to prevent evaporative water loss. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-13: FOUNTAINS, DECORATIVE BASINS, PONDS, WATERWAYS:
It is unlawful for any person to use water to operate or maintain levels in decorative fountains, basins, ponds, and waterways unless a recirculation device
is in use. Discharge of water, other than directly to the sanitary sewer system, must be consistent with this code with regard to stormwater. Discharge of
filter backwash water to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-14: COOLING SYSTEMS:
No single pass cooling systems are permitted in new connections. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-15: COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY FACILITIES:
New commercial laundry facilities must be equipped with a water reclamation system for rinse water. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-16: VISITOR SERVING FACILITIES:
The owner and manager of each hotel, motel, restaurant, and other visitor serving facility must ensure that such facility displays, in places visible to all
customers, placards or decals approved by the city, promoting public awareness of the need for water conservation and/or advising the public that waste
of water is prohibited. Hotels, motels and other similar visitor serving facilities must provide guests the option to not have towels and linens laundered daily
and prominently display this option in each guestroom in easy to understand language. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-17: RESTAURANTS AND OTHER EATING OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS:
Restaurants and any other eating and/or drinking establishments in the city cannot serve water to restaurant customers, except upon request of the
customer. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-18: CONSTRUCTION:
A. It is unlawful to use potable water for compacting or dust control purposes in construction activities where there is a reasonably available source of
recycled or other nonpotable water approved by the California state department of health services and appropriate for such use.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 266/581
B. All water hoses used in connection with any construction activities must be equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle when an automatic shutoff nozzle
can be purchased or otherwise obtained for the size or type of hose in use.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, use of potable water for irrigation and other outdoor use is prohibited outside of newly constructed
homes and buildings unless delivered by drip or microspray systems. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-19: USE OF HYDRANTS:
It is unlawful for any person to utilize any fire hydrant for any purpose other than fire suppression or emergency aid, without first obtaining written approval
from the city manager, or designee. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-20: INDISCRIMINATE USE:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the indiscriminate running of water not otherwise prohibited by this chapter which is wasteful and without
reasonable purpose. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-21: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
These regulations cannot be construed to limit water use which is immediately necessary to protect public health or safety. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-
2010)
10-5-22: WATER SHORTAGE CONTINGENCY MEASURES:
The city council by resolution is authorized to require or impose reductions in the use of water if such reductions are necessary in order for the city to
comply with water use restrictions imposed by federal, state or regional water agencies or to respond to emergency water shortage conditions. Depending
on the expected duration and severity of the shortage, the city council may consider declaring a level 1, level 2, level 3 or level 4 drought response by
resolution.
A. Level 1 Drought Response: Declaring a level 1 drought response condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand by a maximum of
ten percent (10%). During a level 1 drought response condition, the city will increase its public education and outreach efforts to raise public awareness
of the need to implement the permanent water conservation practices established in sections 10-5-1 through 10-5-21 of this chapter.
B. Level 2 Drought Response: Declaring a level 2 drought response condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand between ten
percent (10%) and twenty percent (20%). During a level 2 drought response condition, all persons using city water must comply with the level 1 drought
response conditions, and must also comply with the following additional mandatory conservation measures:
1. Limit residential and commercial landscape irrigation to no more than two (2) days per week. The city council may assign the days by resolution and
the assigned days shall be posted by the city. This subsection shall not apply to commercial growers or nurseries.
2. Cease watering landscaped public street medians with ornamental turf unless using recycled water. Potable water may be used to ensure the health
of trees and shrubs.
3. Cease washing down any sidewalks and driveways, or other outdoor surfaces such as buildings, with potable water.
4. Cease allowing runoff when irrigating with potable water.
5. Any additional or innovative actions to increase the supply of water available to the city and to conserve the city's existing water supply.
C. Level 3 Drought Response: Declaring a level 3 drought response condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand between twenty
percent (20%) and thirty five percent (35%). During a level 3 drought response condition, all persons using city water must comply with the level 1 and
level 2 drought response conditions, and must also comply with the following additional mandatory conservation measures:
1. Limit residential and commercial landscape irrigation to no more than one day per week. The city council may assign the day by resolution and the
assigned day shall be posted by the city. This subsection shall not apply to commercial growers or nurseries.
2. Stop filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant
value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a drought response level under this section.
3. Limit filling swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, jacuzzis, or children's wading pools to not more than one day per week. The city council may assign the
day by resolution and the assigned day shall be posted by the city.
4. Any additional or innovative actions to increase the supply of water available to the city and to conserve the city's existing water supply.
D. Level 4 Drought Response: Declaring a level 4 drought response condition demonstrates the need to reduce the city's water demand by thirty five
percent (35%) or more. During a level 4 drought response condition, all persons using city water must comply with the level 1, level 2 and level 3
drought response conditions, and must also comply with the following additional mandatory conservation measures:
1. All watering without a drip irrigation or microspray system is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to the following categories of use unless the
city has determined that recycled water is available and may be lawfully applied to the use:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 267/581
a. Maintenance of trees and shrubs that are watered on the same schedule set forth in subsection B of this section by using a bucket, handheld hose
with a positive shutoff nozzle, or low volume nonspray irrigation;
b. Maintenance of existing landscaping necessary for fire protection as specified by the fire marshal of the local fire protection agency having
jurisdiction over the property to be irrigated;
c. Maintenance of existing landscaping for erosion control;
d. Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well being of rare animals;
e. Maintenance of landscaping within active public parks and playing fields, daycare centers, school grounds, cemeteries, and golf course greens,
provided that such irrigation does not exceed two (2) days per week according to the schedule established under subsection B of this section;
f. Watering of livestock; and
g. Public works projects and actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects.
2. Repair all water leaks within twenty four (24) hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city manager.
3. Stop filling swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, and/or jacuzzis of any kind whether inground or aboveground structures, including children's wading
pools.
4. Stop washing vehicles except at commercial car washes that recirculate water, or by high pressure/low volume wash systems.
5. Additionally, no new potable water service shall be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters shall be provided, and no statements of
immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will serve letters, certificates or letters of availability) shall be issued, except
under the following circumstances:
a. A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or
b. The project is necessary to protect the public's health, safety, and welfare; or
c. The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of
a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of city.
This provision shall not be construed to preclude the resetting or turn on of meters to provide continuation of water service or to restore service
that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less.
6. Any additional or innovative actions to increase the supply of water available to the city and to conserve the city's existing water supply.
In addition, the resolution declaring a level 4 drought response may direct the city manager not to issue new water utility service connections for any
development. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
10-5-23: RELIEF FROM COMPLIANCE:
The city manager, or designee, may grant written waivers to persons who apply on forms supplied by the city for:
A. Prohibited uses of water if it is found that a waiver is necessary to prevent an emergency condition relating to health and safety, and if the person
seeking a waiver demonstrates that he or she implemented water conservation measures in some other manner that achieves the objectives of this
chapter. No waiver can be granted for the filling of any decorative fountain, basin, pond, hot tub, spa or permanent swimming or wading pool, unless
the filling occurs as the result of performing necessary leak repairs and unless the other provisions of this section are met.
B. No waiver can be granted unless the person demonstrates that he or she has already achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption
as can be achieved by the affected property or business. Any waiver granted must be based upon the water consumption rates of similar water users,
properties or businesses. (Ord. 1433, 11-3-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
10-5-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by up to thirty (30) days in county jail and/or a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). At
least one written warning must be provided to persons upon the first violation of this chapter. Second and subsequent violations may be enforced in
accordance with applicable law. It is the code enforcement officer's responsibility to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 1509, 7-21-2015)
Title 11
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 1
WATER SERVICES
11-1-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The rules, regulations and rates hereinafter set forth in this Chapter, are hereby fixed, adopted and established, as the rules, regulations and rates for and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 268/581
governing the service of water from the waterworks system of the City; and the service shall be rendered subject to each and all of the rules, regulations
and rates and in conformity therewith. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-2: INSTALLATION OF SERVICE:
A. Application For Service: Before service is delivered, a written application therefor, on a form furnished by the Public Works Department of the City must
be signed by the person desiring the service, giving in addition to such information as the Department may require, his status as owner, agent or
tenant.
B. Deposits: Deposits are required as a condition of service in the amounts and under the conditions set forth hereunder:
1. Where service is to be delivered to other than a bona fide owner of the property, a cash deposit must be made to cover the Department's estimate of
the average bill for two (2) months' service to the subject property, and in no case shall the deposit be less than ten dollars ($10.00). The deposit will
be refunded at the time the service is discontinued and all bills for water furnished the service are paid.
2. Each application for a new service installation (as differentiated from an order to turn on an existing service connection) shall be accompanied by a
cash deposit of ten dollars ($10.00). The deposit shall be held by the Department for a period of six (6) months from the date the new service is
installed and turned on. At the end of this six (6) months' period the deposit shall be credited to the account of the subject service to apply on
subsequent billings until depleted. In the event that service is discontinued prior to the time that the credit is consumed, the balance of the deposit on
hand in the Department will be refunded after all bills for water furnished the service are paid.
C. Temporary Service: Connection for temporary use will be made upon a deposit equal to the Department's estimate of the total cost of labor, materials
and overhead necessary to make the installation. This amount shall remain on deposit with the Public Works Department until the termination of the
use, during which time regular rates will be charged for water used, when the deposit will be returned to the depositor, less ten percent (10%) per year
depreciation on material and labor, etc., costs.
D. Relocation Of Service: Services will be relocated at the request of the owner of the premises being served at such time as the owner pays to the Public
Works Department a sum equal to the Department's estimate of the cost of moving the service.
E. Refunds In Certain Cases: In the event any deposit has been made for the installation of any service as set forth in this Section, and for any reason the
installation of the meter and service for which the deposit was deposited is not made, the Director of Finance may order refund of the deposit at any
time. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-3: METER INSTALLATION CHARGES:
A. Charges Based On Meter Size: Charges for installation of water meters by the Public Works Department shall be payable in advance and shall be
based on the size of the meter, as follows:
5/8 x 3/4 inch meter $300.00
1 inch meter 350.00
B. Cash Deposit: For meters, not hereinabove scheduled, the applicant shall make a meter installation cash deposit which will be based upon the Director
of Finance's estimated cost of installation. Following installation of the meter by the Public Works Department, the charges therefor shall be paid out of
the deposit by deducting: 1) the cost of the meter and materials plus ten percent (10%) of the cost for administration and incidentals; and 2) the cost of
labor, including excavation and repaving, plus twenty five percent (25%) of the cost for administration and incidentals; the balance, if any, of the cash
deposit shall, upon completion of the work, be refunded to the depositor, or if the meter installation cost is in excess of the deposit, the additional
charge shall be billed to the depositor and shall be due and payable upon receipt of the bill.
C. Meters Property Of City: All meters installed shall be and remain the property of the City. (Ord. 924, 1977; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-4: METER REQUIREMENTS:
A. All Services Metered: All services shall be metered; provided, however, nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring more than one
metered service to a hotel or apartment house where the halls and reception rooms are used in common by all families occupying the same; nor as
requiring more than one metered service to any store or office building for services to the respective stores or offices actually contained in and made a
part of the store or office building.
B. Meter Size For Single Or Multiple Units On Single Meter:
1. Two (2) or more units may be connected to one meter; provided, however, that all units are on the same premises and that only one address shall be
recognized for billing and collecting purposes.
2. The minimum size of meter to be installed shall be determined by the number of fixture units in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Plumbing Code of the City. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967)
3. The total number of fixture units shall be computed by the Building Department at the time a plumbing permit is issued and the applicants are hereby
required to submit the computation to the Public Works Department with his application for water service.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 269/581
4. The monthly minimum charges and method of billing recommended by the Water Superintendent shall then be applied to existing meters; not in
accordance with the size of the existing meters; but in accordance with what that size should be, computed by the total number of fixture units
served.
5. No change shall be made in the size of the existing meters unless the changes are requested and paid for by the owner or applicant. (Ord. 663, 5-8-
1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-5: WATER RATES:
Rates and charges for water service and the effective date of the rates and charges for water service from the Municipal waterworks system shall be fixed
and established from time to time by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 744, 8-24-1970)
11-1-6: PRESUMPTION OF CONTINUED USE:
All services on any premises, whether used or not, shall be considered as used and shall be charged for so long as the same remain connected. (Ord.
663, 5-8-1967)
11-1-7: DELINQUENCIES:
Bills become delinquent fifteen (15) days after date of mailing, and if not paid, the water may be shut off without further notice. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967)
11-1-8: REBATES PROHIBITED:
No allowance or rebate shall be made in water rates charged against any property or premises so long as the water remains connected therewith, and full
rates shall be charged against any and all property or premises as hereinbefore specified until the Public Works Department has been notified in writing to
shut off or disconnect the water therefrom. Any complaint in regard to the rating of property must be made at the office of the Public Works Department
and the adjustor will properly rate premises. Collectors shall not make rebates or adjust rates. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-9: METER DAMAGE RESULTING FROM CARELESSNESS:
Any damage to meters or appurtenances resulting from carelessness, wilfulness or neglect, or any of them, as well as any damage which may result from
hot water or steam from a boiler, or otherwise, shall be paid for to the Public Works Department on presentation of bill and in case the bill is not paid, the
water may be shut off from the premises without further notice and not turned on until all charges are paid. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-10: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
On failure to comply with the rules and regulations established as a condition to the use of water, or to pay rates or meter rent, or any charge or penalty
imposed, in the time and manner as herein provided, the water may be shut off after twenty four (24) hours' notice to the owner, occupant, tenant or
consumer of the premises or service, until payment of the amount due is made, with three dollars ($3.00) in addition for restoration of service. (Ord. 663, 5-
8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
11-1-11: BILLINGS CREDIT FOR PROMPT REPAIR OF ON-SITE LEAKS:
A. Water Service Billing Credit:
1. Procedure: The Director of the Department of Finance may grant a credit allowance to a customer's water service bill if the customer makes a written
request to the Director of Finance for a credit allowance and presents evidence to establish all of the following facts to the satisfaction of the Director
of Finance and the Director of Public Works: a) a leakage on the customer's property caused a high consumption of water for the property; b) the
customer did not have any knowledge or reason to know of the leakage prior to receiving water/sewer service bill indicating an unusually high water
consumption; and c) prompt repairs of the leak were performed upon the customer becoming aware of the leakage.
2. Amount Of Credit Allowance:
a. The amount of credit allowance may be up to one-half (1/2) of the amount of the water consumption billing in excess of the billing for consumption
in a comparable billing period for which there was no known or apparent leak.
b. The credit allowance is limited to the consumption of two (2) billing periods.
c. Once the allowance for the excess consumption is granted, no further allowance will be made for a period of twelve (12) months for such reason.
B. Sewer Service Billing Credit:
1. Procedure: The Director of Finance may grant a credit allowance to a customer's sewer service charges on the water/sewer service bill if the
customer makes a written request to the Director of Finance for a credit allowance and if: a) the customer's sewer service charges are calculated
based on the customer's water consumption; b) the Director of Finance has granted the customer a credit allowance to water service billing pursuant
to subsection A of this Section; and c) the customer presents evidence to establish to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance that the water
leakage did not enter the property's sewer connection and result in an increased flow to the sewer as determined by the Director of Public Works.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 270/581
2. Amount Of Credit Allowance: The amount of the credit allowance for the sewer service charge may be up to one-half (1/2) of the amount of the
excess sewer service charges related to the excess water billing determined pursuant to subsection A of this Section.
C. Credit Allowances Applied To Subsequent Bills: All such allowances provided to the customer as a result of the leakage shall be applied as credits to
the customer's subsequent water/sewer service bill.
D. Director's Decision Final: The decision of the Director of Finance on the herein described credit allowances for water and/or sewer services is final
except as given in subsection E of this Section.
E. Administrative Limit On Allowance: Upon the Director of Finance determining the possible allowance credits to the original water service billing and the
original sewer service billing and that the total allowance could exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), the allowance must be submitted to the City
Council for review and possible approval. (Ord. 1191, 1-19-1993)
11-1-12: PENALTY FOR UNAUTHORIZED SERVICE:
Should the owner or occupant of any premises turn on the water or cause it to be turned on, or cause the disconnected premises to be connected either
directly or indirectly with the Municipal waterworks system or water supply, after it has been shut off at the curb cock, it shall be shut off at the main, a
charge of ten dollars ($10.00) will be made by the City for the turning off and turning on, which must be paid before the premises will be again connected
to the Municipal system. It is further provided that if any owner, occupant or tenant of any premises connected to the Municipal waterworks system, either
directly or indirectly, connects or permits the connection of the premises, or water service, with that of any owner, tenant, occupant or consumer, of any
other premises whose water has been turned off by the Public Works Department, that then and in that event the service through which the disconnected
premises is served may likewise be turned off on twenty four (24) hours' notice to the owner, occupant, tenant or consumer of the premises or service, and
same shall not be again connected unless and until a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) has been paid to the City. (Ord. 663, 5-8-1967; amd. 2000 Code)
Chapter 2
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
11-2-1: PURPOSE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is:
1. To protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connection by isolating within the premises contamination that may occur
because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises.
2. To eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human
consumption.
3. To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination.
4. To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
B. Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period
of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the City Public Works Department and
any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause
or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the City and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of
the City. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988; amd. 2000 Code)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
AWWA STANDARD: An official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).
AIR-GAP SEPARATION: A physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply
pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch (1").
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing
organization which has demonstrated its competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services.
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply whose potability is regulated by a State or local health agency.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply.
BACKFLOW: A flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the
distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of
backflow. Back pressure is the other cause.
CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may
impair the usefulness or quality of the water.
CROSS-CONNECTION: As the term is used in this Chapter, means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used
to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe,
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 271/581
wholesome, and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which
backflow could occur, shall be considered to be a cross-connection.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly of at least two (2) independently acting check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each
side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve and shall be purchased and installed as a
unit.
DOUBLE CHECK, DETECTOR CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: A specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved double check valve
assembly with a specific bypass five-eighths inch (5/8"), five-eighths inch by three-fourths inch (5/8" x 3/4"), or three-fourths inch (3/4") water meter and a
three-fourths inch (3/4") approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for only very low flow and shall show a registration for
all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth hazard and shall be purchased and installed as a unit.
HEALTH AGENCY: The California Department of Health Services, or the local health agency with respect to a small water system.
LOCAL HEALTH AGENCY: The County or City health authority.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution.
POTABLE WATER: Water that is approved for human consumption and meets the requirements of the health agency having jurisdiction.
PREMISES: Any and all areas on a water user's property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption which has five (5) or more service connections
or regularly serves an average of twenty five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year.
RECLAIMED WATER: Wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device incorporating two (2) or more check valves and an automatically
operating differential relief valve located between the two (2) + checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and
equipped with necessary test cocks for testing; and said device shall be purchased and installed as a unit.
SERVICE CONNECTION: Refers to the point of connection of a user's piping to the water supplier's facilities.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
WATER SUPPLIER: The person who owns or operates the approved water supply system.
WATER USER: Any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-3: CROSS-CONNECTION PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. General Provisions:
1. Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited.
2. Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the City will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device by
and at water user's expense for continued services or before a new service will be granted.
3. Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user's premises, then any and all water supply
lines from the City's mains entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The type
of device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Where Protection Required:
1. Each service connection from the City water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against
backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the City,
and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.
2. Each service connection from the City water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may
allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the
handling of process waters and waters originating from the City water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality.
3. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having: a) internal cross-connections that cannot be
permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the State or local Health Department and the City; or b) intricate plumbing and piping
arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to
ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.
C. Type Of Protection Required:
1. The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard
that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes:
double check valve assembly (DC), double check-detector check valve assembly (DCDC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device
(RP), and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the City. The minimum types of
backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are
given in Table 1 in subsection D of this Section. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the
appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the City or health agency.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 272/581
2. Two (2) or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet main
flow may occur, shall have at least a double check valve assembly on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the
respective meters. Such double check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the City's mains
from pollution or contamination. In such cases the installation of approved backflow devices at such service connections shall be required.
D.Table 1:
TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED
Degree Of Hazard
Minimum
Type Of
Backflow
Prevention
1. Sewage And Hazardous Substances:
a. Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the
reclaimed water supply.
AG
b. Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants
and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does
not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP
may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the
City.
AG
c. Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection
with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if
approved by the health agency and the City.
AG
d. Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in
which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not
include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP
may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and
the City.
AG
e. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers,
herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected.
RP
2. Auxiliary Water Supplies:
a. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which
is interconnected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be
provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the City.
AG
b. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and
there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may
be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and the City.
RP
3. Fire Protection Systems:
a. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public
water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or
to the premises (not interconnected).
DC
b. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system
and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be
provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the City.
AG
c. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system
and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction
from the private reservoirs or tanks are used.
DC
4. Dockside Watering Points And Marine Facilities: DC
a. Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessel for any purpose. RP
b. Premises where there are marine facilities. RP
5. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections
cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to
assure that cross-connections do not exist.
RP
6. Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
RP
7. Each service connection, domestic or fire service, that serves a building
of 50 feet or more in height above the service line.
DCDC
(Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-4: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 273/581
A. Approved Backflow Prevention Devices:
1. Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the City shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the City's
potable water system.
2. The City will provide, upon request, to any affected customer a list of approved backflow prevention devices.
B. Backflow Prevention Device Installation:
1. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in the California Administrative Code title 17, section 7603. Location of the
devices should be as close as practical to the user's connection. The City shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a
backflow prevention device.
a. Air-Gap Separation (AG): The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All
piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point
between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two (2) pipe diameters of
the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch (1") above the overflow rim of the receiving tank.
b. Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP): The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
purchased as a unit and installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a
minimum of twelve inches (12") above grade and not more than thirty six inches (36") above grade measured from the bottom of the device and
with a minimum of twelve inches (12") side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing.
Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the City.
c. Double Check-Detector Check Valve Assembly (DCDC) And Double Check Valve Assembly (DC): The approved double check-detector check
valve assembly or the approved double check valve assembly shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily
accessible for testing and maintenance. The DCDC and the DC shall be purchased and installed as a unit. If a double check valve assembly is
installed below grade, it shall be installed in a vault approved by the City.
C. Backflow Prevention Device Testing And Maintenance:
1. The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person
who has demonstrated their competency in testing of these devices to the City. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested annually and
immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The City may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No
device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the City shall be filed with the City each
time a device is tested, relocated, or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and
all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.
2. The City will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the City to test backflow prevention devices. The City will notify affected
customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which shall be filled out each time a
device is tested or repaired.
D. Backflow Prevention Device Removal:
1. Approval shall be obtained from the City before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated, or replaced.
a. Removal: The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the City to
verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future;
b. Relocation: A device may be relocated following confirmation by the City that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and
satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device;
c. Repair: A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to
service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the City. A retest will be required following the repair of
the device; and
d. Replacement: A device may be removed and replaced; provided, the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All
replacement devices shall be approved by the City and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-5: USER SUPERVISOR:
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the City, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user
supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of
contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the City shall be promptly notified by the user
supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the City of the user supervisor's
identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
A. Water System Survey:
1. The City shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the
City upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a
backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device shall be installed before service will be granted.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 274/581
2. The City may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises
inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the City considers necessary.
3. The City may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. Any customer which
cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the City considers
necessary.
4. In administering and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, the City, bearing proper credentials and identification, may at any reasonable hour
enter upon any premises, subject to approval of the occupant. If the owner or occupier refuses to allow entry, the City may do so after obtaining an
appropriate warrant.
5. If the City has reasonable cause to believe that there are violations of this Chapter occurring that are so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to
require immediate inspection to protect the public health or safety, the City shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and
may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and
whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and
demand entry, explaining his reasons therefor and the purpose of his inspection. No person shall fail or refuse to permit reasonable inspection.
B. Customer Notification; Device Installation:
1. The City will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of sixty (60) days will be given to
complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention devices.
2. A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the sixty (60)
day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two (2) week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within
the two (2) week period, the City may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken.
C. Customer Notification; Testing and Maintenance:
1. The City will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This
written notice shall give the water user thirty (30) days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed
and resubmitted to the City.
2. A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have their backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within
the thirty (30) day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two (2) week period to have their backflow prevention device tested. If
no action is taken within the two (2) week period, the City may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested.
(Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-7: WATER SERVICE TERMINATION:
A. General: When the City encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately
abated, the City shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the City water service.
B. Basis For Termination: Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items:
1. Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device.
2. Refusal to test a backflow prevention device.
3. Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device.
4. Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device.
5. Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line.
6. Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants.
7. Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system.
8. A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system.
C. Water Service Termination Procedures:
1. For conditions in subsections B1, B2, B3, or B4 of this Section, the City will terminate service to a customer's premises after two (2) written notices
have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it shall be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time
period, water service may be terminated.
2. For conditions in subsections B5, B6, B7, or B8 of this Section, the City will take the following steps:
a. Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to terminate water service.
b. Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the City.
(Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
11-2-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER; CERTIFICATION:
The following are minimum requirements:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 275/581
A. Experience: Applicants shall have had at least two (2) years' experience in plumbing or pipefitting or equivalent qualifications.
B. Certification Or Training: Hold a valid certification from the American Water Works Association (AWWA) California-Nevada section, from a County
certification program, or have equivalent training in the opinion of the City and the Health Department.
C. Tools And Equipment: Applicants for certification as testers of backflow prevention devices shall furnish evidence to show that they have available the
necessary tools and equipment to properly test such devices. They shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports
prepared by them. (Ord. 1110, 5-3-1988)
Chapter 3
UNDERGROUND OR OVERHEAD UTILITIES
11-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases defined in this Section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following
definitions:
COMMISSION: The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
PERSON: Means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES: Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms,
crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground
within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT: That area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are
prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter.
UTILITY: Includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-2: PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL:
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for
supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing
shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-3: REPORT BY CITY ENGINEER:
Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing
containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners.
Such report shall, where feasible, also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-4: DESIGNATION OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS:
If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal
and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such
removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A
reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment
necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein
as provided in Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 11-3-9 of
this Chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-6: EXCEPTIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 276/581
A. Emergency Or Unusual Circumstances: Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period,
not to exceed thirty (30) days, without authority of the City Engineer in order to provide emergency service. The City Engineer may grant special
permission, on such terms as the City Engineer may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or
utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures.
B. Other Exceptions: In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter, the City may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:
1. Any Municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
2. Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
3. Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated
structures are not prohibited.
4. Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty four
thousand five hundred (34,500) volts.
5. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.
6. Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services.
7. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts.
8. Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 718, 6-23-
1969)
11-3-7: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES:
A. Time Limit: Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all
affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further
notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric,
communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive
such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.
B. Mailing Notice: Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter,
together with a copy of this Chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.
(Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-8: UTILITY COMPANIES, RESPONSIBILITY:
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 11-3-4 of this
Chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-9: PROPERTY OWNERS, RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Notice From City: Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 11-3-8 of this Chapter and the termination facility on or
within said building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted
pursuant to Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in
writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after
receipt of such notice.
B. Sending Notice; Posting Premises: The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case
of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid,
addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's
name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no
address appears, to General Delivery, City of El Segundo. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person
to whom it has been sent within forty eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such
premises, the City Engineer shall, within forty eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight
inches by ten inches (8" x 10") in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.
C. Contents Of Notice: The notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required
to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the City Engineer will provide such
required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon
such property.
D. Failure To Provide Facilities; City Work, Cost Assessment:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 277/581
1. If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer shall forthwith
proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto,
the City Engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and
all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property.
2. Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required
underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be
assessed.
3. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which
said time shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter.
E. Notice Of Hearing Against Assessment: The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in
writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the
giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear
protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.
F. Council Decision: Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any,
and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
G. Unpaid Assessment; Lien: If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall
become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer, and the City Engineer is directed to turn over to the
assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector
shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said
assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear
interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-10: CITY, RESPONSIBILITY:
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-11: EXTENSION OF TIME:
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 11-3-4 of this Chapter cannot be performed within the
time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other
circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the
time of such limitation. (Ord. 718, 6-23-1969)
11-3-12: OVERHEAD UTILITIES OWNED BY PUBLIC AGENCIES:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this Section to supplement the provisions of this Chapter by providing for the regulation of overhead utilities owned by
public agencies. The Public Utilities Commission of the State has provided an orderly manner for the elimination of privately owned overhead
installations belonging to public utilities, and the City has implemented that requirement in this Chapter. It is the purpose of this Section to provide
regulations for publicly owned utilities not subject to the requirements of the Public Utilities Commission of the State.
B. Definitions: The definitions contained in Section 11-3-1 of this Chapter shall be applicable to this Section. In addition, the term "public agency" means
and includes the State of California and all cities, counties, agencies, subdivisions, and municipal corporations of the State of California, including, but
not limited to, the County of Los Angeles and the Cities of Manhattan Beach and Los Angeles.
C. Overhead Wires Prohibited: Except as provided in subsections D and E of this Section and except in the M-1 and M-2 Zones, no public agency shall
erect or install, or place or replace any poles, towers, wires, conduits, cables, or other structure or device, above the surface of the ground, nor shall
any public agency expand or enlarge or increase any existing installation located above the surface of the ground except in the M-1 and M-2 Zones.
D. Exceptional Or Emergency Circumstances: In exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions, or emergency situations, overhead facilities
may be installed and maintained by a public agency for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days upon the approval of the City Engineer.
E. Amortization And Removal: On and after January 1, 1995, no public agency shall keep or maintain any overhead utility service within the City except in
the M-1 and M-2 Zones and except for emergency installations authorized by subsection D of this Section. Every public agency shall, on or before
December 31, 1994, remove any overhead installation whether now existing or hereafter erected or constructed from all portions of the City except the
M-1 and M-2 Zones. (Ord. 730, 1-12-1970)
Title 12
PUBLIC SEWER FACILITIES
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 278/581
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Title is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by providing for beneficial public use of the City sewer system through regulation
of sewer construction, sewer use and industrial wastewater discharges; to prevent any discharge which may reasonably interfere with the operation of the
system; to provide for equitable distribution of the sewer system costs; to provide procedures for complying with requirements placed on the City by State
and Federal laws; and to provide funds for the operation and maintenance of the City sewer system by imposing a service charge upon the users of these
facilities. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended:
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW: The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the public sewers during a twenty four (24) hour period.
BOD OR BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The measure of decomposable organic material in domestic or industrial wastewaters as represented by
the oxygen utilized over a period of five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) and as determined by the appropriate procedure in "Standard
Methods".
COD OR CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The measure of chemically decomposable material in domestic or industrial wastewater as represented by the
oxygen utilized as determined by the appropriate procedure described in "Standard Methods".
CESSPOOL: Excavation or underground structure which receives any discharge of a drainage system and is constructed to retain organic matter and
solids discharged therein but which permits the liquids to seep through the bottom and sides.
CHIMNEY: A vertical section of a sewer pipe extending either from a tee set ninety degrees (90°) to the main line or from a wye and a one-quarter bend
set vertically at the curb or property line, and in either case suitably reinforced with concrete.
CHLORINE DEMAND: The difference between the amount of chlorine added to a wastewater sample and the amount remaining at the end of a thirty (30)
minute period as determined by the procedures given in "Standard Methods".
CLARIFICATION: The process of removal and retention of turbidity, settleable solids, deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from wastes by
sedimentation or flotation.
CLARIFIER OR INTERCEPTOR: A device or structure which separates and retains suspended solids, settleable solids, deleterious, hazardous, or
undesirable matter from wastes prior to discharge into public sewer.
COMMERCIAL USE: Any commercial or business establishment, office, hotel, motel, or hospital.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the underground or surface waters by sewage or industrial waste to a degree which creates a hazard to
the public health through poisoning or the spread of disease.
DISCHARGER: Any person who discharges or causes a discharge to a public sewer.
DISSOLVED SOLIDS OR DISSOLVED MATTER: The solid matter in solution in wastewater as obtained by evaporation of a sample from which all
suspended matter has been removed by filtration as determined by the procedures in "Standard Methods".
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: The water-carried wastes not produced from commercial or industrial activity and which result from normal human living
processes.
EFFLUENT: The liquid flowing out of any facility operated for treatment of sewage or industrial waste.
FACILITY: A pipe or structure constructed for the purpose of collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of industrial wastewater and sewage.
GROSS ANNUAL INCOME OF THE HOUSEHOLD: The income of every member of the household received during the year for which the refund is
claimed and shall include, but not be limited to, wages, salaries, bonuses, tips, gross amount of pensions and annuities, retirement benefits, social security
payments, disability payments, life insurance benefits, interest, capital gains and inheritances.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The area included within the exterior of the surrounding walls of a building or portions thereof, exclusive of courts.
HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER OR LATERAL: That part of the sewer piping within the street or public right of way which extends from the house sewer
to a connection with the public sewer.
HOUSE SEWER: That part of the sewer piping beginning two feet (2') from the exterior wall of a building, structure or foundation and extending to its
connection with the house connection sewer.
INDUSTRIAL CONNECTION SEWER: A house connection sewer used primarily for the discharge of industrial waste.
INDUSTRIAL USE: Any manufacturing or processing activity, airport or railroad.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Liquid or solid waste, except domestic sewage, including radioactive substances and explosives, and noxious or toxic gas in the
sewer system.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 279/581
INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT FACILITY: Any works or device for the treatment of industrial waste, prior to discharge into the
public sewer.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: All water-carried wastes and wastewater excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water, and shall include all
wastewater from commercial, manufacturing, institutional, agricultural, or other operations where it includes significant quantities of wastes of nonhuman
origin.
INSPECTOR: A person authorized by the Public Works Director to inspect wastewater facilities.
LICENSED: Licensed and registered by the State.
LOT: Any parcel of land occupied or to be occupied for use permitted by this Code.
MANHOLE: An access structure to a public sewer or storm drain, usually located in a street right of way, covered by a flat metal hatch.
OTHER USE: Any use not defined, including schools, churches, and the like.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ion in grams per liter of solution.
PARKWAY: That portion of a public street which is not improved, designed, and ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
PEAK FLOW OR PEAK FLOW RATE: The maximum thirty (30) minute rate of sewage flow to be generated from the premises as estimated by the Public
Works Director.
PERSON: Every owner, tenant, occupant or person having the care or control of any premises in the City and shall include the Federal, State and County
Government and all cities and districts except the City of El Segundo.
POLLUTION: An impairment in the quality of the underground or surface water by sewage or industrial waste which adversely affects the use of such
waters for domestic, industrial, agricultural, or other beneficial purposes.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT FACILITY: See definition of Industrial Waste Pretreatment or Treatment Facility.
PUBLIC SEWER: A main line sanitary sewer, dedicated to public use and owned by the City.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works of the City or his duly authorized representative.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL: Material containing chemical elements that spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays or
energy forms.
RESIDENTIAL USE: Any single- or multiple-family dwelling.
SEEPAGE PIT: An excavation in the ground which receives the effluent from a septic tank and permits the effluent to seep through the ground.
SEPTIC TANK: A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge from a sewer system, which retains solids, digests organic matter, and permits the
liquids to discharge into the soil through a cesspool, leach field or other method.
SEWAGE: The wastewater of the community received by the sewer system consisting of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
and industrial buildings, and institutions, and of such a character as to permit satisfactory disposal without special treatment into the public sewer system.
SEWER: The conduit that carries sewage in the sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM: All of the property involved in the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage of the community including land, sewers and
appurtenances, pumping stations, treatment works and equipment.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
SOLID WASTES: Wastes that are not water-carried and that are suitable for disposal with refuse at sanitary landfill refuse disposal sites.
STANDARD METHODS: The current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public
Health Association.
STORM DRAIN: A conduit or channel which carries storm and surface waters and drainage other than polluted wastewaters.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR SUSPENDED MATTER: The insoluble solid matter suspended in wastewater that is separable by filtration in accordance with
the procedure described in "Standard Methods".
TAPPING: The forming of a connection to a public sewer after the sewer is in place.
TEE SADDLE: A short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the public sewer forming a ninety
degree (90°) angle to the public sewer pipe.
TOXIC OR POISONOUS SUBSTANCE: Any solid, liquid or gas in sufficient quantity or concentration, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
which tends to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any
hazard in the receiving waters of a sewage treatment facility.
TRADE SECRETS: Any formulas, plans, processes, tools, mechanisms, procedures, compilations of information, or other materials or methods which are
not patented, which are known only to certain individuals within a commercial concern and are used to fabricate, produce or compound an article of trade
or a service having commercial value, and which provide an opportunity for a business advantage over competitors.
UNCONTAMINATED WATER: Any water utilized by the community which is not contaminated or polluted with wastewater or sewage and which is suitable
or could readily be made suitable for discharge to the storm water drainage system.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 280/581
WASTEWATER: The water-carried wastes of the community derived from human or industrial sources including domestic and industrial wastewater.
Rainwater, ground water, or drainage of uncontaminated water is not wastewater.
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the flow of storm or surface waters.
WYE SADDLE: A short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of a fitting to a hole tapped in the public sewer forming a forty five
degree (45°) angle to the public sewer pipe. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
A. Facilities: This Title shall apply to all sewer facilities in the City, including house connection sewers, house sewers, industrial connection sewers,
interceptors, sewage and industrial waste treatment plants, sewage pumping plant, and their appurtenances, except that nonconforming facilities may
be continued in use for one year from the effective date of this Title, or until such longer time as may be permitted by the Public Works Director, if they
complied with the applicable provisions of law before this Title became effective.
B. Discharges: This Title shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all liquid-carried wastes to the sewer system of the City. This Title shall also apply
to discharges of all liquid wastes into the City's storm drainage system and all waters of the State. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-4: SCOPE:
This Title provides for the regulation of discharges into the City sewer system through the issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge
containing specific discharge requirements, as well as other permits, and through enforcement of general discharge prohibitions; imposes regulations for
waste pretreatment and for sewer construction within the City; authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities; imposes reporting requirements on
specific permits; sets the quantity and quality of discharged wastes; establishes penalties for violation of provisions of this Title; and sets fees for the
recovery of program costs. This Title is applicable to all discharges within the City and to all persons outside the City who discharge into the City's sewer
system. Except as otherwise provided, the Public Works Director of the City shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Title. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-5: STRICT INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this Title and of all rules, regulations and permits promulgated or issued hereunder shall be strictly construed and applied. (Ord. 1093, 1-
20-1987)
12-1-6: LIQUID WASTE DISPOSAL POLICY:
A. General: Generally, liquid wastes originating within the City will be removed by the City sewer system, unless the wastes cause damage to structures,
create nuisances such as odors, menace public health, impose unreasonable collection, treatment or disposal costs on the City, violate quantity and
quality requirements prescribed by State and Federal laws, interfere with wastewater treatment processes, violate applicable State and Federal laws,
or detrimentally affect the environment.
B. Cesspools And Septic Tanks: The disposal of sewage by means of septic tanks and cesspools or leach fields is a nonconforming sewer facility in the
City and their use is to be discontinued pursuant to subsection 12-1-3A of this Chapter. If it can be demonstrated to the Public Works Director that the
continued use of such facilities is necessary because of geographical or other conditions, then such use shall be permitted until public sewers are
installed making it unnecessary to use cesspools and septic tanks.
C. Highest And Best Use: The highest and best use of the City sewer system is the conveyance, treatment and disposal of domestic wastewater. The use
of the City sewer system for the discharge of industrial wastewater is subject to further regulation by the City.
D. Water Reclamation: In compliance with requirements of Federal and State agencies, the City is or may be committed to a policy of wastewater and
reuse in order to provide an alternate source of water for nondomestic use and to reduce costs of wastewater treatment and disposal.
E. Industrial Wastewater: In conformance with policies of Federal and State agencies which establish higher standards of treatment plant effluent quality,
provisions are made in this Title for the regulation of industrial wastewater discharges. This Title establishes quantity and quality limitations on industrial
wastewater discharges which may adversely affect the City sewer system or effluent quality. Fees to recover costs from industrial wastewater
dischargers are also established where the dischargers impose inequitable collection, treatment or disposal costs on the City. Optimum use of the City
facilities may require the Public Works Director to limit certain industrial wastewater discharges to periods of low flow in the sewer system. (Ord. 1093,
1-20-1987)
12-1-7: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SEWAGE PLANTS:
Sewage and industrial waste treatment plants and facilities shall only discharge effluents to the City sewer system that meet the requirements of the Public
Works Director as described in an industrial wastewater discharge permit. If the discharge is to a storm drain system, the requirements of the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board must be met. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-1-8: MAINTENANCE OF SEWERS AND APPURTENANCES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 281/581
All house connection sewers, house sewers, industrial connection sewers, clarifiers, sewage and industrial waste treatment facilities, private pretreatment
plants, sewage pumping plants, and their appurtenances shall be maintained in good operating condition and in conformity with applicable law by the
owner of the property which such facilities serve. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION; RULES; INSPECTIONS
12-2-1: ADMINISTRATION BY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
The Public Works Director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Title and supervise the construction of public sewers in streets and public
sewer easements owned by the City. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Adoption: The Public Works Director may prescribe rules and regulations not inconsistent with this Title as are reasonably necessary for the lawful and
efficient operation of the City sewer system including, but not limited to, rules and regulations mandated by State and Federal laws. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective when adopted by resolution of the City Council. Such rules and regulations shall consider the quantity, quality and
means of disposal of sewage and industrial wastes as well as geographic, topographic, and physical construction factors and treatment methods in the
sewer system and the beneficial uses of the water in the system or of waters receiving discharge therefrom.
B. Notice: The Public Works Director shall serve on each person holding a permit under this Title a copy of all rules and regulations adopted by the City
Council that are applicable to said permit. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-3: RECORDS:
The Public Works Director shall keep complete records of all permit applications and permits issued under this Title including the location; plans and
specific description of the use; the names and addresses of applicants and permittees; and records of all fees paid pursuant to this Title, with the names of
the persons making payments, dates of payments, purposes and amounts of the payments. These records shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 1093,
1-20-1987)
12-2-4: TRADE SECRETS:
To the extent permitted by State law, any record, report, or information that may become known to the City in the course of implementation or enforcement
of the provisions of this Title which if made public would divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets, shall not be made public by
the City if the person from whom said data is obtained requests in writing that the City maintain the confidentiality of said data. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-5: INSPECTION AUTHORIZED:
A. Entry And Inspection On Private Property: In administering and enforcing the provisions of this Title, the Public Works Director, bearing proper
credentials and identification, may at any reasonable hour enter upon any premises, subject to approval of the occupant. If the owner or occupier
refuses to allow entry, the Public Works Director may do so after obtaining an appropriate warrant.
B. Emergency Entry; Denial Constitutes Misdemeanor: Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Public Works Director has reasonable cause to believe that
there are violations of this Title occurring that are so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to protect the public health or
safety, the Public Works Director shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to
effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been
obtained. If the property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining his reasons therefor and the
purpose of his inspection. No person shall fail or refuse to permit reasonable inspection. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-6: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
A. Facilities Inspection: Inspection of every facility involved with the discharge of wastewater to the City sewer system may be made by the Public Works
Director. These facilities shall include, but not be limited to, sewers, sewage pumping plants, pollution control plants, all industrial processes, industrial
wastewater generation, conveyance and pretreatment facilities, and similar facilities. Inspections may be made to determine whether such facilities
comply with the provisions of this Title.
B. Access: Access to such facilities shall be given to authorized personnel of the City at all reasonable times and whenever emergency conditions exist.
Any obstruction to access to the sewage facility to be inspected shall promptly be removed by the facility user or owner at the written or verbal request
of the Public Works Director and shall not be replaced.
C. Interference Or Refusal: No person shall interfere with, delay, or refuse entrance to authorized City personnel attempting to inspect any facility
connected directly or indirectly to the City sewer system. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 282/581
12-2-7: PURPOSE OF INSPECTION:
The Public Works Director may, as herein provided, enter private property to exercise any power vested in him by this Title, including the power to
determine:
A. The size, depth and location of any connection with a public sewer or storm drain.
B. The quantity, quality and nature of industrial waste, sewage, or surface waters being discharged into a public sewer, storm drain, or watercourse.
C. The effectiveness of any device used to prevent waste prohibited by this Title from entering any sewer, storm drain or watercourse.
D. The location of roof, swimming pool, and surface drains, and whether they are connected to a street gutter, storm drain, or sewer.
E. The nature of liquids and the condition of processing equipment which are a potential hazard to the City sewer system.
F. Whether there is compliance with the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-8: MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS:
The Public Works Director may inspect, as often as he deems necessary, every public sewer, sewage pumping plant, sewage or industrial waste
pretreatment or treatment facility, industrial connection sewer, clarifier, dilution basin, neutralization basin, or other similar appurtenance, to ascertain
whether such facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-9: INSTALLATION OF CONTROL MANHOLE:
The Public Works Director may require a control manhole of a design he approves to be furnished and installed by any industrial wastewater discharger to
facilitate inspection and sampling by the City or other governmental agencies. Such manholes shall be constructed at locations approved by the Public
Works Director and authorized City personnel shall have unrestricted access thereto at all times consistent with the provisions of subsection 12-2-5B of
this Chapter. Access of others to such manholes shall be restricted by appropriate security measures. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-10: CHEMICAL SHUT-OFF REQUIREMENT:
A means shall be provided to effect immediate cessation of discharge of liquid chemicals, process solutions, or spent process solutions into the City sewer
as a result of spills, overflows, leaks, failure of containers or inadvertent discharges. Such means of cessation shall include, but not be limited to,
installation of automatic valves, gates, or bypasses to impervious containers which when activated will stop water supply to and the discharge from
industrial processes. The discharger shall submit details of the proposed measures and drawings before installation and obtain approval from the Public
Works Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-11: PERMANENT OR TEMPORARY OBSTRUCTIONS:
No person shall install, construct, or place any permanent or temporary object or structure in a location where it will interfere with ready and easy access to
any pretreatment or treatment facility, sampling compartment, manhole, flow metering device, or any instrumentality for which a permit is required by this
Title. Any such obstruction shall be removed upon order of the Public Works Director by the person responsible for it, at no expense to the City. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-12: CERTIFICATE OF FINAL INSPECTION:
When the Public Works Director is satisfied that all work done under a permit issued pursuant to this Title has been constructed according to and meets
the requirements of this Title and such other applicable provisions of law, and that all required fees have been paid, he shall, upon request therefor, issue
to the permittee constructing such work a certificate of final inspection, which shall recite that the work covered by the permit has been constructed
according to this Title and is approved. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-13: SEWER FUND:
All fees received by the City under this Title shall be deposited in a Sewer Fund maintained by the City Treasurer. The monies received and the interest
thereon shall be used for the operation, maintenance and expansion of the City sewer system. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-2-14: VIOLATIONS; NOTICE; COMPLAINT:
A. Violations: It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this Title, the conditions or limitations of any permit issued under this Title, or any rule or
regulation prescribed and adopted pursuant to this Title.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 283/581
B. Notice; Complaint: Before requesting a criminal complaint, the Public Works Director may notify any person found to be in violation of this Title or of any
limitation or requirement of a permit issued hereunder. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
Chapter 3
SEWER CONNECTIONS; SPECIFICATIONS; MANHOLES
12-3-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Sewer Connection: No person shall connect to or tap a public sewer of the City or maintain a connection or tap to such sewer without obtaining a permit
from the Public Works Director.
B. Excavations: No permit to connect to or tap a public sewer shall be issued unless a permit is also obtained pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 2 this Code, if
applicable. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-2: EASEMENT REQUIRED:
No permit shall be issued to connect a house sewer or house connection sewer to a public sewer if the connection or any portion thereof is in, under, or on
a lot not owned by the person whose house is to be connected and no recorded easement exists authorizing the connection of such lot. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-3-3: EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE:
No permit shall be issued to connect to or tap a public sewer unless said sewer has sufficient sewage capacity to receive the intended discharge. The
Public Works Director may require the discharger to restrict the discharge until sufficient capacity is available, or to construct a public sewer to provide
sufficient capacity. The Public Works Director may refuse service to persons locating facilities in areas where their proposed quantity or quality of sewage
or industrial wastewater is unacceptable to the available treatment facility. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-4: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT:
No permit to connect to or tap a public sewer shall be issued if the proposed use of the public sewer may have a significant effect on the environment
unless the environmental review process has been completed pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act1. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-3-5: FEES:
A. Sewer Connection Fees: Except as otherwise provided in this Title, no permit to connect to or tap a public sewer shall be issued unless the prescribed
sewer connection fees have been paid to the City. The sewer connection fee shall be fixed and established from time to time by the City Council by
resolution.
B. Increase Or Reduction Of Fee: The City Council may, for good cause, increase, remit or reduce all or any portion of any fee or charge prescribed by this
Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-6: TAPPING PUBLIC SEWER:
A. Application For Tap: When, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, a house connection sewer should be connected to a public sewer at a point
where there is no connection facility, application for a public sewer tap shall be submitted and a sewer connection fee for each tap shall be paid before
the permit is issued for construction of the house connection sewer.
B. Tapping In Presence Of City Employee: All tapping of public sewers shall be made by a licensed sewer contractor in the presence and to the
satisfaction of an inspector acting under the authority of the Public Works Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-7: SPECIFICATIONS AND GRADES:
Connections to public sewers shall comply with the following:
A. Cast Iron Pipe: House connection sewers shall be made with pipe of cast iron, clay or other material, approved by the Public Works Director.
B. City Specifications: The pipe of the house connection sewer shall be laid in conformity with City specifications for public sewers.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 284/581
C. Alignment: The pipe shall be laid in a straight alignment and at a uniform slope, and shall have a fall of at least one foot (1') in fifty feet (50') unless the
Public Works Director determines that an exception is warranted.
D. Depth: The pipe must be at least three and one-half feet (31/2') below an established street or alley grade where it crosses the property line on the date
of installation unless the Public Works Director determines that an exception is warranted.
E. Right Angle From Connection: The alignment of the house connection sewer must be at right angles from the connection to the public sewer unless the
Public Works Director determines that an exception is warranted.
F. Wye Or Tee Saddles: A collar wye or tee saddle shall be installed in tapped public sewers by cutting a properly proportioned hole in the public sewer
and fitting the saddle tightly in place. Wye saddles shall be placed in the side of the public sewer with the wye branch so pointed as to direct the flow
from the house connection sewer downstream at approximately a forty five degree (45°) angle with the public sewer, and tilted upward at approximately
forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal. Tee saddles shall be used for the construction of chimney pipes and for connections to twelve inch (12")
diameter and larger public sewers and tilted upward at approximately forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal or as approved by the Public Works
Director.
G. Wye Or Tee Connection: No house or industrial waste connection to a public sewer shall be made, except through a wye or tee branch, without written
permission from the Public Works Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-8: HOUSE CONNECTION SEWERS, SERVE ONE LOT:
No more than one lot shall be connected to any one house connection sewer. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-9: CONNECTING CESSPOOLS OR SEPTIC TANKS:
No person shall connect any cesspool, seepage pit or septic tank to any public sewer or to any house sewer or house connection sewer. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-
1987)
12-3-10: DISCONNECTION OF UNLAWFUL CONNECTION:
The Public Works Director may disconnect any house connection sewer installed or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Title. Reconnection of
such a disconnected sewer shall be made only upon issuance of a permit as provided in this Title. Before such permit is issued or considered, the
applicant shall reimburse the City for all cost resulting from the disconnection. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-11: COST OF REPAIR TO PUBLIC SEWER:
Any person who unlawfully obstructs, damages, destroys, or removes any public sewer, or appurtenance thereof, shall reimburse the City for the
reasonable cost of necessary flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconstruction of the sewer within thirty (30) days after written request from the Public
Works Director to do so. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-3-12: DISCHARGE INTO MANHOLE; PERMIT; FEE:
A. Opening Manhole: No person shall open, enter, or allow to remain open, any manhole in any public sewer without a permit from the Public Works
Director.
B. Disposal Of Cesspool Effluent: No person shall deposit cesspool effluent or any waste or sewage into a manhole without a permit from the Public Works
Director. The Public Works Director may permit disposal of cesspool effluent into designated manholes by operators of cesspool pump trucks holding
valid County Health Department certificates of registration upon payment of a disposal fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each truckload,
provided the effluent contains no substance which he determines to be deleterious; and further provided, that the cesspool wastes originated from
cesspools within the City.
C. Method Of Disposal: Cesspool effluent deposited into a manhole in accordance with this Section shall be discharged through a pipe or hose in such a
manner that none of the effluent adheres to the sides or shelf of the manhole. If any effluent adheres to the sides or shelf of the manhole, it shall be
removed by the operator of the cesspool pump truck. Said operator shall leave the sides and shelf of the manhole clean. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
Chapter 4
INDUSTRIAL WASTE AND DISPOSAL
12-4-1: INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: No person shall discharge any industrial waste into any City sewer or storm drain without first obtaining an industrial waste permit from
the Public Works Director in the case of discharge to the sewer, and from the California Regional Water Quality Control Board in the case of discharge
to the storm drain.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 285/581
B. Industrial Waste Disposal By Landfill: If a person chooses to dispose of industrial waste material by hauling said material to an authorized disposal site,
he shall apply for an industrial waste permit as provided herein.
C. Application For Permit: Applications for industrial waste permits shall be filed in writing with the Public Works Director and shall be supplemented by
such additional information as he may require. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
D. Permit Fee: Applications for permits shall be accompanied by an application fee based on the nature of work required to process the permit, which shall
be fixed and established from time to time by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1268, 3-18-1997)
12-4-2: REVIEW AND ACTION ON APPLICATIONS:
A. Review: The Public Works Director shall review all applications for industrial waste permits to determine that the proposed discharge of waste will not
violate any provision of this Title or State and Federal laws.
B. Action: Within thirty (30) days after the Public Works Director receives an application for an industrial waste permit, he shall, pursuant to this Title, grant
or deny the permit and notify the applicant of the action taken. Such time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the Public Works
Director and the applicant. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-3: CONDITIONS IMPOSED:
The Public Works Director, in granting a permit, may impose conditions consistent with the purpose of this Title, including, but not limited to, pretreatment
of wastewater before discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges or of discharge of certain substances, limitation of discharge to certain hours, and
payment of additional charges to defray increased costs to the City created by the discharge. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-4: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT:
No industrial waste permit shall be granted if the proposed use of the public sewer may significantly affect the environment, unless the environmental
review process has been completed pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act1. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-5: CONDITIONS CHANGED:
Whenever the operators of the treatment facilities, through which effluent from the City's sewerage system is discharged, require any modification of the
conditions or composition of the effluent, the Director of Public Works may impose conditions upon any industrial waste permit in order to conform with
such requirements or may revoke or suspend any such industrial waste permit. When possible, the permit holder shall be allowed sixty (60) days after
notice within which to comply with the conditions of the permit. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-6: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE:
No person shall directly or indirectly discharge industrial waste into the City sewer system unless the Public Works Director has determined that the
substance to be discharged will not violate the provisions of this Title or the water quality standards for receiving waters established by other government
agencies. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-7: FEES; EXCEPTIONS:
The fees established in Sections 12-4-8 and 12-4-9 of this Chapter shall be applicable to all sewer connections within the City and all sewer connections to
the City's system, whether within or without the City, except that those portions of the City within the Los Angeles County South Bay Sanitation District or
Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 5, shall not be subject to any of the fees set forth in the foregoing Sections, where a fee for similar service is
imposed by the Los Angeles County South Bay Sanitation District or Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 5. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-8: ANNUAL INSPECTION FEE:
Every person granted an industrial waste permit under this Title shall pay an annual fee to the City for inspection and control and such fee shall be fixed
and established from time to time by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-9: ANNUAL QUALITY SURCHARGE FEE:
A. Formula: Every person granted an industrial waste permit under this Title shall pay an annual quality surcharge fee for wastes discharged into the
sanitary sewer system pursuant to the following formula:
C = V [a(SS-250) + b(BOD - 180)] k
where "C" is the quality surcharge fee;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 286/581
"V" is the average daily volume of waste discharged in gallons, based on:
1. The volume of water supplied to the premises less an amount determined by the Public Works Director to account for water not discharged into
the sanitary sewer system; or
2. The metered volume of waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system according to a measuring device approved by the Public Works Director;
or
3. A figure determined by the Public Works Director based on any other equitable method;
SS is the suspended solids in the waste discharged, expressed in milligrams per liter;
BOD is the five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand of the waste discharged, expressed in milligrams per liter;
a is the cost assessed for each pound of suspended solids, and such cost shall be fixed and established from time to time by the City Council by
resolution; presently $ 0.29/lb.
b is the cost assessed for each pound of biochemical oxygen demand, and such cost shall be fixed and established from time to time by the City
Council by resolution; presently $0.11/lb.
k365 x 8.34/1,000,000, a dimensional constant to convert C to dollars.
If the term containing SS or BOD is negative, a value of zero shall be used for that term.
SS and BOD analyses shall be made in accordance with "Standard Methods". In determining the annual quality surcharge fee, the Public Works
Director may use industrial averages for SS and BOD values. The Public Works Director may group permit holders into discharge volume ranges.
Where volume measurement at the premises of a permit holder is impractical for physical, economic or other reasons, these volume ranges may be
used in establishing the quality surcharge fee. (Ord. 1237, 4-4-1995)
B. Appeal From Annual Quality Surcharge Fee: Any permit holder whose annual quality surcharge fee has been determined in the manner provided and
who believes the discharge volume range applied to his premises is incorrect, may submit engineering data to the Public Works Director. If the Public
Works Director finds the discharge of the permit holder differs significantly from the volume range which was applied, he may adjust the fee.
C. Review Of Annual Surcharge Fee: The Public Works Director shall annually review the rates assessed in subsection A of this Section for SS and BOD
and make a written recommendation to the City Council concerning rate adjustments necessary to recover revenue from industrial waste dischargers to
pay the cost to the City of treating sewer discharge in excess of domestic quality. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-10: ANNUAL COST OF TREATMENT FEE:
An annual cost of treatment fee of from twenty five dollars ($25.00) to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a fee per unit of offending constituent as set by
the Public Works Director shall be paid by permit holders who discharge wastes that impose unusual monitoring, maintenance, or capital costs on the City
which are unrelated to total flow volume, SS or BOD, or peak flow rates. Such fees shall be calculated to defray costs attributable to such wastes. (Ord.
1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-11: DUE DATES:
The annual inspection fee, quality surcharge fee, and the cost of treatment fee shall be paid annually in advance of one of four (4) dates as follows:
If The Permit
Is Granted Between
The Due Date
Of The Annual
Fee Shall Be
Jan. 1 and Mar. 31, inclusive April 1
April 1 and June 30, inclusive July 1
July 1 and Sept. 30, inclusive Oct. 1
Oct. 1 and Dec. 31, inclusive Jan. 1
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-12: DELINQUENCY; ADDITIONAL CHARGE:
If annual fees are not paid on or before the last day of the month in which they are due, an additional charge of twenty five percent (25%) of the required
fees, but not less than ten dollars ($10.00), shall be imposed and become payable as part of the annual fees. If said fees and additional charges are not
paid on or before thirty (30) days after the last day of the month in which said fees were due, the permit shall be revoked pursuant to Section 12-4-13 of
this Chapter. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-13: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 287/581
A. Authority: The Public Works Director shall suspend the permit of any permit holder who fails to comply with the conditions of his permit or any provision,
rule, or regulation of this Title. Any person whose permit has been suspended shall immediately discontinue the discharge of industrial waste, and shall
not resume such discharge or deposit until the permit has been reinstated. The Public Works Director shall revoke any permit suspended pursuant to
this Section which is not reinstated within one year from the date of suspension.
B. Reinstatement Of Permit: The Public Works Director shall reinstate a suspended permit when all violations have been corrected and all new conditions
have been met. Before any revoked permit is reissued, all delinquent fees and additional charges due and owing to the City shall be paid. (Ord. 1093,
1-20-1987)
12-4-14: TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
A. Successor In Interest: Permits issued under this Title shall be transferred to the successor in title or interest of the premises for which the permit was
granted if the same business is continued and the successor files with the Public Works Director a written statement agreeing to comply with the
conditions of the permit, pays an application fee, and provides satisfactory evidence of the transfer of title or interest.
B. Other Premises: Permits issued under this Title are not transferable from one location to another. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-15: DISCLOSURE AND MEASUREMENT OF WASTE PRODUCTS:
A. Origin Of Waste: The Public Works Director may require any person discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste in a public sewer to furnish
information respecting the origin and nature of such waste, and to provide and maintain facilities for sample collection and recording.
B. Measurements: Periodic measurements of flow rates, flow volumes, BOD and SS to determine the annual quality surcharge fee and such
measurements of other constituents as required by the Public Works Director shall be made by industrial waste dischargers. Such sampling, analyses
and flow measurements of industrial wastes shall be performed by a State certified independent laboratory; or by a laboratory of an industrial waste
discharger approved by the Public Works Director; or by City personnel, at the discretion of the Public Works Director, upon written request of the
discharger, and on condition that the discharger shall reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the City. Data from the laboratory of an industrial
waste discharger shall be submitted only after verification by an administrative official of such discharger under penalty of perjury.
C. Analyses: All wastewater analyses shall be conducted according to the procedures stated in "Standard Methods". If no procedure is contained therein,
the standard procedure of the industry or a method approved by the Public Works Director shall be used. Independent laboratories or the discharger
performing tests shall furnish data on test methods or equipment as requested by the Public Works Director.
D. Rate And Volume: Dischargers making periodic measurements shall install at the control manhole or other location a calibrated fume, weir, flow meter
or similar device approved by the Public Works Director to measure the wastewater flow rate and volume. A flow indicating and recording register may
be required by the Public Works Director.
E. Records Of Water Use: In lieu of wastewater flow measurement, the Public Works Director may accept records of water use and adjust the flow
volumes by suitable factors to determine peak and average flow rates.
F. Inspection: Sampling analysis and flow measurement procedures and equipment shall be subject at any time to inspection by the Public Works Director.
Industrial plants with large fluctuations in quality and quantity of wastewater may be required to provide sampling, analysis, and flow measurement data
for each work day.
G. Monitor And Alarm System: Industries producing a discharge with a fluctuating pH shall install a continuous pH monitor and alarm system to alert the
discharger of any discharge with a pH higher than eleven (11) or lower than five and five-tenths (5.5). The discharger shall maintain the records of the
monitoring system, incidents of discharge contrary to the permissible limits and corrective and preventive measures implemented. These records shall
be available for inspection by the authorized City representative at all times.
H. Chemical Containers Identified: Tanks and containers for chemicals or other substances that might by process, leakage or spillage reach the City sewer
shall be plainly identified by number and contents.
I. Random Measurements: Public Works Director shall make measurements on a random basis to verify the constituents or quantities of waste flows
reported by industrial dischargers. Additional City costs resulting from violations shall be paid by the discharger.
J. Discharger Report: Dischargers shall furnish a report to the Public Works Director concerning the disposal of industrial wastes which the Public Works
Director has prohibited from discharge into the City sewer system. The report shall include the date of the disposal, tanks or containers emptied, name
of the disposal agency, and signed receipt. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-4-16: FOOD WASTES:
Food wastes processed or ground by grinders with a rated horsepower of one horsepower or more are industrial wastes and subject to the provisions of
this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 288/581
12-4-17: TEMPERATURE OF WASTE:
No person without specific authorization from the Public Works Director shall discharge into a public sewer any industrial waste having a temperature
greater than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F). (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
Chapter 5
UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL
12-5-1: PROHIBITED WASTE:
No person shall discharge, permit the discharge, cause the discharge, or contribute to the discharge directly or indirectly into the City sewer system or
storm drain system industrial waste containing hazardous, flammable, toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to be injurious to humans or animals, or to create a hazard or public nuisance, or any waste of such a nature or quality as to interfere
with the effective operation of the City sewer system or storm drain system or with the water quality requirements placed on the City by other governmental
agencies. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-2: ALLOWABLE CONCENTRATIONS OF CERTAIN WASTES:
The Public Works Director shall from time to time prepare a list of allowable quantities or concentrations of certain constituents in industrial wastewater
flows and shall issue directions for meeting requirements of this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-3: SWIMMING POOLS:
Discharges from swimming pools during maintenance operations may be made into City sewers, as determined by the Director of Public Works if the
discharge is properly neutralized so as not to have a detrimental effect on the sewer, and the receiving waters thereof. A permit for the discharge shall be
obtained from the Public Works Director. The fee for such a permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-4: WATER ON STREETS PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY PERMITS:
No person shall negligently, wilfully or maliciously discharge, throw or deposit water on any street in such manner as to obstruct or damage the street, or to
create a nuisance or hazard to persons or property, or to prevent or interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of the street by the public; provided,
however, that the Public Works Director may grant and issue permits for the temporary discharge of water upon the street, upon such terms and conditions
as he may deem necessary to protect the City and public from damage and injury. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-5: UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE:
No person shall discharge any waste or sewage into any watercourse, flood control channel or tributaries or into the ground by percolation or injection
without a permit from the Public Works Director. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-6: UNLAWFUL POLLUTION:
No permit shall be issued for, nor shall any person discharge or deposit waste or sewage which creates a public nuisance, a menace to the public safety,
pollution or contamination of underground or surface waters, or impairs the use of any public sewer, storm drain channel, or public or private property.
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-5-7: LIABILITY FOR UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE:
Any person who unlawfully discharges or causes wastewater to be discharged into the public sewer system or storm drain systems is in violation of this
Chapter and is therefore liable for all damages, costs, fines or charges incurred. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
Chapter 6
ENFORCEMENT
12-6-1: SUSPENSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMIT:
A. Authority: The Public Works Director may suspend an industrial wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop a discharge
which presents an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, to the local environment, or which either singly or by interaction with other
discharges, is an imminent hazard to the sewer system, the storm drain system, or the waters of the State, or places the City in violation of its NPDES
permit.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 289/581
B. Cease Discharge Upon Notice: Any discharger notified of a suspension of that discharger's industrial wastewater permit shall immediately cease and
desist the discharge of all industrial wastewater to the sewer system.
C. Failure Of Discharge To Comply: In the event of a failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Public Works Director
may take such steps as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance. These include, but are not limited to, immediate blockage or disconnection of
the discharger's connection to the sewer system.
D. Notice Of Intended Order Of Suspension: In addition, the Public Works Director, in the event of violation of this Chapter, may serve the discharger with
a notice of an intended order of suspension, stating the reasons therefor, the opportunity for a hearing with respect thereto, and the proposed effective
date of the intended order.
E. Request For Hearing; Council Determination: Any discharger suspended or served with a notice of an intended order of suspension may file with the
City Clerk a request for a City Council hearing with respect thereto. Filing of such a request shall not stay a suspension. In the event of a suspension of
a permit due to imminent hazard related to continued discharge, the discharger may request a hearing, and the City Council or a hearing examiner
designated by the City Council for that purpose shall conduct a hearing within three (3) days of receipt of the request. In the event of hearing requests,
for other than an imminent hazard suspension, the City Council shall hold a hearing on the suspension within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the
request. At the close of the hearing, the City Council shall make its determination whether to terminate, or conditionally terminate the suspension
imposed by the Public Works Director, or the City Council may cause the permit to be revoked. Except in the case of a hearing within three (3) days
being required as above provided, reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the suspended discharger in the manner provided for in Section
12-6-5 of this Chapter.
F. Stay Of Order Pending Council Determination: In the event that the City Council fails to meet within the time set forth above or fails to make a
determination within seventy two (72) hours after the close of the hearing, the order of suspension shall be stayed until a City Council determination is
made with respect to the action of the Public Works Director.
G. Reinstatement Of Permit Upon Compliance: The Public Works Director shall reinstate the industrial wastewater permit upon proof of compliance which
ends the emergency nature of the hazard created by the discharge that had been cause for the Public Works Director to initiate the suspension;
provided, that the Public Works Director is satisfied that all discharge requirements of this Chapter, City Council rules and regulations, and any City
Council order will be implemented. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-2: REVOCATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMIT:
The City Council may revoke an industrial wastewater permit upon finding that the discharger has violated any provision of this Title or the Council rules
and regulations. No revocation shall be ordered until a notice and hearing on the question has been held by the Council as provided in Sections 12-6-4
and 12-6-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-3: ADDITIONAL EMERGENCY REMEDIAL MEASURES:
The Public Works Director shall have full power and authority to take any necessary precautions including, but not limited to, decontamination, sewer
closure, packaging, diking, and transportation of materials, in order to protect life, protect property, or prevent further damage resulting from a condition
that is likely to result in a discharge which presents an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; or which either singly or by interaction with
other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the sewer system; or which places the City in violation of its NPDES permit. In the pursuit of such an operation,
City personnel, any party contracting with the City, or duly authorized representative of another government agency shall have immediate access to the
premises. The Public Works Director may prohibit approach to the scene of such emergency by any person, vehicle, vessel or thing, and all persons not
actually employed in the extinguishment of the condition or the preservation of lives and property in the vicinity thereof. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-4: CITY COUNCIL HEARING; HEARING EXAMINERS:
A. Conduct Of Hearings By Council Or Examiner: With respect to permit revocation or suspension hearings, the City Council may conduct the hearing or
may appoint one or more examiners or designate one or more of its members to serve as hearing examiners and to conduct a hearing with respect to
any appeal or protest filed. At such hearing the discharger may appear personally or through counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence
in the discharger's behalf.
B. Examiners Report To Council; Notice Of Council Action:
1. The hearing examiner or examiners, if other than the City Council, shall submit a written report and recommendations to the City Council together
with a brief summary of the evidence considered and conclusions reached with respect thereto.
2. The City Council, after considering evidence presented at such a hearing, and any report submitted to it with respect to such a hearing, or after any
hearing which it conducts, shall adopt findings supported by the evidence, and may adopt, reject, or modify the report in whole or in part, make its
decision, and issue its order.
3. If the City Council's order is to revoke the discharger's industrial wastewater permit, the order may be effective forthwith, or at a later specified date.
4. The discharger shall be notified in writing of the City Council's action.
C. Cease Discharging Upon Permit Revocation: Any discharger whose industrial wastewater permit has been revoked shall immediately cease and desist
all discharge of any wastewater covered by the permit. The Public Works Director may disconnect or permanently block the discharger's connection if
such action is necessary to ensure compliance with the order of revocation.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 290/581
D. New Application: After revocation of a discharger's industrial waste permit, there shall be no further discharge of industrial wastewater by that
discharger into the sewer system, the storm drain system, or the waters of the State unless there has been a new application filed, all fees and charges
that would be required upon an initial application and all delinquent fees, charges, penalties and other sums owed by the discharger and/or the
applicant to the City have been paid to the City, and a new industrial wastewater permit has been issued. Any costs incurred by the City, including
administrative costs and investigative fees, in revoking the permit and disconnecting the connection if necessary, shall also be paid for by the
discharger before issuance of a new industrial wastewater permit. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-5: NOTICE OF HEARING:
A. Mailing Or Posting Of Notice: Notice of the hearing shall be given to the discharger at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing. Unless otherwise
provided herein, any notice required to be given by the Public Works Director under this Title shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or
certified mail addressed to the addressee's last known address with request for return receipt. Where no address is known, service may be made upon
the owner of record of the property upon which the alleged violation occurred or by posting the notice conspicuously on the property.
B. Depositing In Mail: Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time the written notice is deposited, postage prepaid, in the United States mail at
El Segundo, California. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-6-6: ADDITIONAL LEGAL REMEDIES; ATTEMPT:
Any person who attempts to commit an act which is in violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1-2-1 of
this Code. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987; amd. 2000 Code)
12-6-7: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Provisions of this Title shall prevail over any other inconsistent or conflicting provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
Chapter 7
SEWER USE FEE
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide funds for the operation and maintenance of the City sewer system by imposing a City sewer use fee upon the
users of these facilities. This charge is to be reviewed at least bi-annually. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-2: IMPOSITION OF SEWER USE FEE:
Every person discharging sewage, effluent, industrial waste, or other waste matter into a public sewer shall pay a sewer use fee to the City. This fee shall
be in addition to any other fee imposed by this Title. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-3: DETERMINATION OF FEE:
The sewer use fee shall be computed and determined on the basis of water supplied to the premises and shall be fixed and established from time to time
by the City Council by resolution. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-4: COLLECTION OF FEE BY UTILITY BILL:
The fees imposed by this Chapter shall be collected by adding the same to the water bills rendered by the Director of Finance of the City. The period
covered by each billing shall be the same period for which the water bill is rendered and shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as the
water bill. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-5: DELINQUENCIES:
Bills for sewer use fee set forth on water bills shall be delinquent if not paid when the water bill is due; otherwise, within fifteen (15) days from the date the
bill is delivered or mailed. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-6: JOINT OCCUPANCY:
When there is more than one dwelling unit, business, industry, or other use on any premises served by a single water meter, the sewer use fee will be
billed to the water user. In those instances where the water user fails to pay such sewer use fee, the owner shall be liable to the City for payment thereof.
(Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 291/581
12-7-7: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
In case of delinquency in payment of the sewer use fee, the sewer lateral shall be plugged. The lessor or the owner shall be responsible for payment of all
fees incurred in plugging or unplugging of the sewer lateral in addition to the delinquent charges. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-8: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
A. Water Supply Not Discharged To City Sewer: Where no portion of the water supplied to any premises enters a public sewer of the City, no fee shall
accrue under this Chapter if an application for exemption is filed with the Public Works Director and he finds that there is no discharge of any sewage,
effluent, industrial waste or other waste matter from such premises into a public sewer of the City.
B. Low Income Residential Discount: Low income residential users meeting the adjusted gross annual income criteria included in the current City water
rate resolution shall receive a discount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the monthly charges for sewer use. (Ord. 1237, 4-4-1995)
12-7-9: APPLICATION FOR ADJUSTMENT OF FEE:
A. Determination Of Reasonable Fee: In any case where it is believed that a sewer use fee imposed by this Chapter is excessive, the person responsible
for paying such fee may apply to the Public Works Director for an adjustment. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show that the
fee is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair. The fee shall be deemed to be nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair if the following percentage of water
supplied to the premises on an annual basis enters a public sewer:
Use Of Premises Percentage
Residential 40 or more
Commercial 60 or more
Industrial 60 or more
Other 40 or more
Measured discharge 100
B. Investigation; Findings: The Public Works Director shall conduct an investigation and make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the
fee is fair and reasonable. If he determines that the fee is excessive, he shall adjust the fee so that it is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If the fee
has already been paid, he shall order a refund of the excess paid during the twelve (12) months or any portion thereof immediately preceding the date
of application for adjustment. Fees which are delinquent for more than ninety (90) days shall not be subject to adjustment. (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
12-7-10: DEBT; PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT:
The sewer use fee imposed by this Chapter shall constitute a debt owed to the City and, in the event suit is brought to recover such fee, shall be subject to
a delinquent penalty of twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 1093, 1-20-1987)
Title 13
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
13-1-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 50022.2, the California building code, 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 2, of the California code of
regulations, including appendices F, H, I, and J ("CBC") is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One
true copy of the CBC is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1524, 12-6-2016)
13-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Section 105.1 of chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
105.1 Permit Required.
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or
to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.
Parking lots shall not be paved, improved, striped, or restriped unless a separate permit for each parking lot has first been obtained from the building
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 292/581
official.
Exception: A separate permit shall not be required to pave, improve, stripe, or restripe a parking lot when such work is included in the scope of
another project for which a building permit has been issued and when the design of such parking lot was included in the plan check review of such
project.
Subsection 14 is added to section 105.2 of chapter 1 of the CBC as follows:
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit.
Building:
14. Block wall and concrete fences not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
Section 105.3.2 of chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
105.3.2 Expiration Of Plan Check.
An application for a permit for any proposed work is deemed abandoned 12 months after the application date. Unless otherwise provided, after
expiration of the application, the city will not issue a permit until the plans are rechecked and approved and a new fee is paid.
Exception: The building official may grant extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if a permit applicant submits in
writing sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or circumstances precluded the securing of the permit within the allocated time.
Section 105.5 of chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
105.5 Expiration Of Permits.
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if
the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Work
shall be considered suspended or abandoned if the building official determines that substantial work has not been performed within the time
specified above. Substantial work shall be constructed to mean:
1.1 Measurable work such as, but not limited to, the addition of footings, structural members, flooring, wall covering, etc.
2.1 The work mentioned in subsection 1 of this section 105.5 above must constitute 20% of the value of the work for which the permit was issued
in any 180 day period for group R, division 3 occupancies and 10% for all other occupancies.
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one half the amount required for
a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and
provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the
permittee shall pay a new permit fee and may be required to comply with all applicable new regulations at the time of issuance. The building official is
authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing
and justifiable cause demonstrated. Except as otherwise provided, every permit issued by the city is valid for a period of three (3) years.
Exception: The building official may grant extensions of time if a permit applicant submits in writing sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or
circumstances precluded from the work being completed. An extension of time may require conditions of approval and additional fees.
Section 105.8 of chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
105.8 Responsibility Of Permittee.
Building permits shall be presumed by the city to incorporate all of the work that the applicant, the applicant's agent, employees and/or contractors
shall carry out. Said proposed work shall be in accordance with the approved plans and with all requirements of this code and any other laws or
regulations applicable thereto. No city approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions of this
code nor shall any vested rights be created for any work performed in violation of this code.
Section 109.4 of chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
109.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance.
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to a fee in addition to the normally established permit fee, equal to 100% of such normally established permit fee, or as
otherwise determined by the building official.
Section 109.6.1 of chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 293/581
109.6.1 Plan Check Fees Refund.
No portion of the plan check fee shall be refunded unless plan review has not been performed, in which case 80 percent of the plan check fee shall
be refunded upon written application for refund submitted by the person who made original payment of such fee and with the written consent of the
owner of the real property on which the work was proposed to be done. The building official shall determine, in such official's discretion, whether an
applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of the submittal for plan check, no plan check fees shall be
refunded. In the event subsequent application for plan check is made by a person who has received a refund, the full amount of all required fees
shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
Section 109.6.2 of chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
109.6.2 Permit Fees Refund.
In the event any person shall have obtained a building permit and no portion of the work or construction covered by such permit shall have
commenced, nor any inspection performed by any city employee, and notice of abandonment has been received from the owner of the real property
on which such work would have been performed, the permittee, upon presentation to the building official of a written request for refund, shall be
entitled to a refund in an amount equal to 80 percent of the building permit fee actually paid for such permit. The building official shall determine, in
such official's discretion, whether an applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of the issuance of the
permit, no permit fees shall be refunded. In the event subsequent application for a permit is made by a person who has received a refund, the full
amount of all required fees shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
Exception:
1. If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside the jurisdiction of the city, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee
may be refunded.
2. If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of the duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded.
Section 109.7 of chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
109.7 Re-Inspections.
A re-inspection fee in the amount set by city council resolution may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for
which inspection is called is incomplete or when required corrections are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection
fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections
before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or
otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official. In instances where re-inspection fees have been
assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until required fees have been paid.
Section 110.1.1 of chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
110.1.1 Setback Certification Required.
A California state licensed surveyor is required to certify the location and setbacks of all new construction prior to the first foundation inspection. A
copy of the certification shall be available to the building division inspector for the job file prior to the first inspection.
Exception: Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this section, the building official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases.
Section 113.3 of chapter 1 of the CBC is amended to read as follows:
113.3 Board Of Appeals.
The board of appeals consists of members of the planning commission. The term of a board of appeals member will coincide with the term of service
as a planning commissioner and will terminate should the member cease serving as a planning commissioner. The building official is the secretary to
the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and will render all its decisions and findings on
contested matters, in writing to the building official, with a duplicate copy for any appellant or contestant affected by such decision or finding, and
may recommend to the city council appropriate new legislation.
Three members of the board constitute a quorum. The planning chairperson is the board's chairperson and in the chairperson's absence the board
will select a temporary chairperson.
The city will assess a $250.00 charge, or a higher amount set by resolution, at the time that an appellant file appeal of any order, decisions, or
determination made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. The filing fee is refundable should the appellant
prevail in a decision by the board. The appeal must be taken by filing a written notice of appeal, in letter form, to the board of appeals. The board's
decision constitutes the city's final decision.
Section 113.4 of chapter 1 of the CBC is added to read as follows:
113.4 Access Board Of Appeals.
A. There shall be a disability access board of appeals ("access board of appeals") to consist of five members. Each member shall be appointed
and hold office in accordance with procedures established by resolution of the city council. Three of the five members shall be members of the
building board of appeals, and shall be co-appointed by the city council to be a member of the building board of appeals and the access board of
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 294/581
appeals. Two of the five members shall be "physically handicapped persons" (as defined by California Health And Safety Code section 19957.5).
B. The access board of appeals shall be considered a "standing committee" with a continuing subject matter jurisdiction. Thus, the access board of
appeals shall be subject to the requirements of the Brown act (California Government Code section 54950 et seq.); however, the access board of
appeals shall have no regular meetings, and all meetings shall be special meetings noticed pursuant to California Government Code section
54956. The access board of appeals shall conduct its meetings in accordance with procedures established by resolution of the city council. The
access board of appeals may establish its own rules of procedure or by-laws consistent with city council resolutions and ordinances.
C. Any person aggrieved by a determination made by the building official or fire code official in administering or enforcing the portions of this
chapter related to access to "public accommodations or facilities" (pursuant to California Health And Safety Code section 19955, et seq.) may
appeal the determination to the access board of appeals. The appeal shall be filed with the building official no later than 10 days after receipt of
written notice of the determination and the appeal provisions of this section. Upon receipt of an appeal by the building official, a hearing shall be
scheduled before the access board of appeals. The access board of appeals shall consider relevant evidence presented at the hearing, and shall
render a final written decision within a reasonably prompt time after conducting the hearing. The authority of the access board of appeals to render
a written decision shall be limited to the scope of authority of the building official, and the access board of appeals shall have no authority to waive
a requirement of this chapter.
D. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the access board of appeals may request an administrative hearing within 10 days of the issuance of the
final written decision. Any such request shall be made and heard in the same manner as an administrative hearing related to an administrative
citation, in accordance with city of El Segundo municipal code.
E. Failure to timely request an appeal to the access board of appeals (pursuant to subsection C), or to an administrative hearing officer (pursuant
to subsection D) constitutes a waiver of the hearing and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
F. Unless otherwise designated by the city manager, the building official shall be the principal city staff liaison to the access board of appeals, and
the building official shall appoint a secretary to the access board of appeals to comply with all procedural requirements related to the Brown act.
G. The building official may request a special meeting of the access board of appeals in order to request advisory comments from the access
board of appeals regarding issues related to this chapter, such as the potential adoption of new codes, proposed code changes, or alternate
methods and materials.
Section 1207.6 is added to chapter 12 of the 2016 edition of the California building code to read as follows:
1207.6 Residential Noise Insulation Standards (Airport Noise Sources)
1207.6.01 Noise Insulation Requirements For New Construction.
1207.6.02 Purpose And Scope.
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum noise insulation performance standards for new residential dwelling units and additions of
habitable rooms to existing residential dwelling units to protect public health, safety, and welfare from the effects of excessive noise, including without
limitation, indoor quality of life, speech interference, and sleep disruption.
1207.6.03 Applicability.
This section applies to all newly constructed residences and habitable room additions to existing residences.
1207.6.04 Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following words must have the following meaning:
"Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)" means the noise measure defined in 21 code of California regulations § 5001(d), and any successor
regulation or amendment.
"Habitable Room" means a room that is a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets,
halls, storage or utility space, garages, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
"LAX" means Los Angeles International Airport.
"Noise Impact Boundary For LAX" means the area around LAX as defined in 21 California code of regulations § 5001(1), and any successor
regulation or amendment. The city's building safety department must at all times maintain a current map of the noise impact boundary. The latest
published map by LAWA located at the building safety counter shall be used as the basis for determination.
"Residence" means any occupancy group R building as used in El Segundo title 13 of the El Segundo municipal code.
1207.6.05 Standards.
Any new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing residence that is within the noise impact boundary for LAX must be
designed to ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX do not exceed 45 dB CNEL. This standard may be satisfied in two ways: (1) by performing
the acoustical analysis described in section 1207.6.06, below, or (2) by employing the prescribed construction methods described in section
1207.6.07, below.
1207.6.06 Acoustical Analysis.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum
noise insulation performance standards established in this section if it includes an acoustical analysis demonstrating that the proposed design will
ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX aircraft noise will not exceed 45 dB CNEL. The acoustical analysis shall be proven to meet the standard
by providing post-construction/pre-occupancy acoustic measurement to verify compliance with the 45 dB CNEL standard. The building official has
the discretion to implement policies that meet the intent of this code section.
A. The acoustical analysis must be prepared by a person experienced in the field of acoustical engineering. The analysis must consider and
include: the topographical relationship between LAX aircraft noise sources and the dwelling site, the characteristics of those noise sources,
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 295/581
predicted noise spectra and levels at the exterior of the dwelling site, the basis for this prediction (measured or obtained from published data), the
noise insulation measures to be employed, and the effectiveness of the proposed noise insulation measures.
B. If the interior allowable noise levels are to be met by requiring that windows be unopenable or closed, the design for the structure must also
specify a ventilation or air-conditioning system to provide a habitable interior environment, having at least 2 air exchanges per hour for the affected
rooms. The ventilation system must not compromise the interior room noise reduction.
1207.6.07 Prescribed Construction Methods.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum
noise insulation performance standards established in this section if the design incorporates the following construction methods.
Construction Methods In The 70 dB CNEL And Greater Noise Zone
1207.6.08 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed as follows:
A. Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B. Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch minimum solid sheathing.
C. Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot must require an interior supporting stud-wall that is finished with at
least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
D. Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
E. Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
F. Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
1207.6.09 Exterior Windows.
A. Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 40 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
B. Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must:
1. Have a sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB, or
2. Must be 5/8-inch laminated glass with STC rating of 40 dB and must be set in non-hardening glazing materials, or
3. Must be glass block at least 31/2 inches thick.
C. The total areas of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20% of the wall area.
1207.6.10 Exterior Doors.
A. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 40 dB.
B. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 35 dB.
C. Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must not be allowed in walls that are directly exposed to aircraft noise. Sliding glass doors in walls that
are not directly exposed must have an STC rating of at least 40 dB.
D. Access doors from attached garage to the interior of a residence must have an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
1207.6.11 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
A. Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
B. Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C. Attic ventilation must be:
1. Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible ducting
or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree bend in the
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 296/581
duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic, or
2. Noise control louver vents, or
3. Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
4. Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/8-inch thick. Ceiling materials must be mounted on resilient channels.
5. Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line or at any point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight
glazing and the secondary glazing and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or laminated glass. The weather-side skylight must be any
type that is permitted by the building code. The size of skylights must be no more than 20 percent of the roof area of the room.
1207.6.12 Ventilation.
A. A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated flexible glass fiber
ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two points of connection.
B. Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type with no ducted connection to the exterior.
1207.6.13 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of
the firebox.
1207.6.14 Wall And Ceiling Openings.
Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are
closed are prohibited unless access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or other openings are designed to maintain the 45 dB
CNEL (or less) standard in the room to which they provide access.
Construction Methods In The 65 dB CNEL To 70 dB CNEL Noise Zone
1207.6.15 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed as follows:
A. Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B. Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch solid sheathing.
C. Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot will require an interior studwall that is finished with at least 5/8-inch
thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
D. Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
E. Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
F. Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
1207.6.16 Exterior Windows.
A. Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 35 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
B. Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must be at least 1/4-inch thick and must be set in non-hardening
glazing materials.
C. The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20% of the floor area.
1207.6.17 Exterior Doors.
A. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 35 dB.
B. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 30 dB.
C. Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must have glass that is 1/4-inch thick.
D. Access doors from a garage to a habitable room must have an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 297/581
1207.6.18 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
A. Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
B. Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C. Attic ventilation must be:
1. Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible ducting
or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree bend in the
duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic, or
2. Noise control louver vents, or
3. Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
D. Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/8-inch thick.
E. Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated
glass. The weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted by the building code.
1207.6.19 Floors.
The floor of the lowest habitable rooms must be concrete slab on grade or wood framed floors.
1207.6.20 Ventilation.
A. A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of at least 2 air
exchanges in each affected habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be
insulated flexible glass fiber ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two points of connection.
B. Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type with no ducted connection to the exterior.
1207.6.21 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of
the firebox.
1207.6.22 Wall And Ceiling Openings.
Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are
closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB
CNEL or less standard in the room to which they provide access.
Section 1507.3.1 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1507.3.1 Deck Requirements.
Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid structural sheathing boards.
Section 1613.5.2 is added to chapter 16 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
1613.5.2 Structural Separation.
Modify ASCE 7 section 12.12.3 equation 12.12-1 as follows:
Section 1613.5.3 is added to chapter 16 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 298/581
1613.5.3 Values For Vertical Combinations.
Modify ASCE 7 section 12.2.3.1 exception 3 as follows:
3. Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height of light frame construction.
Section 1613.5.4 is added to chapter 16 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
1613.5.4 Wood Diaphragms.
Modify ASCE 7 section 12.11.2.2.3 as follows:
12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms.
In wood diaphragms, the continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm sheathing. Anchorage shall not be accomplished by use of toe nails or
nails subject to withdrawal nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall
not be considered effective as providing ties or struts required by this section.
For structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F, wood diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls shall comply with the
following:
1. The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet. Added chords of diaphragms may be used to form subdiaphragms to transmit the
anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.
2. The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth of the subdiaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.
Section 1613.5.5 is added to chapter 16 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
1613.5.5 Maximum SDS Value In Determination Of Cs And Ev.
Modify ASCE 7 section 12.8.1.3 as follows:
12.8.1.3 Maximum SDS Value In Determination Of Cs And Ev.
The value of Cs and Ev are permitted to be calculated using a value of SDS equal to 1.0 but not less than 70% of SDS as defined in section 11.4.4,
provided that all of the following criteria are met:
1. The structure does not have irregularities, as defined in section 12.3.2;
2. The structure does not exceed five stories above the lower of the base or grade plane as defined in section 11.2, and, where present, each
mezzanine level shall be considered a story for the purpose of this limit;
3. The structure has a fundamental period, T, that does not exceed 0.5 seconds, as determined using section 12.8.2;
4. The structure meets the requirements necessary for the redundancy factor, ., to be permitted to be taken as 1.0, in accordance with section
12.3.4.2;
5. The site soil properties are not classified as site classes E or F, as defined in section 11.4.2; and
6. The structure is classified as risk category I or II, as defined in section 1.5.1.
Section 1613.7 is added to chapter 16 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
1613.7 Seismic Design Provisions For Hillside Buildings.
1613.7.1 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum regulations for the design and construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings
when constructing such buildings on or into slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). These regulations establish
minimum standards for seismic force resistance to reduce the risk of injury or loss of life in the event of earthquakes.
1613.7.2 Scope.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of the lateral-force-resisting system for hillside buildings at and below the base level
diaphragm. The design of the lateral-force-resisting system above the base level diaphragm shall be in accordance with the provisions for seismic
and wind design as required elsewhere in this division.
Exception: Non-habitable accessory buildings and decks not supporting or supported from the main building are exempt from these regulations.
1613.7.3 Definitions.
For the purposes of this section certain terms are defined as follows:
Base Level Diaphragm is the floor at, or closest to, the top of the highest level of the foundation.
Diaphragm Anchors are assemblies that connect a diaphragm to the adjacent foundation at the uphill diaphragm edge.
Downhill Direction is the descending direction of the slope approximately perpendicular to the slope contours.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 299/581
Foundation is concrete or masonry which supports a building, including footings, stem walls, retaining walls, and grade beams.
Foundation Extending In The Downhill Direction is a foundation running downhill and approximately perpendicular to the uphill foundation.
Hillside Building is any building or portion thereof constructed on or into a slope steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). If
only a portion of the building is supported on or into the slope, these regulations apply to the entire building.
Primary Anchors are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a direct connection as described in sections 1613.7.5 and 1613.7.7.3 between
the diaphragm and the uphill foundation.
Secondary Anchors are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a redundant diaphragm to foundation connection, as described in sections
1613.7.6 and 1613.7.7.4.
Uphill Diaphragm Edge is the edge of the diaphragm adjacent and closest to the highest ground level at the perimeter of the diaphragm.
Uphill Foundation is the foundation parallel and closest to the uphill diaphragm edge.
1613.7.4 Analysis And Design.
1613.7.4.1 General.
Every hillside building within the scope of this section shall be analyzed, designed, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this division.
When the code-prescribed wind design produces greater effects, the wind design shall govern, but detailing requirements and limitations prescribed
in this and referenced sections shall be followed.
1613.7.4.2 Base Level Diaphragm-Downhill Direction.
The following provisions shall apply to the seismic analysis and design of the connections for the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction.
1613.7.4.2.1 Base For Lateral Force Design Defined.
For seismic forces acting in the downhill direction, the base of the building shall be the floor at or closest to the top of the highest level of the
foundation.
1613.7.4.2.2 Base Shear.
In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall and building frame
systems. The total base shear shall include the forces tributary to the base level diaphragm including forces from the base level diaphragm.
1613.7.5 Base Shear Resistance-Primary Anchors.
1613.7.5.1 General.
The base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through primary anchors from diaphragm struts provided in the base level diaphragm to the
foundation.
1613.7.5.2 Location Of Primary Anchors.
A primary anchor and diaphragm strut shall be provided in line with each foundation extending in the downhill direction. Primary anchors and
diaphragm struts shall also be provided where interior vertical lateral-force-resisting elements occur above and in contact with the base level
diaphragm. The spacing of primary anchors and diaphragm struts or collectors shall in no case exceed 30 feet (9144 mm).
1613.7.5.3 Design Of Primary Anchors And Diaphragm Struts.
Primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of section 1613.7.8.
1613.7.5.4 Limitations.
The following lateral-force-resisting elements shall not be designed to resist seismic forces below the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction:
1. Wood structural panel wall sheathing,
2. Cement plaster and lath,
3. Gypsum wallboard, and
4. Tension only braced frames.
Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of section 2205.2.1.2 may be used to transfer forces from the primary anchors and
diaphragm struts to the foundation provided lateral forces do not induce flexural stresses in any member of the frame or in the diaphragm struts.
Deflections of frames shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal members when the frame is not rectangular.
1613.7.6 Base Shear Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
1613.7.6.1 General.
In addition to the primary anchors required by section 1613.7.5, the base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through secondary anchors
in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in the base level diaphragm.
Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in the downhill direction spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm)
on center extend up to and are directly connected to the base level diaphragm for at least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
1613.7.6.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity And Spacing.
Secondary anchors at the base level diaphragm shall be designed for a minimum force equal to the base shear, including forces tributary to the base
level diaphragm, but not less than 600 pounds per linear foot (8.76 kN/m) based on allowable stress design (ASD) levels. The secondary anchors
shall be uniformly distributed along the uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 300/581
1613.7.6.3 Design.
Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with section 1613.7.8.
1613.7.7 Diaphragms Below The Base Level-Downhill Direction.
The following provisions shall apply to the lateral analysis and design of the connections for all diaphragms below the base level diaphragm in the
downhill direction.
1613.7.7.1 Diaphragm Defined.
Every floor level below the base level diaphragm shall be designed as a diaphragm.
1613.7.7.2 Design Force.
Each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be designed for all tributary loads at that level using a minimum seismic force factor not less
than the base shear coefficient.
1613.7.7.3 Design Force Resistance-Primary Anchors.
The design force described in section 1613.7.7.2 shall be resisted through primary anchors from diaphragm struts provided in each diaphragm to the
foundation. Primary anchors shall be provided and designed in accordance with the requirements and limitations of section 1613.7.5.
1613.7.7.4 Design Force Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
1613.7.7.4.1 General.
In addition to the primary anchors required in section 1613.7.7.3, the design force in the downhill direction shall be resisted through secondary
anchors in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in each diaphragm below the base level.
Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in the downhill direction, spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm)
on center, extend up to and are directly connected to each diaphragm below the base level for at least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
1613.7.7.4.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity.
Secondary anchors at each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be designed for a minimum force equal to the design force but not less
than 300 pounds per linear foot (4.38 kN/m) based on allowable stress design (ASD) levels. The secondary anchors shall be uniformly distributed
along the uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
1613.7.7.4.3 Design.
Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with section 1613.7.8.
1613.7.8 Primary And Secondary Anchorage And Diaphragm Strut Design.
Primary and secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Fasteners. All bolted fasteners used to develop connections to wood members shall be provided with square plate washers at all bolt heads and
nuts. Washers shall be minimum 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm by 76 mm) in size. Nuts shall be tightened to finger tight
plus one half (1/2) wrench turn prior to covering the framing.
2. Fastening. The diaphragm to foundation anchorage shall not be accomplished by the use of toenailing, nails subject to withdrawal, or wood in
cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension.
3. Size Of Wood Members. Wood diaphragm struts collectors, and other wood members connected to primary anchors shall not be less than 3
inch (76 mm) nominal width. The effects of eccentricity on wood members shall be evaluated as required per item 9.
4. Design. Primary and secondary anchorage, including diaphragm struts, splices, and collectors shall be designed for 125% of the tributary force.
5. Allowable Stress Increase. The one-third allowable stress increase permitted under section 1605.3.2 shall not be taken when the working
(allowable) stress design method is used.
6. Steel Element Of Structural Wall Anchorage System. The strength design forces for steel elements of the structural wall anchorage system, with
the exception of anchor bolts and reinforcing steel, shall be increased by 1.4 times the forces otherwise required.
7. Primary Anchors. The load path for primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be fully developed into the diaphragm and into the foundation.
The foundation must be shown to be adequate to resist the concentrated loads from the primary anchors.
8. Secondary Anchors. The load path for secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be fully developed in the diaphragm but need not be
developed beyond the connection to the foundation.
9. Symmetry. All lateral force foundation anchorage and diaphragm strut connections shall be symmetrical. Eccentric connections may be
permitted when demonstrated by calculation or tests that all components of force have been provided for in the structural analysis or tests.
10. Wood Ledgers. Wood ledgers shall not be used to resist cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension.
1613.7.9 Lateral-Force-Resisting Elements Normal To The Downhill Direction.
1613.7.9.1 General.
In the direction normal to the downhill direction, lateral-force-resisting elements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
1613.7.9.2 Base Shear.
In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall and building frame
systems.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 301/581
1613.7.9.3 Vertical Distribution Of Seismic Forces.
For seismic forces acting normal to the downhill direction the distribution of seismic forces over the height of the building using section 12.8.3 of
ASCE 7 shall be determined using the height measured from the top of the lowest level of the building foundation.
1613.7.9.4 Drift Limitations.
The story drift below the base level diaphragm shall not exceed 0.007 times the story height at strength design force level. The total drift from the
base level diaphragm to the top of the foundation shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19 mm). Where the story height or the height from the base level
diaphragm to the top of the foundation varies because of a stepped footing or story offset, the height shall be measured from the average height of
the top of the foundation. The story drift shall not be reduced by the effect of horizontal diaphragm stiffness.
1613.7.9.5 Distribution Of Lateral Forces.
1613.7.9.5.1 General.
The design lateral force shall be distributed to lateral-force-resisting elements of varying heights in accordance with the stiffness of each individual
element.
1613.7.9.5.2 Wood Structural Panel Sheathed Walls.
The stiffness of a stepped wood structural panel shear wall may be determined by dividing the wall into adjacent rectangular elements, subject to the
same top of wall deflection. Deflections of shear walls may be estimated by AWC SDPWS section 4.3.2. Sheathing and fastening requirements for
the stiffest section shall be used for the entire wall. Each section of wall shall be anchored for shear and uplift at each step. The minimum horizontal
length of a step shall be 8 feet (2438 mm) and the maximum vertical height of a step shall be 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm).
1613.7.9.5.3 Reinforced Concrete Or Masonry Shear Walls.
Reinforced concrete or masonry shear walls shall have forces distributed in proportion to the rigidity of each section of the wall.
1613.7.9.6 Limitations.
The following lateral force-resisting-elements shall not be designed to resist lateral forces below the base level diaphragm in the direction normal to
the downhill direction:
1. Cement plaster and lath,
2. Gypsum wallboard, and
3. Tension-only braced frames.
Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of section 2205.2.1.2 of this code may be designed as lateral-force-resisting
elements in the direction normal to the downhill direction, provided lateral forces do not induce flexural stresses in any member of the frame.
Deflections of frames shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal members when the frame is not rectangular.
1613.7.10 Specific Design Provisions.
1613.7.10.1 Footings And Grade Beams.
All footings and grade beams shall comply with the following:
1. Grade beams shall extend at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the lowest adjacent grade and provide a minimum 24 inch (610 mm) distance
horizontally from the bottom outside face of the grade beam to the face of the descending slope.
2. Continuous footings shall be reinforced with at least two no. 4 reinforcing bars at the top and two no. 4 reinforcing bars at the bottom.
3. All main footing and grade beam reinforcement steel shall be bent into the intersecting footing and fully developed around each corner and
intersection.
4. All concrete stem walls shall extend from the foundation and reinforced as required for concrete or masonry walls.
1613.7.10.2 Protection Against Decay And Termites.
All wood to earth separation shall comply with the following:
1. Where a footing or grade beam extends across a descending slope, the stem wall, grade beam, or footing shall extend up to a minimum 18
inches (457 mm) above the highest adjacent grade.
Exception: At paved garage and doorway entrances to the building, the stem wall need only extend to the finished concrete slab, provided the
wood framing is protected with a moisture proof barrier.
2. Wood ledgers supporting a vertical load of more than 100 pounds per linear foot (1.46 kN/m) based on allowable stress design (ASD) levels and
located within 48 inches (1219 mm) of adjacent grade are prohibited. Galvanized steel ledgers and anchor bolts, with or without wood nailers, or
treated or decay resistant sill plates supported on a concrete or masonry seat, may be used.
1613.7.10.3 Sill Plates.
All sill plates and anchorage shall comply with the following:
1. All wood framed walls, including nonbearing walls, when resting on a footing, foundation, or grade beam stem wall, shall be supported on wood
sill plates bearing on a level surface.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 302/581
2. Power-driven fasteners shall not be used to anchor sill plates except at interior nonbearing walls not designed as shear walls.
1613.7.10.4 Column Base Plate Anchorage.
The base of isolated wood posts (not framed into a stud wall) supporting a vertical load of 4,000 pounds (17.8 kN) based on allowable stress design
(ASD) levels or more and the base plate for a steel column shall comply with the following:
1. When the post or column is supported on a pedestal extending above the top of a footing or grade beam, the pedestal shall be designed and
reinforced as required for concrete or masonry columns. The pedestal shall be reinforced with a minimum of four no. 4 bars extending to the
bottom of the footing or grade beam. The top of exterior pedestals shall be sloped for positive drainage.
2. The base plate anchor bolts or the embedded portion of the post base, and the vertical reinforcing bars for the pedestal, shall be confined with
two no. 4 or three no. 3 ties within the top 5 inches (127 mm) of the concrete or masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor bolts shall be embedded
a minimum of 20 bolt diameters into the concrete or masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor bolts and post bases shall be galvanized and each
anchor bolt shall have at least 2 galvanized nuts above the base plate.
1613.7.10.5 Steel Beam To Column Supports.
All steel beam to column supports shall be positively braced in each direction. Steel beams shall have stiffener plates installed on each side of the
beam web at the column. The stiffener plates shall be welded to each beam flange and the beam web. Each brace connection or structural member
shall consist of at least two 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) diameter machine bolts.
Section 1613.8 is added to chapter 16 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
1613.8 Suspended Ceilings.
Minimum design and installation standards for suspended ceilings shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of section 2506.2.1 of
this code and this section.
1613.8.1 Scope.
This part contains special requirements for suspended ceilings and lighting systems. Provisions of section 13.5.6 of ASCE 7 shall apply except as
modified herein.
1613.8.2 General.
The suspended ceilings and lighting systems shall be limited to 6 feet (1828 mm) below the structural deck unless the lateral bracing is designed by
a licensed engineer or architect.
1613.8.3 Sprinkler Heads.
All sprinkler heads (drops) except fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, shall be designed to allow for free movement of the
sprinkler pipes with oversize rings, sleeves or adaptors through the ceiling tile. Sprinkler heads and other penetrations shall have a 2 inch (50 mm)
oversize ring, sleeve, or adapter through the ceiling tile to allow for free movement of at least 1 inch (25 mm) in all horizontal directions. Alternatively,
a swing joint that can accommodate 1 inch (25 mm) of ceiling movement in all horizontal directions is permitted to be provided at the top of the
sprinkler head extension.
Sprinkler heads penetrating fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies shall comply with section 714 of this code.
1613.8.4 Special Requirements For Means Of Egress.
Suspended ceiling assemblies located along means of egress serving an occupant load of 30 or more shall comply with the following provisions.
1613.8.4.1 General.
Ceiling suspension systems shall be connected and braced with vertical hangers attached directly to the structural deck along the means of egress
serving an occupant load of 30 or more and at lobbies accessory to group A occupancies. Spacing of vertical hangers shall not exceed 2 feet
(610 mm) on center along the entire length of the suspended ceiling assembly located along the means of egress or at the lobby.
1613.8.4.2 Assembly Device.
All lay-in panels shall be secured to the suspension ceiling assembly with two hold-down clips minimum for each tile within a 4-foot (1219 mm) radius
of the exit lights and exit signs.
1613.8.4.3 Emergency Systems.
Independent supports and braces shall be provided for light fixtures required for exit illumination. Power supply for exit illumination shall comply with
the requirements of section 1008.3 of this code.
1613.8.4.4 Supports For Appendage.
Separate support from the structural deck shall be provided for all appendages such as light fixtures, air diffusers, exit signs, and similar elements.
Section 1704.6 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1704.6 Structural Observations.
Where required by the provisions of section 1704.6.1 or 1704.6.2, the owner or the owner's authorized agent shall employ a structural observer to
perform structural observations. Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the inspections in section 110 or the special
inspections in section 1705 or other section of this code. The structural observer shall be one of the following individuals:
1. The registered design professional responsible for the structural design, or
2. A registered design professional designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.
Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural observer shall submit to the building official a written statement identifying the frequency
and extent of structural observations.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 303/581
The owner or owner's authorized agent shall coordinate and call a preconstruction meeting between the structural observer, contractors, affected
subcontractors and special inspectors. The structural observer shall preside over the meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be to identify the
major structural elements and connections that affect the vertical and lateral load resisting systems of the structure and to review scheduling of the
required observations. A record of the meeting shall be included in the report submitted to the building official.
Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner or owner's authorized agent, special inspector, contractor and the building official.
Upon the form prescribed by the building official, the structural observer shall submit to the building official a written statement at each significant
construction stage stating that the site visits have been made and identifying any reported deficiencies which, to the best of the structural
observer's knowledge, have not been resolved. A final report by the structural observer which states that all observed deficiencies have been
resolved is required before acceptance of the work by the building official.
Section 1704.6.1 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1704.6.1 Structural Observations For Seismic Resistance.
Structural observations shall be provided for those structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F, where one or more of the following
conditions exist:
1. The structure is classified as risk category III or IV in accordance with table 1604.5.
2. The height of the structure is greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the base.
3. The structure is classified as risk category I or II in accordance with table 1604.5, and a lateral design is required for the structure or portion
thereof.
Exception: One-story wood framed group R-3 and group U occupancies less than 2,000 square feet in area, provided the adjacent grade is not
steeper than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% sloped), assigned to seismic design category D.
4. When so designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.
5. When such observation is specifically required by the building official.
Section 1705.3 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1705.3 Concrete Construction.
The special inspections and tests for concrete construction shall be performed in accordance with this section and table 1705.3.
Exceptions: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:
1. Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the
structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa)
regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.
2. Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock
where:
2.1. The footings support walls of light-frame construction;
2.2. The footings are designed in accordance with table 1809.7; or
2.3. The structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi)
(17.2 Mpa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.
3. Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground, including prestressed slabs on grade, where the effective prestress in the
concrete is less than 150 psi (1.03 Mpa).
3.1 Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.
Exception 3 of section 1705.12 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1705.12 Special Inspections For Seismic Resistance.
Special inspections for seismic resistance shall be required as specified in sections 1705.12.1 through 1705.12.9, unless exempted by the
exceptions of section 1704.2.
Exception: The special inspections specified in sections 1705.12.1 through 1705.12.9 are not required for structures designed and constructed in
accordance with one of the following:
1. The structure consists of light-frame construction; the design spectral response acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in section
1613.3.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm).
2. The seismic force-resisting system of the structure consists of reinforced masonry or reinforced concrete; the design spectral response
acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in section 1613.3.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not
exceed 25 feet (7620 mm).
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 304/581
3. The structure is a detached one- or two-family dwelling not exceeding two stories above grade plane, is not assigned to seismic design category
D, E or F and does not have any of the following horizontal or vertical irregularities in accordance with section 12.3 of ASCE 7:
3.1 Torsional or extreme torsional irregularity.
3.2 Nonparallel systems irregularity.
3.3 Stiffness-soft story or stiffness-extreme soft story irregularity.
3.4 Discontinuity in lateral strength-weak story irregularity.
Section 1807.1.4 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1807.1.4 Permanent Wood Foundation Systems.
Permanent wood foundation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF. Lumber and plywood shall be treated in
accordance with AWPA U1 (commodity specification A, use category 4B and section 5.2) and shall be identified in accordance with section
2303.1.9.1. Permanent wood foundation systems shall not be used for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Section 1807.1.6 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1807.1.6 Prescriptive Design Of Concrete And Masonry Foundation Walls.
Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in
accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Section 1809.3 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1809.3 Stepped Footings.
The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall be permitted to have a slope not exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units
horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the
surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
For structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F, the stepping requirement shall also apply to the top surface of grade beams supporting
walls. Footings shall be reinforced with four no. 4 bars. Two bars shall be placed at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in figure 1809.3.
FIGURE 1809.3 - STEPPED FOOTING
Section 1809.7 and table 1809.7 of the 2016 CBC are amended to read as follows:
1809.7 Prescriptive Footings For Light-Frame Construction.
Where a specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be
designed in accordance with table 1809.7. Prescriptive footings in table 1809.7 shall not exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned
to seismic design category D, E or F.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 305/581
TABLE 1809.7
PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION a,b,c,d,e
Number Of Floors
Supported By The Footingf
Width Of Footing
(Inches)
Thickness Of Footing
(Inches)
1 12 6
2 15 6
3 18 8 g
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
a. Depth of footings shall be in accordance with section 1809.4.
b. The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the elevation of the top of the footing.
c. Not adopted.
d. See section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings of structures assigned to seismic design category C, D, E or F.
e. For thickness of foundation walls, see section 1807.1.6.
f.Footings shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for
supporting one floor.
Section 1809.12 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1809.12 Timber Footings.
Timber footings shall be permitted for buildings of type V construction and as otherwise approved by the building official. Such footings shall be
treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (commodity specification A, use category 4B). Treated timbers are not required where placed entirely below
permanent water level, or where used as capping for wood piles that project above the water level over submerged or marsh lands. The compressive
stresses perpendicular to grain in untreated timber footing supported upon treated piles shall not exceed 70 percent of the allowable stresses for the
species and grade of timber as specified in the ANSI/AWC NDS. Timber footings shall not be used in structures assigned to seismic design category
D, E or F.
Section 1810.3.2.4 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1810.3.2.4 Timber.
Timber deep foundation elements shall be designed as piles or poles in accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS. Round timber elements shall conform to
ASTM D 25. Sawn timber elements shall conform to DOC PS-20. Timber shall not be used in structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or
F.
Section 1905.1.7 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
1905.1.7 ACI 318, Section 14.1.4.
Delete ACI 318, section 14.1.4, and replace with the following:
14.1.4 - Plain concrete in structures assigned to seismic design category C, D, E or F.
14.1.4.1 - Structures assigned to seismic design category C, D, E or F shall not have elements of structural plain concrete, except as follows:
(a) Concrete used for fill with a minimum cement content of two (2) sacks of portland cement or cementious material per cubic yard.
(b) Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of
the supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.
(c) Plain concrete footings supporting walls are permitted provided the footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars
shall not be smaller than no. 4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. A minimum
of one bar shall be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement shall be provided at corners and intersections.
Exceptions:
Detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height and constructed with stud-bearing walls, are permitted to have plain
concrete footings with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars not smaller than no. 4 are permitted to have a total area of less than
0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing.
Section 1905.1 is amended and sections 1905.1.9 through 1905.1.11 are added to chapter 19 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
1905.1 General.
The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as indicated in sections 1905.1.1 through 1905.1.11.
1905.1.9 ACI 318, Section 18.7.5.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 306/581
Modify ACI 318, section 18.7.5, by adding section 18.7.5.7 and 18.7.5.8 as follows:
18.7.5.7 - Where the calculated point of contraflexure is not within the middle half of the member clear height, provide transverse reinforcement as
specified in ACI 318 sections 18.7.5.1, items (a) through (c), over the full height of the member.
18.7.5.8 - At any section where the design strength, .Pn, of the column is less than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with ACI 318
sections 18.7.6.1 and 18.6.5.1 for all the beams framing into the column above the level under consideration, transverse reinforcement as
specified in ACI 318 sections 18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided. For beams framing into opposite sides of the column, the moment
components are permitted to be assumed to be of opposite sign. For the determination of the design strength, .Pn, of the column, these moments
are permitted to be assumed to result from the deformation of the frame in any one principal axis.
1905.1.10 ACI 318, Section 18.10.4.
Modify ACI 318, section 18.10.4, by adding section 18.10.4.6 as follows:
18.10.4.6 - Walls and portions of walls with Pu> 0.35Po shall not be considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the structure for
resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform to the requirements of ACI 318 section 18.14.
1905.1.11 ACI 318, Section 18.12.6.
Modify ACI 318, by adding section 18.12.6.2 as follows:
18.12.6.2 Collector and boundary elements in topping slabs placed over precast floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) or
6 db in thickness, where db is the diameter of the largest reinforcement in the topping slab.
Section 2304.10.1 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2304.10.1 Fastener Requirements.
Connections for wood members shall be designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in section 2301.2. The number and size of
fasteners connecting wood members shall not be less than that set forth in table 2304.10.1. Staple fasteners in table 2304.10.1 shall not be used to
resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the building official.
Section 2304.12.5 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2304.12.5 Wood Used In Retaining Walls And Cribs.
Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for soil and fresh water use. Wood shall not be
used in retaining or crib walls for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Section 2305.4 is added to chapter 23 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
2305.4 Quality Of Nails.
In seismic design category D, E or F, mechanically driven nails used in wood structural panel shear walls shall meet the same dimensions as that
required for hand-driven nails, including diameter, minimum length and minimum head diameter. Clipped head or box nails are not permitted in new
construction. The allowable design value for clipped head nails in existing construction may be taken at no more than the nail-head-area ratio of that
of the same size hand-driven nails.
Section 2305.5 is added to chapter 23 of the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
2305.5 Hold-Down Connectors.
In seismic design category D, E or F, hold-down connectors shall be designed to resist shear wall overturning moments using approved cyclic load
values or 75 percent of the allowable seismic load values that do not consider cyclic loading of the product. Connector bolts into wood framing shall
require steel plate washers on the post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate size shall be a minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3
inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm by 76 mm) in size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger tight plus one half (1/2) wrench turn just prior to
covering the wall framing.
Section 2306.2 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2306.2 Wood-Frame Diaphragms.
Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with
staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in table 2306.2(1) or 2306.2(2) shall only
be permitted for structures assigned to seismic design category A, B, or C.
Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by
cyclic testing and approved by the building official.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 307/581
The allowable shear values in tables 2306.2(1) and 2306.2(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design.
Wood structural panel diaphragms used to resist seismic forces in structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F shall be applied
directly to the framing members.
Exception: Wood structural panel diaphragms are permitted to be fastened over solid lumber planking or laminated decking, provided the panel
joints and lumber planking or laminated decking joints do not coincide.
Section 2306.3 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2306.3 Wood-Frame Shear Walls.
Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. For structures assigned to seismic design category D,
E, or F, application of tables 4.3A and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:
1. Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls shall not be less than 3/8 inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more than 16 inches on
center.
2. The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8 inch wood structural panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned to seismic design
category D, E or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (plf).
Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities may be permitted if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building
official.
3. Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2 inch in from the panel edges and not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the connecting members for
shear greater than 350 plf using ASD or 500 plf using LRFD. Nails shall be placed not less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not less than 1/4
inch from the edge of the connecting members for shears of 350 plf or less using ASD or 500 plf or less using LRFD.
4. Table 4.3B application is not allowed for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E, or F.
For structures assigned to seismic design category D, application of table 4.3C of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a multilevel
building.
Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear
values set forth in table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall only be permitted for structures assigned to seismic design category A, B, or C.
Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by
cyclic testing and approved by the building official.
The allowable shear values in tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with
ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for plywood siding in the AWC SDPWS.
Section 2307.2 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
2307.2 Wood-Frame Shear Walls.
Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with section 2306.3 as applicable.
Table 2308.6.1 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 308/581
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 309/581
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 310/581
Section 2308.6.5, figure 2308.6.5.1, and figure 2308.6.5.2 of the 2016 CBC are amended to read as follows:
2308.6.5 Alternative Bracing.
An alternate braced wall (ABW) or a portal frame with hold-downs (PFH) described in this section is permitted to substitute for a 48-inch (1219 mm)
braced wall panel of method DWB, WSP, SFB, PBS, PCP or HPS. For method GB, each 96-inch (2438 mm) section (applied to one face) or 48-inch
(1219 mm) section (applied to both faces) or portion thereof required by table 2308.6.1 is permitted to be replaced by one panel constructed in
accordance with method ABW or PFH.
2308.6.5.1 Alternate Braced Wall (ABW).
An ABW shall be constructed in accordance with this section and figure 2308.6.5.1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less
than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 3/8-inch (9.5 mm)
minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails in accordance with table 2304.10.1 and blocked at wood structural
panel edges. For structures assigned to seismic design category D or E, each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimumthickness
(11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate
supports. Two anchor bolts installed in accordance with section 2308.3.1 shall be provided in each panel. Anchor bolts shall be placed at each panel
outside quarter points. Each panel end stud shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation, capable of providing an approved uplift
capacity of not less than 1,800 pounds (8006 N). The hold-down device shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
The ABW shall be supported directly on a foundation or on floor framing supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length
of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is
required to have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing is permitted at
door openings in the braced wall line. This continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement
shall be lapped 24 inches (610 mm) with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly under the braced wall line.
Where the ABW is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, the wood structural panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces, three anchor
bolts shall be placed at one-quarter points and hold-down device uplift capacity shall be not less than 3,000 pounds (13 344 N).
2308.6.5.2 Portal Frame With Hold-Downs (PFH).
A PFH shall be constructed in accordance with this section and figure 2308.6.5.2. The adjacent door or window opening shall have a full-length
header.
In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 16 inches (406 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each
panel shall be sheathed on one face with a single layer of 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d
common or galvanized box nails in accordance with figure 2308.6.5.2. For structures assigned to seismic design category D or E, each panel shall
be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3
inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports and in accordance with figure 2308.6.5.2. The wood structural panel sheathing shall extend
up over the solid sawn or glued-laminated header and shall be nailed in accordance with figure 2308.6.5.2. A built-up header consisting of at least
two 2-inch by 12-inch (51 mm by 305 mm) boards, fastened in accordance with item 24 of table 2304.10.1 shall be permitted to be used. A spacer, if
used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up beam opposite the wood structural panel sheathing. The header shall extend between the inside
faces of the first full-length outer studs of each panel. The clear span of the header between the inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6
feet (1829 mm) and not more than 18 feet (5486 mm) in length. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the
header to the inner studs opposite the sheathing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) diameter and installed in accordance with section
2308.3.1 shall be provided in the center of each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel shall have a hold-down device fastened to the
foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds (15 570 N).
Where a panel is located on one side of the opening, the header shall extend between the inside face of the first full-length stud of the panel and the
bearing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the header to the
bearing studs. The bearing studs shall also have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds
(4400 N). The hold-down devices shall be an embedded strap type, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The PFH
panels shall be supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be
reinforced with not less than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater than 12 inches
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 311/581
(305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This
continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped not less than 24 inches
(610 mm) with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly under the braced wall line.
Where a PFH is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 24 inches (610 mm).
Section 2308.6.8.1 of chapter 23 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2308.6.8.1 Foundation Requirements.
Braced wall lines shall be supported by continuous foundations.
Exception: For structures with a maximum plan dimension not more than 50 feet (15 240 mm), continuous foundations are required at exterior
walls only for structures assigned to seismic design category A, B, or C.
For structures in seismic design categories D and E, exterior braced wall panels shall be in the same plane vertically with the foundation or the
portion of the structure containing the offset shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice and section 2308.1.1.
Section 2308.6.9 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
2308.6.9 Attachment Of Sheathing.
Fastening of braced wall panel sheathing shall not be less than that prescribed in tables 2308.6.1 or 2304.10.1. Wall sheathing shall not be attached
to framing members by adhesives. Staple fasteners in table 2304.10.1 shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to
seismic design category D, E or F.
Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the building official.
All braced wall panels shall extend to the roof sheathing and shall be attached to parallel roof rafters or blocking above with framing clips (18
gauge minimum) spaced at maximum 24 inches (609.6 mm) on center with four 8d nails per leg (total eight 8d nails per clip). Braced wall panels
shall be laterally braced at each top corner and at maximum 24 inches (609.6 mm) intervals along the top plate of discontinuous vertical framing.
Section J101.3 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J101.3 Hazards.
1. Whenever the building official determines that any land or any existing excavation or fill has, from any cause, become a menace to life or limb, or
endangers public or private property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of public or private property, the owner or other person in legal
control of the property concerned shall, upon receipt of a written notice thereof from the building official, correct such condition in accordance with the
provisions of this appendix and the requirements and conditions set forth in the notice so as to eliminate such condition. The owner or other person
in legal control of the property shall immediately comply with the provisions set forth in the notice and shall complete the work within 180 days from
the date of the notice unless a shorter period of time for completion has been specified in the notice in which case the owner shall comply with the
shorter period of time. Upon written application and good cause shown, the building official may approve the request for an extension of time to
complete the work required by the notice.
2. If the above condition is not eliminated within the specified time period, the building official may file with the office of the Los Angeles County
recorder a certificate stating that the property is deemed substandard and that the owner thereof has been so notified to correct the substandard
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 312/581
condition. Said certificate shall specify the conditions creating the substandard classification.
3. When the above conditions have been corrected to the satisfaction of the building official, upon receiving a sixty-dollar fee from the owner or his
agent, the building official shall file with the office of the Los Angeles County recorder, within a reasonable period of time, a certificate specifying that
the conditions creating the substandard classification have been corrected and that the property is no longer considered substandard.
Section J101.4 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J101.4 Safety Precautions.
1. General
a) If at any stage of work on an excavation or fill, the building official determines that the work has become or is likely to become dangerous to
any person, or is likely to endanger any property, public or private, the building official must be authorized to require safety precautions to be
immediately taken by the property owner as a condition to continuing such permitted work or to require cessation thereof forthwith unless and
until it is made safe and to amend the plans for such work.
b) Safety precautions may include, without limitation, specifying a flatter exposed slope or construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction, cribbing, retaining walls or buttress fills, slough walls, desilting basins, check dams, benching, wire mesh and guniting,
rock fences, revetments or diversion walls.
c) Upon the determination of the building official that such safety precautions during grading are necessary, the building official must provide a
notice and order to the permittee to implement same. After receiving such notice, oral or written, it is unlawful for the permittee or any person to
proceed with such work contrary to such order.
2. Removal Of Ground Cover
a) The existing vegetative ground cover of any watershed in any hillside area cannot be destroyed, removed or damaged except for routine
maintenance pursuant to lawful grading, use or occupancy of the property or to clear hazardous vegetation near structures and roads.
b) Whenever ground cover is removed or damaged pursuant to a validly issued grading permit, the permittee must restore and maintain the
affected area with an approved ground cover, or must accomplish such other erosion control protection measures as may be approved by the
building official. Such erosion control must be completed within thirty days after cessation of the grading work or other work pursuant to a validly
issued building permit.
3. Maintenance Of Protective Devices
All devices used to protect hillside areas from erosion or landslide damage including, without limitation, retaining walls, cribbing, terracing, surface
and subsurface drainage structures, interceptor drains, check dams, and riprap must be maintained in good condition and repair as approved by the
building official at the time of completion of construction thereof.
Section J101.5 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J101.5 Protection Of Utilities.
The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit must be responsible for the
prevention of damage to any public utilities or services.
Section J101.6 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J101.6 Protection Of Adjacent Properties.
The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit is responsible for the prevention
of damage to adjacent property and no person must excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage that might
result. Special precautions approved by the building official must be made to prevent imported or exported materials from being deposited on the
adjacent public way and/or drainage courses. A 30 day excavation notice must be provided as required by California Civil Code section 829 - 834
when the excavation is of sufficient depth and proximity to adjacent lot structures.
Section J101.7 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J101.7 Storm Water Control Measures.
The owner and permittee of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under section J103 shall put into
effect and maintain all precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent water courses and public private property from damage by erosion,
flooding, and deposition of mud, debris and construction-related pollutants originating from the site during, and after, grading and related construction
activities. Furthermore, the owner and permittee shall be responsible for putting into effect and maintaining appropriate measures necessary to
prevent any change in cross-lot surface drainage that may adversely affect any adjoining property as a result of grading and/or construction-related
activities. Such measures to prevent any adverse cross-lot surface drainage effects on adjoining property shall be required whether shown on
approved grading plans or not.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 313/581
Section J101.8 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J101.8 Conditions Of Approval.
In granting any permit under this code, the building official may include such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a
nuisance or hazard to public or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
1. Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of this code.
2. Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills which would otherwise be hazardous.
Section J101.9 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J101.9 Rules And Regulations.
J101.9.1 Rules. The permissive provisions of this chapter shall not be presumed to waive any regulations imposed by other statutes or other
ordinances of the state of California or the city of El Segundo.
J101.9.2 Regulations. If two or more pertinent regulations are not identical, those regulations shall prevail which are more restrictive or which afford
greater safety to life, limb, health, property or welfare. For the purposes of these regulations, grading permits shall be considered as building permits
and shall be subject to the administrative provisions of this code, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter.
Section J103.2 of the 2016 CBC is amended to read as follows:
J103.2 Exemptions.
A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
1. When approved by the building official, grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such
grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
2. Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code where the excavation is limited to within the volume of the proposed
structure.
3. Cemetery graves.
4. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
5. Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.
6. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations
do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil and adjoining properties.
7. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered soils engineer or engineering geologist. This shall not exempt grading of
access roads or pads created for exploratory excavations. Exploratory excavations must not create a hazardous condition to adjacent properties or
the public in accordance with section J101.3. Exploratory excavations must be restored to existing conditions, unless approved by the building
official.
8. An excavation that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m3) and complies with one of the following conditions:
(1) Is less than 2 feet (0.6 m) in depth.
(2) Does not create a cut slope greater than 5 feet (1.5 m) measured vertically upward from the cut surface to the surface of the natural grade
and is not steeper than 2 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
9. A fill not intended to support a structure, that does not obstruct a drainage course and complies with one of the following conditions:
(a) Is less than 1 foot (0.3 m) in depth and is placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 5 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (20 percent
slope).
(b) Is less than 3 feet (0.9 m) in depth at its deepest point measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not
exceed 50 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 2 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
(c) Is less than 5 feet (1.5 m) in depth at its deepest point measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not
exceed 20 cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than 2 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical (50 percent slope).
Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Section J103.3 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 314/581
J103.3 Permit Issuance.
1. The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the
permit or on the grading plans and specifications approved by the building official at the time of issuance.
2. Jurisdiction Of Other Agencies. Permits issued under the requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for securing
required permits for work to be accomplished which is regulated by any other code, department or division of the governing agency.
3. Conditions Of Permit. The building official, upon recommendation of the city traffic and transportation administrator, may impose such
regulations with respect to access routes to and from grading sites in hillside areas as the building official shall determine are required in the
interest of safety precautions involving pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
4. Consent Of Adjacent Property Owner. Whenever any excavation or fill requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permit applicant
shall obtain the written consent or legal easements or other property rights of the adjacent property owner or their authorized representative, and
shall file a signed and duly notarized copy of such consent with the building official, and no permit for such grading work may be issued unless and
until all necessary consent documents are so filed. The consent shall be in a form acceptable to the building official.
Section J103.4 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J103.4 Grading Fees.
1. Fees for grading plan check and for grading permits shall be established or modified by resolution of the city council. The schedule of such fees
shall remain on file and be available in the office of the building official. The building official shall, with the approval of the city manager,
recommend changes to the council when the costs to provide grading plan check and grading inspection services make it appropriate.
2. The applicant shall pay a plan check fee prior to acceptance of grading plans and specifications for checking by the city. The plan check fee
shall be based on the total volume of the excavation and fill, on the site. The grading plan check fee shall be recalculated each time the grading
plan volume of excavation and fill exceeds the volume used to determine the original plan check fee, and the applicant shall pay the difference
between the revised and original fee before the revised grading plans are accepted for review by the city. The original grading plan check fee
includes the cost to the applicant for the original submittal plus two additional submittals of corrected grading plans and specifications. When
required by the building official, the applicant shall pay a supplemental grading plan check fee in accordance with the fee resolution established by
the city council.
3. Whenever the applicant submits a grading plan for plan check that is substantially different in design of the earthwork as compared to previously
submitted grading plans, the submittal shall be considered an original and a new grading plan check fee shall be determined and paid to the city as
provided in this section.
4. The applicant shall pay a grading permit fee prior to the issuance of a grading permit by the city. The fee shall be based on the total volume of
excavation and fill, on the site. If, during grading operations, the plans and specifications for the grading project are revised increasing the volume
of excavation, fill, or a combination thereof above the volume that was used to determine the grading permit fee, the applicant shall pay to the city
the difference between the original grading permit fee and the recalculated fee before work may resume under the grading permit.
5. Whenever grading operations are commenced without an approved grading permit, a penalty shall be added to all unpaid fees for grading plan
check and grading permits. The penalty shall be three hundred percent of all fees due the city.
Section J104.2.1 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J104.2.1 Grading Designation.
Grading in hilly terrain and all grading in excess of 2,500 cubic yards shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a
registered civil engineer, and shall be designated as "engineered grading." Grading involving less than 2,500 cubic yards and not located in an area
of mountainous terrain shall be designated as "regular grading" unless the permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading,
or the building official determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading shall conform to the requirements for
engineered grading.
Section J104.2.2 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J104.2.2 Regular Grading Requirements.
In addition to the provisions of section 106, and section 104.2, chapter 1, division II, an application for a regular grading permit shall be accompanied
by plans in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and
the name of the person who prepared the plan. If the slope of the grade exceeds 3 units horizontal to 1 unit vertical or as required by the building
official, the plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications. The
plan shall include the following information:
1. General vicinity of the proposed site.
2. Limits and depths of cut and fill.
3. Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (4.6 m) of the
proposed grading.
4. Contours, flow areas, elevations, or slopes which define existing and proposed drainage patterns.
5. Storm water provisions in accordance with the requirements of appendix J and title 5 chapter 4 of the city of El Segundo municipal code.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 315/581
6. Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and recorded public and private easements and use restricted use areas.
7. Location of all special flood hazard areas as designated and defined in title 44, code of federal regulations.
Section J104.2.3 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J104.2.3 Engineered Grading Requirements.
In addition to the provisions of chapter 1 division II, section 107 and appendix J section J104.2, an application for an engineered grading permit shall
be accompanied by plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans
and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the
building official. Specifications shall contain information covering structures and material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the
owner, and the person by whom they were prepared. The plans shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. General vicinity of the proposed site.
2. Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage.
3. Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, proposed drainage channels, and related structures.
4. Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a
part of, the proposed work. A map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains shall also be provided.
5. Location of any existing or proposed buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings
or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4.6 m) of the property or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations.
6. Recommendations in the geotechnical engineering report and the engineering geology report shall be incorporated into the grading plans or
specifications. When approved by the building official, specific recommendations contained in the geotechnical engineering report and the
engineering geology report, that are applicable to grading, may be included by reference.
7. The dates of the geotechnical engineering and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the
firms or individuals who prepared the reports.
8. A statement of the earthwork quantities of materials to be excavated and/or filled. Earthwork quantities shall include quantities for geotechnical
and geological remediation. In addition, a statement of material to be imported or exported from the site.
9. A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work covered by the permit.
10. A statement signed by the owner acknowledging that a field engineer, geotechnical engineer and engineering geologist, when appropriate, will
be employed to perform the services required by this code, whenever approval of the plans and issuance of the permit are to be based on the
condition that such professional persons be so employed. These acknowledgements shall be on a form furnished by the building official.
11. Storm water provisions are required to be shown on the grading plan in accordance with appendix J section J and title 5 chapter 4 of the
ESMC.
12. A drainage plan for that portion of a lot or parcel to be utilized as a building site (building pad), including elevation of floors with respect to finish
site grade and locations of existing and proposed stoops, slabs, fences or other features that may affect drainage.
13. Location and type of any existing or proposed private sewage disposal system.
14. Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and recorded public and private easements.
15. Location of all recorded floodways.
16. Location of all special flood hazard areas as designated and defined in title 44, code of federal regulations.
Section J109.5 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J109.5 Disposal.
All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable street, storm drain, or natural watercourse drainage way approved
by the building official or other appropriate governmental agency jurisdiction provided it is a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in
the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-erosive down drains or other devices. Desilting basins, filter barriers or other methods,
as approved by the building official, shall be utilized to remove sediments from surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter streets, storm
drains, or natural watercourses. If the drainage device discharges onto natural ground, riprap or a similar energy dissipater may be required. Building
pads shall have a minimum drainage gradient of 2 percent toward approved drainage facilities, a public street or drainage structure approved to
receive storm waters unless waived by the building official. A lesser slope may be approved by the building official for sites graded in relatively flat
terrain, or where special drainage provisions are made, when the building official finds such modification will not result in unfavorable drainage
conditions.
Section J113 is added to the 2016 CBC to read as follows:
J113 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Compliance.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 316/581
J113.1 General.
All grading plans and permits shall comply with the provisions of this section for NPDES compliance including the owner of any property on which
grading has been performed and which requires a grading permit under appendix J section J103. Sites which have been graded and which require a
grading permit under appendix J section J103 are subject to penalties and fines per appendix J section J113.4. All best management practices shall
be installed before grading begins or as instructed in writing by the building official for unpermitted grading as defined by section J103.3. As grading
progresses, all best management practices shall be updated as necessary to prevent erosion and control structures related pollutants from
discharging from the site. All best management practices shall be maintained in good working order to the satisfaction of the building official unless
final grading approval has been granted by the building official and all permanent drainage and erosion control systems, if required, are in place.
J113.2 Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
When requested by the building official, no grading permit shall be issued unless the plans for such work include a storm water pollution prevention
plan with details of best management practices, including desilting basins or other temporary drainage or control measures, or both, as may be
necessary to control structures-related pollutants which originate from the site as a result of structures related activities. For unpermitted grading as
defined by section J103.3 upon written request a SWPPP in compliance with the provisions of this section and section J106.4.3 for NPDES
compliance shall be submitted to the building official.
J113.3 Wet Weather Erosion Control Plans (WWECP).
In addition to the SWPPP required in appendix J section J113.2, where a grading permit is issued and it appears that the grading will not be
completed prior to November 1, then on or before October 1 the owner of the site on which the grading is being performed shall file or cause to be
filed with the building official a WWECP which includes specific best management practices to minimize the transport of sediment and protect public
and private property from the effects of erosion, flooding or the deposition of mud, debris or structures related pollutants. The best management
practices shown on the WWECP shall be installed on or before October 15. The plans shall be revised annually or as required by the building official
to reflect the current site conditions. The WWECP shall be accompanied by an application for plan checking services and plan check fees equal in
amount to 10 percent of the original grading permit fee.
(Ord. 1524, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 2
RESIDENTIAL CODE
13-2-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 50022.2, the California residential code, 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 2.5, of the California code
of regulations, and appendix J of the California residential code, 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 2.5, of the California code of regulations are
adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the CRC, is on file in the office of the building
official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1525, 12-6-2016)
13-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Subsection 11 is added to section R105.2 of the CRC:
R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit.
Building
11. Block wall and concrete fences not over 3 feet 6 inches high.
Section R105.3.2 of the CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:
R105.3.2 Expiration Of Plan Check.
An application for a permit for any proposed work is deemed to have been abandoned 12 months after the application date. Unless otherwise
provided, after expiration of the application, the city will not issue a permit until the plans are rechecked and approved and a new fee is paid.
Exception: The building official may grant extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if a permit applicant submits in
writing sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or circumstances precluded the securing of the permit within the allocated time.
Section R105.5 of chapter 1 of the CRC is hereby amended to read as follows:
R105.5 Expiration Of Permits.
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if
the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Work
shall be considered suspended or abandoned if the building official determines that substantial work has not been performed within the time
specified above. Substantial work shall be constructed to mean:
1. Measurable work such as, but not limited to, the addition of footings, structural members, flooring, wall covering, etc.
2. The work mentioned in subsection 1 of this section [A] 105.5 above must constitute 20% of the value of the work for which the permit was
issued in any 180 day period for group R, division 3 occupancies and 10% for all other occupancies.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 317/581
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one half the amount required for
a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and
provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the
permittee shall pay a new permit fee and may be required to comply with all applicable new regulations at the time of issuance. The building official is
authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing
and justifiable cause demonstrated. Except as otherwise provided, every permit issued by the city is valid for a period of three (3) years.
Exception: The building official may grant extensions of time if a permit applicant submits in writing sufficient evidence that unusual conditions or
circumstances precluded from the work being completed. An extension of time may require conditions of approval and additional fees.
Section R105.8 of chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
R105.8 Responsibility Of Permittee.
Building permits shall be presumed by the city to incorporate all of the work that the applicant, the applicant's agent, employees and/or contractors
shall carry out. Said proposed work shall be in accordance with the approved plans and with all requirements of this code and any other laws or
regulations applicable thereto. No city approval shall relieve or exonerate any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions of this
code nor shall any vested rights be created for any work performed in violation of this code.
Section R108.5.1 of chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
R108.5.1 Plan Check Fees Refund.
No portion of the plan check fee shall be refunded unless plan review has not been performed, in which case 80 percent of the plan check fee shall
be refunded upon written application for refund submitted by the person who made original payment of such fee and with the written consent of the
owner of the real property on which the work was proposed to be done. The building official shall determine, in such official's discretion, whether an
applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of the submittal for plan check, no plan check fees shall be
refunded. In the event subsequent application for plan check is made by a person who has received a refund, the full amount of all required fees
shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
Section R108.5.2 of chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
R108.5.2 Permit Fees Refund.
In the event any person shall have obtained a building permit and no portion of the work or construction covered by such permit shall have
commenced, nor any inspection performed by any city employee, and notice of abandonment has been received from the owner of the real property
on which such work would have been performed, the permittee, upon presentation to the building official of a written request for refund, shall be
entitled to a refund in an amount equal to 80 percent of the building permit fee actually paid for such permit. The building official shall determine, in
such official's discretion, whether an applicant is qualified to receive a refund. After 180 days have elapsed from the date of the issuance of the
permit, no permit fees shall be refunded. In the event subsequent application for a permit is made by a person who has received a refund, the full
amount of all required fees shall be paid as elsewhere provided in this chapter.
Exception:
1. If a permit has been issued for a project located in an area outside the jurisdiction of the city, 100 percent of the permit and plan checking fee
may be refunded.
2. If a duplicate permit has been erroneously issued, 100 percent of the duplicated permit and plan checking fee may be refunded.
Section R108.6 of chapter 1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R108.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance.
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to a fee in addition to the normally established permit fee, equal to 100% of such normally established permit fee, or as
otherwise determined by the building official.
Section R109.1.7 of chapter 1 of the CRC is added to read as follows:
R109.1.7 Setback Certification Required.
A California state licensed surveyor is required to certify the location and setbacks of all new construction prior to the first foundation inspection. A
copy of the certification shall be available to the building division inspector for the job file prior to the first inspection.
Exception: Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this section, the building official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases.
Section R109.5 of chapter 1 of the CRC is hereby added to read as follows:
R109.5 Re-Inspections.
A re-inspection fee in the amount set by the city council resolution may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work
for which inspection is called is incomplete or when required corrections called are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection
fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 318/581
inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not
posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date
for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official. In instances where re-inspection fees have
been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until required fees have been paid.
Section R112.3 of chapter 1 of the CRC is hereby added to read as follows:
R112.3 Board Of Appeals.
The board of appeals consists of members of the planning commission. The term of a board of appeals member will coincide with the term of service
as a planning commissioner and will terminate should the member cease serving as a planning commissioner. The building official is the secretary to
the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and will render all its decisions and findings on
contested matters, in writing to the building official, with a duplicate copy for any appellant or contestant affected by such decision or finding, and
may recommend to the city council appropriate new legislation.
Three members of the board constitute a quorum. The planning chairperson is the board's chairperson and in the chairperson's absence the board
will select a temporary chairperson.
The city will assess a $250.00 charge, or a higher amount set by resolution, at the time that an appellant files appeal of any order, decisions, or
determination made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. The filing fee is refundable should the appellant
prevail in a decision by the board. The appeal must be taken by filing a written notice of appeal, in letter form, to the board of appeals. The board's
decision constitutes the city's final decision.
Section R301.1.3.2 of chapter 3 of the 2016 CRC is amended to read as follows:
R301.1.3.2 Wood-Frame Structures.
The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings
of wood-frame construction more than two stories and basement in height located in seismic design category A, B or C. Notwithstanding other
sections of law; the law establishing these provisions is found in Business And Professions Code section 5537 and 6737.1.
The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings
of wood-frame construction more than one story in height or with a basement located in seismic design category D0, D1, D2 or E.
Section R301.1.4 is added to chapter 3 of the CRC to read as follows:
R301.1.4 Seismic Design Provisions For Buildings Constructed On Or Into Slopes Steeper Than One Unit Vertical In Three Units Horizontal
(33.3 Percent Slope).
The design and construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings when constructed on or into slopes steeper than one unit vertical in
three units horizontal (33.3 percent slope) shall comply with section 1613.7 of the building code.
Items 1, 3 and 5 of section R301.2.2.2.5 of the CRC are amended to read as follows:
R301.2.2.2.5 Irregular Buildings.
1. Where exterior shear wall lines or braced wall panels are not in one plane vertically from the foundation to the uppermost story in which they are
required.
3. When the end of a braced wall panel occurs over an opening in the wall below.
5. Where portions of a floor level are vertically offset.
Section R301.2.2.3.8 is added to chapter 3 of the CRC to read as follows:
R301.2.2.3.8 Anchorage Of Mechanical, Electrical, Or Plumbing Components And Equipment.
Mechanical, electrical, or plumbing components and equipment shall be anchored to the structure. Anchorage of the components and equipment
shall be designed to resist loads in accordance with the California residential code and ASCE 7, except where the component is positively attached
to the structure and flexible connections are provided between the component and associated ductwork, piping, and conduit; and either
1. The component weighs 400 lbs. (1780 N) or less and has a center of mass located 4 ft. (1.22 m) or less above the supporting structure; or
2. The component weighs 20 lbs. (89 N) or less or, in the case of a distributed system, 5 lb/ft. (73 N/m) or less.
Section R341 is added to chapter 3 of the CRC to read as follows:
R341 Residential Noise Insulation Standards (Airport Noise Sources).
R341.1207.6.01 Noise Insulation Requirements For New Construction.
R341.1207.6.02 Purpose And Scope.
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum noise insulation performance standards for new residential dwelling units and additions of
habitable rooms to existing residential dwelling units to protect public health, safety, and welfare from the effects of excessive noise, including without
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 319/581
limitation, indoor quality of life, speech interference, and sleep disruption.
R341.1207.6.03 Applicability.
This section applies to all newly constructed residences and habitable room additions to existing residences.
R341.1207.6.04 Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following words must have the following meaning:
"Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)" means the noise measure defined in 21 code of California regulations § 5001(d), and any successor
regulation or amendment.
"Habitable Room" means a room that is a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets,
halls, storage or utility space, garages, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
"LAX" means Los Angeles International Airport.
"Noise Impact Boundary For LAX" means the area around LAX as defined in 21 California code of regulations § 5001(1), and any successor
regulation or amendment. The city's building safety department must at all times maintain a current map of the noise impact boundary. The latest
published map by LAWA located at the building safety counter shall be used as the basis for determination.
"Residence" means any occupancy group R building as used in El Segundo title 13 of the El Segundo municipal code.
R341.1207.6.05 Standards.
Any new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing residence that is within the noise impact boundary for LAX must be
designed to ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX do not exceed 45 dB CNEL. This standard may be satisfied in two ways: (1) by performing
the acoustical analysis described in section R341.1207.6.06, below, or (2) by employing the prescribed construction methods described in section
R341.1207.6.07, below.
R341.1207.6.06 Acoustical Analysis.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum
noise insulation performance standards established in this section if it includes an acoustical analysis demonstrating that the proposed design will
ensure that internal noise levels due to LAX aircraft noise will not exceed 45 dB CNEL. The acoustical analysis shall be proven to meet the standard
by providing post-construction/pre-occupancy acoustic measurement to verify compliance with the 45 dB CNEL standard. The building official has
the discretion to implement policies that meet the intent of this code section.
A. The acoustical analysis must be prepared by a person experienced in the field of acoustical engineering. The analysis must consider and
include: the topographical relationship between LAX aircraft noise sources and the dwelling site, the characteristics of those noise sources,
predicted noise spectra and levels at the exterior of the dwelling site, the basis for this prediction (measured or obtained from published data), the
noise insulation measures to be employed, and the effectiveness of the proposed noise insulation measures.
B. If the interior allowable noise levels are to be met by requiring that windows be unopenable or closed, the design for the structure must also
specify a ventilation or air-conditioning system to provide a habitable interior environment, having at least 2 air exchanges per hour for the affected
rooms. The ventilation system must not compromise the interior room noise reduction.
R341.1207.6.07 Prescribed Construction Methods.
A building permit application for a new residence or addition of one or more habitable rooms to an existing residence must comply with the minimum
noise insulation performance standards established in this section if the design incorporates the following construction methods.
Construction Methods In The 70 dB CNEL And Greater Noise Zone
R341.1207.6.08 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed as follows:
A. Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B. Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch minimum solid sheathing.
C. Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot must require an interior supporting stud-wall that is finished with at
least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
D. Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
E. Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
F. Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wall board or plaster.
R341.1207.6.09 Exterior Windows.
A. Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 40 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 320/581
B. Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must:
1. Have a sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB, or
2. Must be 5/8-inch laminated glass with STC rating of 40 dB and must be set in non-hardening glazing materials, or
3. Must be glass block at least 31/2 inches thick.
C. The total areas of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20% of the wall area.
R341.1207.6.10 Exterior Doors.
A. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 40 dB.
B. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 35 dB.
C. Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must not be allowed in walls that are directly exposed to aircraft noise. Sliding glass doors in walls that
are not directly exposed must have an STC rating of at least 40 dB.
D. Access doors from attached garage to the interior of a residence must have an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
R341.1207.6.11 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
A. Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
B. Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C. Attic ventilation must be:
1. Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible ducting
or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree bend in the
duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic, or
2. Noise control louver vents, or
3. Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
4. Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/8-inch thick. Ceiling materials must be mounted on resilient channels.
5. Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line or at any point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight
glazing and the secondary glazing and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or laminated glass. The weather-side skylight must be any
type that is permitted by the building code. The size of skylights must be no more than 20 percent of the roof area of the room.
R341.1207.6.12 Ventilation.
A. A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of this code in each
habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be insulated flexible glass fiber
ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two points of connection.
B. Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type with no ducted connection to the exterior.
R341.1207.6.13 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of
the firebox.
R341.1207.6.14 Wall And Ceiling Openings.
Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are
closed are prohibited unless access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or other openings are designed to maintain the 45 dB
CNEL (or less) standard in the room to which they provide access.
Construction Methods In The 65 dB CNEL To 70 dB CNEL Noise Zone
R341.1207.6.15 Exterior Walls.
New walls that form the exterior portion of habitable rooms must be constructed as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 321/581
A. Studs must be at least 4 inches in nominal depth.
B. Exterior finish must be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or any siding material allowed by this code. Wood or metal
siding must be installed over 1/2-inch solid sheathing.
C. Masonry walls with a surface weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot will require an interior studwall that is finished with at least 5/8-inch
thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
D. Wall insulation must be at least R-11 glass fiber or mineral wool and must be installed continuously throughout the stud space.
E. Exterior solid sheathing must be covered with overlapping asphalt felt.
F. Interior wall finish must be at least 5/8-inch thick gypsum wallboard or plaster.
R341.1207.6.16 Exterior Windows.
A. Openable Windows: All openable windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at
least STC 35 dB and must have an air infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per minute when tested according to ASTM E-283.
B. Fixed Windows: All fixed windows in the exterior walls of habitable rooms must be at least 1/4-inch thick and must be set in non-hardening
glazing materials.
C. The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping must not exceed 20% of the floor area.
R341.1207.6.17 Exterior Doors.
A. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are directly exposed to aircraft noise and are facing the source of the noise must be a door and
edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound transmission class of at least STC 35 dB.
B. Exterior hinged doors to habitable rooms that are not directly exposed to aircraft noise and do not face the source of the noise must have a
minimum STC rating of 30 dB.
C. Sliding glass doors in habitable rooms must have glass that is 1/4-inch thick.
D. Access doors from a garage to a habitable room must have an STC rating of at least 30 dB.
R341.1207.6.18 Roof/Ceiling Construction.
A. Roof rafters must have a minimum slope of 4:12 and must be covered on their top surface with minimum 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof
covering allowed by this code.
B. Attic insulation must be batt or blow-in glass fiber or mineral wool with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
C. Attic ventilation must be:
1. Gable vents or vents that penetrate the roof surface that are fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length that are insulating flexible ducting
or metal ducts containing internal 1-inch thick coated fiberglass sound absorbing duct liner. Each duct must have a lined 90-degree bend in the
duct so that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic, or
2. Noise control louver vents, or
3. Eave vents that are located under the eave overhang.
D. Ceilings must be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at least 5/8-inch thick.
E. Skylights must penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel must be mounted at the ceiling line and must be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated
glass. The weather-side skylight must be any type that is permitted by the building code.
R341.1207.6.19 Floors.
The floor of the lowest habitable rooms must be concrete slab on grade or wood framed floors.
R341.1207.6.20 Ventilation.
A. A ventilation system must be provided that will provide at least the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of at least 2 air
exchanges in each affected habitable room without opening any window, door or other opening to the exterior. All concealed ductwork must be
insulated flexible glass fiber ducting that is at least 10 feet long between any two points of connection.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 322/581
B. Kitchen cooktop vent hoods must be the non-ducted recirculating type with no ducted connection to the exterior.
R341.1207.6.21 Fireplaces.
Each fireplace must be fitted with a damper at the top of the chimney that is operated from the firebox and must have glass doors across the front of
the firebox.
R341.1207.6.22 Wall And Ceiling Openings.
Openings in the shell of the residence that degrade its ability to achieve an interior CNEL rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are
closed are prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air-conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB
CNEL or less standard in the room to which they provide access.
Section R401.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R401.1 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In addition to the
provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in flood hazard areas as established by table R301.2(1) shall meet the
provisions of section R322. Wood foundations shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF.
Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations:
1. In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof.
2. When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at intervals not exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm).
Wood foundations in seismic design category D0, D1 or D2 shall not be permitted.
Exception: In non-occupied, single-story, detached storage sheds and similar uses other than carport or garage, provided the gross floor area
does not exceed 200 square feet, the plate height does not exceed 12 feet in height above the grade plane at any point, and the maximum roof
projection does not exceed 24 inches.
Sections R403.1.2, R403.1.3.6 and R403.1.5 of the CRC are amended to read as follows:
R403.1.2 Continuous Footing In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 And D2.
Exterior walls of buildings located in seismic design categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or
concrete footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings located in seismic design categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported on
continuous foundations.
R403.1.3.6 Isolated Concrete Footings.
In detached one- and two-family dwellings located in seismic design category A, B, or C that are three stories or less in height and constructed with
stud bearing walls, isolated plain concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals are permitted.
R403.1.5 Slope.
The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall not have a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-
percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footings or where the slope of the
bottom surface of the footings will exceed one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
For structures located in seismic design categories D0, D1 or D2, stepped footings shall be reinforced with four no. 4 rebar. Two bars shall be placed
at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in figure R403.1.5.
Figure R403.1.5 - Stepped Footing
Section R404.2 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls.
Wood foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of sections R404.2.1 through R404.2.6 and with the details shown in
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 323/581
figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3). Wood foundation walls shall not be used for structures located in seismic design category D0, D1 or D2.
Section R501.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R501.1 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the floors for buildings, including the floors of attic spaces used to house
mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment. Mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment shall be attached (or anchored) to the structure in
accordance with section R301.2.2.3.8.
Section R503.2.4 is added to chapter 5 of the CRC to read as follows:
R503.2.4 Openings In Horizontal Diaphragms.
Openings in horizontal diaphragms with a dimension perpendicular to the joist that is greater than 4 feet (1.2 m) shall be constructed in accordance
with figure R503.2.4.
a. Blockings shall be provided beyond headers.
b. Metal ties not less than 0.058 inch [1.47 mm (16 galvanized gage)] by 1.5 inches (38 mm) wide with eight 16d common nails on each side of the
header-joist intersection. The metal ties shall have a minimum yield of 33,000 psi (227 MPa).
c. Openings in diaphragms shall be further limited in accordance with section R301.2.2.2.5.
Figure R503.2.4
Openings In Horizontal Diaphragms
Lines 35 and 36 of table R602.3(1) of the CRC are amended to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 324/581
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 325/581
Footnote "b" of table R602.3(2) of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
b. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16-inch on diameter except as noted. Use of staples in roof, floor, subfloor, and braced wall panels
shall be prohibited in seismic design category D0, D1, or D2.
Exception of section R602.3.2 and table R602.3.2 of the CRC are amended to read as follows:
R602.3.2 Single Top Plate.
Exception: In other than seismic design category D0, D1 or D2, a single top plate used as an alternative to a double top plate shall comply with the
following:
1. The single top plate shall be tied at corners, intersecting walls, and at in-line splices in straight wall lines in accordance with table R602.3.2.
2. The rafters or joists shall be centered over the studs with a tolerance of not more than 1 inch (25 mm).
3. Omission of the top plate is permitted over headers where the headers are adequately tied to adjacent wall sections in accordance with table
R602.3.2.
Table R602.10.3(3) of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 326/581
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 327/581
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 328/581
Table R602.10.4 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 329/581
Table R602.10.5 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 330/581
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 331/581
Figure R602.10.6.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
Figure R602.10.6.2 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 332/581
Section R602.10.2.3 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R602.10.2.3 Minimum Number Of Braced Wall Panels. Braced wall lines with a length of 16 feet (4877 mm) or less shall have a minimum of two
braced wall panels of any length or one braced wall panel equal to 48 inches (1219 mm) or more. Braced wall lines greater than 16 feet (4877 mm)
shall have a minimum of two braced wall panels. No braced wall panel shall be less than 48 inches in length in seismic design category D0, D1, or
D2.
Figure R602.10.6.4 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
Section R606.4.4 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R606.4.4 Parapet Walls.
Unreinforced solid masonry parapet walls shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick and their height shall not exceed four times their thickness.
Unreinforced hollow unit masonry parapet walls shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick, and their height shall not exceed three times their
thickness. Masonry parapet walls in areas subject to wind loads of 30 pounds per square foot (1.44 kPa) or located in seismic design category D0,
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 333/581
D1 or D2, or on townhouses in seismic design category C shall be reinforced in accordance with section R606.12.
Section R606.12.2.2.3 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R606.12.2.2.3 Reinforcement Requirements For Masonry Elements.
Masonry elements listed in section R606.12.2.2.2 shall be reinforced in either the horizontal or vertical direction as shown in figure R606.11(3) and in
accordance with the following:
1. Horizontal Reinforcement. Horizontal joint reinforcement shall consist of at least one no. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm).
Horizontal reinforcement shall be provided within 16 inches (406 mm) of the top and bottom of these masonry elements.
2. Vertical Reinforcement. Vertical reinforcement shall consist of at least one no. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm). Vertical
reinforcement shall be within 8 inches (203 mm) of the ends of masonry walls.
Section R803.2.4 is added to chapter 8 of the CRC to read as follows:
R803.2.4 Openings In Horizontal Diaphragms.
Openings in horizontal diaphragms shall conform with section R503.2.4.
Section R1001.3.1 of the CRC is amended to read as follows:
R1001.3.1 Vertical Reinforcing.
For chimneys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, four no. 4 continuous vertical bars adequately anchored into the concrete foundation shall be placed
between wythes of solid masonry or within the cells of hollow unit masonry and grouted in accordance with section R609. Grout shall be prevented
from bonding with the flue liner so that the flue liner is free to move with thermal expansion. For chimneys more than 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, two
additional no. 4 vertical bars adequately anchored into the concrete foundation shall be provided for each additional flue incorporated into the
chimney or for each additional 40 inches (1016 mm) in width or fraction thereof.
(Ord. 1525, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
13-3-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California electrical code, 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 3, of the
California code of regulations, including annexes A through J ("CEC") is adopted by reference, subject to amendments, additions and deletions. One true
copy of the CEC is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1526, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 4
MECHANICAL CODE
13-4-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California mechanical code, 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 4, of the
California code of regulations, including appendices A through G ("CMC") is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set
forth below. One true copy of the CMC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1527, 12-
6-2016)
13-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Section 104.0 of the CMC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CMC section 104.0 Permits, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal code, will
govern the administration of the CMC.
Section 104.5 of the CMC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CMC section 104.5 Fees, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal code, will govern
the administration of the CMC.
Section 107.0 of the CMC is hereby amended as follows:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 334/581
CMC section 107.0, Board Of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal
code, will govern the administration of the CMC.
(Ord. 1527, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 5
PLUMBING CODE
13-5-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California plumbing code, 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 5, of the
California code of regulations, including appendices A, B, D, I, and L ("CPC") is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions
set forth below. One true copy of the CPC is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1528,
12-6-2016)
13-5-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Section 104.4 of the CPC is amended to read as follows:
CPC section 104.4 Permit Issuance, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal code,
will govern the administration of the CPC.
Section 104.5 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CPC section 104.5 Fees, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal code, will govern
the administration of the CPC.
Section 107.0 of the CPC is hereby amended to read as follows:
CPC section 107.0, Board Of Appeals, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal
code, will govern the administration of the CPC.
(Ord. 1528, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 6
ENERGY CODE
13-6-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California energy code, 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 6, of the
California code of regulations is adopted by reference. One true copy of the CEC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public
inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1529, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
13-7-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the international property maintenance code ("IPMC"), 2015 edition, promulgated
and published by the International Code Council, including appendix A, is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set
forth below. One true copy of the IPMC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1530,
12-6-2016)
13-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Section [A]111.2 of the IPMC is hereby amended to read as follows:
IPMC section [A]111.2 Membership Of Board, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo
municipal code, will govern the administration of the IPMC.
Sections [A]111.2.1 through [A]111.8 of the IPMC are hereby deleted.
(Ord. 1530, 12-6-2016)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 335/581
Chapter 8
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE1
13-8-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the international swimming pool and spa code ("ISPSC"), 2015 edition,
promulgated and published by the International Code Council, including appendices A through D, is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments,
additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the ISPSC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as
required by law. (Ord. 1531, 12-6-2016)
13-8-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Section [A]108.2 Membership Of Board, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal code,
will govern the administration of the ISPSC.
(Ord. 1531, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 9
FIRE CODE
13-9-1: ADOPTION OF CODES:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 50022.1 to 50022.8, the city adopts and incorporates by reference the California fire code, 2016 edition
("CFC"), including appendixes A, B, and C drafted and published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue NW, 6th Floor, Washington
DC, 20001-2070, and the California building standards commission, 2525 Natoma Park Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833. The city also adopts and
incorporates by reference chapter 1, division 2, 3, 4, and sections 503, 510.2 and 1103.2 of the international fire code, 2016 edition, published by the
International Code Council, not included in the California building standards code, as modified and amended by this chapter. Should the changes set forth
below conflict with the provisions of any other locally adopted code, these changes will prevail. The CFC and the IFC will apply to all occupancies within
the city's jurisdiction. One true copy of each code is on file with the city clerk and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1532, 12-6-
2016)
13-9-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS:
After due consideration, the city council has found that as a result of existing local climatic, geological, or topographical conditions that amendments,
additions, and deletions to the CFC are reasonably necessary to provide sufficient and effective levels of fire safety for the protection of life, health and
property. Therefore, the CFC is amended, added to, or deleted from, as set forth below:
§ 104.10.2 Technical Assistance. When there is a fire, explosion, hazardous materials incident or other potential life or serious property threatening
situation, the fire code official can request the owner to or operator to hire a private fire protection or hazardous materials investigator, acceptable to
the fire code official and at the expense of the owner or operator, to provide a full report of the incident, including, without limitation, such matters as
origin, cause, circumstances or proposed solution to the problem.
§ 104.11.4 Financial Responsibility. Any person who personally, or through another, willfully, negligently, or in violation of law, sets a fire, allows a
fire to be set, or allows a fire kindled or attended by him/her to escape from his/her control, allows any hazardous material to be handled, stored,
disposed of or transported in a manner not in accordance with this code, state law or nationally recognized standards, allows any hazardous material
to escape from his/her control, allows continuation of a violation of this code is liable for the expense of fighting the fire or for the expenses incurred
during a hazardous materials incident, and such expense will be a charge against that person.
§ 105.2 Application For Permit. Applications for permits will be made to the fire prevention office in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire
code official. Applications for permits must be accompanied by such plans as required by the fire code official. Any applicable permit fees must be
paid at the time of application for the permit.
§ 105.6.50 Battery Systems. To install or operate stationary storage battery systems having a liquid capacity of more than 50 gallons (189 l) for
flooded lead acid, nickel cadmium (NiCad) and valve-regulated lead acid (VRLA), or 1,000 pounds (454 kg) for lithium-ion, used for facility standby
power, emergency power or uninterruptible power supplies. See section 608.
§ 105.6.51 Woodworking. To operate a business which conducts woodworking, or operates as a cabinet shop or other similar purposes.
§ 105.7.13 Rooftop Obstructions. A construction permit is required to install or modify rooftop gardens or landscaped roofs.
§ 106.2.1 Inspection Requests. It is the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the fire code official when work is
ready for inspection. It is the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work that are required by this code.
Every request for inspection must be filed not less than two working days before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by
telephone.
§ 108.4 Filing Fee And Application. The city will assess a fee in an amount set by resolution at the time that an appellant files an appeal of any
order, decisions, or determination made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. The fee is refundable should
the appellant prevail in a decision by the board. The appeal must be taken by filing a written notice of appeal, in letter form, to the board of appeals.
The board's decision constitutes the city's final decision.
§ 109.4 Violation Penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any of its requirements or who erects, installs, alters,
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 336/581
repairs or does work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under
provisions of this code, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding 6 months,
or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served constitutes a separate offense.
§ 202 General Definitions are amended to add and/or modify the following definitions to read as follows:
"Building Access" means an exterior door opening conforming to all of the following:
1. Suitable and available for fire department use, opening onto or adjacent to a public way or a fire department access road as described in section
902.
2. Located not more than 2 feet (609.6 mm) above adjacent ground level.
3. Leading to a space, room or area having foot traffic communication capabilities with the remainder of the building.
4. Designed to permit access with the use of keys available in an approved key lock box.
"Fire Code Official" is the fire chief or a duly authorized representative.
"Low-Rise Building" is any building that is less than four stories in height from the lowest level of fire department access. Measurement will be from
the topside of the highest floor level that can be occupied to the lowest floor level of building access, as defined in section 202.
"Mid-Rise Building" is any building having space used for human occupancy four complete stories or more in height while being 75 feet (22 860 mm)
or less in height and not defined as a high-rise building by section 202. Measurement will be from the topside of the highest floor level that can be
occupied to the lowest floor level of building access, as defined in section 202.
§ 308.1.4 Open-Flame Cooking Devices is deleted.
§ 311.5 Placards is deleted.
§ 503 Fire Apparatus Access Roads is adopted with the following amendments:
§ 503.1.1 Buildings And Facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads must be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building
hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road must comply with the requirements of this section and
extend to within 150 feet (45 720 mm) of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by
an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility. The fire code official has the authority to designate fire apparatus access roads on
private property.
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to increase to dimension of 150 feet (45 720 mm) where:
1. The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, 903.1.2 or
903.3.1.3.
2. Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of location on property, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar
conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is provided.
3. There are not more than two group R-3 or group U occupancies.
§ 503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads must have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) exclusive of shoulders,
except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 15 feet (4572 mm).
Exception:
1. When serving only one group R, division 3 or group U occupancy the unobstructed width of the access road may be 12 feet (3658 mm).
§ 503.2.1.1 Access Roads With Vehicle Parking. No access roads can be less than 32 feet (9754 mm) in width if the vehicle parking is permitted
on one side of the access road and not less than 40 feet (12 192 mm) if vehicle parking is permitted on both sides of the access road. To permit the
free passage of vehicles, access roads designated for vehicle parking on only one side must have signs or markings prohibiting the parking of
vehicles on the traffic flow side of the roadway.
§ 503.2.1.2 Road Divider. An access road divider into separate adjacent one-way traffic lanes by a curbed divider or similar obstacle must not be
less than 15 feet (4572 mm) in unobstructed width on each side of the divider.
§ 503.2.4 Turning Radius. The inside turning radius of a fire apparatus access road must be a minimum of 60 feet, outside and 40 feet, inside.
§ 503.4 Obstruction Of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Fire apparatus access roads cannot be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of
vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in section 503.2.1 must be maintained at all times. Speed bumps and speed humps must
be approved before installation.
§ 505.1 Address Numbers. Approved address numbers and letters must be placed on all new and existing buildings and units in such a location as
to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting such buildings and units. Numbers and letters must be at least four (4) inches in height
for residential, six (6) inches in height for commercial, and twelve (12) inches in height for industrial buildings and units and may not be located on
doors or other areas that can be obstructed from view. The numbers and letters will be in a color that contrasts with their background and must be in
the city's approved numbering sequence. Residential, commercial and industrial buildings and units that are served by an alley or a fire apparatus
access roadway to the rear of the building must also have approved address numbers and letters posted in a visible location near the primary door to
the alley or a fire apparatus access roadway. Address identification shall be maintained.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 337/581
§ 505.1.1 Directory. For complexes and large buildings, a directory or premises map with approved addressing must be installed and maintained at
a location and in format as approved by the fire code official.
§ 507.5.1.1 Hydrant For Sprinkler Systems And Standpipe Systems. Buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system or a standpipe
system installed in accordance with sections 903 or 905 must have a fire hydrant within 80 feet of the fire department connection.
Exception: The distance may be permitted to exceed 80 feet where approved by the fire code official.
§ 510.2 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage In Existing Buildings is adopted.
§ 605.11.1.2.2 Hip Roof Layouts. Panels and modules installed on group R-3 buildings with hip roof layouts shall be located in a manner that
provides a minimum 3-foot-wide (914 mm) clear perimeter around the edges of the roof. The access pathway shall be capable of supporting the
firefighters accessing the roof.
§ 605.11.1.2.3 Single Ridge Roof Layout. Panels and modules installed on group R-3 buildings with single ridge roof layouts shall be located in a
manner that provides a minimum 3-foot-wide (914 mm) clear perimeter around the edges of the roof. The access pathway shall be capable of
supporting the firefighters accessing the roof.
§ 605.11.1.2.5 Allowance For Smoke Ventilation Operations. Panels and modules installed on group R-3 buildings shall be not less than 1 foot
from the ridgeline, and shall be located on only one side of any ridge to allow for smoke ventilation operations on the opposing side.
Exception:
1. Where solar panels are located a minimum of 5 feet from the ridge on the opposing side.
2. Where alternative means of allowance for smoke ventilation operations have been approved by the fire chief.
§ 901.4.7 Partial Fire Sprinkler Systems. Where in this code or the building code a partial fire sprinkler system is required, the fire sprinkler system
must be installed, modified or extended to protect the entire building or structure.
§ 901.11 Problematic Systems. In the event of a failure of a fire protection system or 2 or more alarms in a week where the fire code official finds no
evidence of a situation requiring a response, the fire code official is authorized to require the building owner or occupant to provide a fire watch until
the system is repaired. Fire watch personnel must be provided with at least one approved means for notification of the fire department and their only
duty is to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires.
§ 903.2.11.3 Building 4 Stories Or More In Height. An automatic sprinkler system must be installed throughout all buildings having usable floor
area four stories or more above grade, or buildings attached thereto.
Exceptions:
1. Airport control towers.
2. Open parking structures.
3. Occupancies in group F-2.
§ 903.2.20 Structures In The Smoky Hollow Specific Plan Area. An automatic sprinkler system must be provided throughout every facility or
building hereafter constructed within the Smoky Hollow specific plan area.
§ 903.3.1.2.2 Protection Of Attached Garages. Residential occupancies protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13R
must have automatic sprinklers installed in attached garages and in other areas as required by the fire code official.
§ 903.3.1.3.1 Protection Of Attached Garages. Residential occupancies protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13D
must have automatic sprinklers installed in attached garages and in other areas as required by the fire code official.
§ 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically Calculated Systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water
supply capacity.
§ 903.3.8 Shutoff Valves. Sprinkler shut off valves are required on each floor of buildings three stories or greater in height.
§ 903.4.2 Alarms. One exterior approved audible and visible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be
connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm device shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a
single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system
shall actuate the building fire alarm system.
§ 903.4.2.1 Exterior audible and visible alarm notification shall be provided on NFPA 13, NFPA 13R and NFPA 13D systems.
§ 905.5.3 Intentionally blank.
§ 907.6.5 Monitoring. All fire alarm and detection systems must be monitored by an approved central station as defined in NFPA 72. A (UL)
Underwriters Laboratories certificate or (FM) Factory Mutual placard must be provided and maintained by a UL listed or FM approved fire alarm
contractor who provides runner service in accordance with the 2016 edition of NFPA 72, chapter 26 for all newly installed fire alarm systems in
commercial occupancies.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 338/581
Exception: Supervisory service is not required for:
1. Single and multiple-station smoke alarms required by section 907.2.11.
2. Smoke detectors in group I-3 occupancies.
3. Automatic sprinkler systems in one and two-family dwellings.
Section 915 Mid-Rise Buildings
§ 915.1 General.
§ 915.1.1 Scope. In addition to other applicable provisions of this code, other laws and regulations, and any policies of the fire code official, the
provisions of this article apply to every mid-rise building, of any type construction, newly constructed after the adoption of this code, or which
undergoes a complete renovation that requires the complete vacancy of the building.
Exceptions: The following structures, while defined as mid-rise buildings, are not subject to this article:
1. Buildings used exclusively as open parking garage;
2. Buildings where all floors above the third floor (9144 mm) level are used exclusively as open parking garage;
3. Buildings such as power plants, lookout towers, steeples, grain houses, and similar structures with non-continuous human occupancy, when so
determined by the fire code official;
4. Buildings used exclusively for jails, prisons and hospitals.
§ 915.1.2 Definitions. For definitions of Mid-Rise Building and Building Access, see section 202.
§ 915.2 Building Access.
§ 915.2.1 Building Access. Building access must be provided and approved by the fire code official.
§ 915.3 Fire And Life Safety Requirements.
§ 915.3.1 Automatic Fire Sprinklers. Every mid-rise building must be protected throughout by an automatic fire sprinkler system that is designed
and installed in conformance with NFPA 13. A shut-off valve and a water flow alarm device must be provided for each floor.
§ 915.3.2 Standpipes. Every mid-rise building must be provided with a class I standpipe system in each required stairway. The standpipe system
must be interconnected with the fire sprinkler system. The system must consist of 21/2 inch hose valves provided for each floor level above or below
grade. Two hose outlets must also be located on the roof, outside of each stair shaft enclosure that penetrates the roof. Hose connections must be
located in the exit vestibule, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
§ 915.3.3 Smoke Detection. Smoke detectors must be provided in accordance with this section. Smoke detectors must be connected to an
automatic fire alarm system installed in accordance with NFPA 72. The actuation of any detector required by this section will operate the emergency
voice alarm signaling system and will place into operation all equipment necessary to prevent the circulation of smoke through air return and exhaust
ductwork.
§ 915.3.3.1 Location. Smoke detectors must be located as follows:
1. In every elevator machinery room and in all elevator lobbies. Elevator lobby detectors must be connected to an alarm verification zone or be
listed as a releasing device.
2. In the main return-air and exhaust-air plenum of each air-conditioning system. Such device must be located in a serviceable area downstream of
the last duct inlet.
3. At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more stories from a return-air duct or plenum of an air conditioning system. In group
R-1 and R-2 occupancies, an approved smoke detector may be used in each return-air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cubic feet per minute
and serving not more than 10 air inlet openings.
4. For group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, in all corridors serving as a means of egress for an occupant load for 10 or more.
§ 915.3.4 Smoke Control. A passive or active smoke control system must be provided for all mid-rise buildings whenever a complete floor is in
excess of 55 feet (16 764 mm) from the lowest point of fire department access. Such system must be mechanical and must be designed, installed
and tested to be in compliance with section 909.
§ 915.3.5 Fire Alarm System. An approved and listed, automatic and manual, fully addressable and electronically supervised fire alarm system
must be provided in conformance with this code and any policies of the fire prevention division.
§ 915.3.6 Emergency Voice Alarm Signaling System. The operation of any automatic or manual fire alarm initiating device must automatically
sound an alert tone followed by a pre-recorded voice instruction giving appropriate information and direction on a general or selective basis to entire
building, occupied and normally non-occupied areas.
§ 915.3.6.1 Pre-Recorded Instructions. The content of the voice alarm instruction must be approved by the El Segundo fire department.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 339/581
§ 915.3.6.2 Manual Override. A manual override for emergency voice communication must be provided for all paging zones.
§ 915.4 Central Control Station.
§ 915.4.1 General. A central control station room for fire department-operations must be provided. The location and accessibility of the central
control station room must be approved by the fire department. The room must be separated from the remainder of the building by not less than onehour,
fire resistive occupancy separation. The room must be a minimum of 200 square feet with a minimum dimension of 8 feet. It must contain the
following as a minimum:
1. The voice alarm and public address panels.
2. The fire alarm annunciator panel.
3. Elevator annunciator panel when the building exceeds 55 feet in height.
4. Status indicators and controls of air handling systems.
5. Controls for unlocking stairwell doors.
6. Annunciator panels for emergency and stand-by power status.
7. Annunciator panels for fire pump status.
8. Complete building plans set.
9. Work table.
10. Elevator control switches for switching of emergency power.
§ 915.4.2 Annunciation Identification. Control panels in the central control station must be permanently identified as to function. Water flow,
automatic fire detection and manually activated fire alarms, supervisory and trouble signals must be monitored by an approved, UL listed central
monitoring station or proprietary monitoring station and annunciated in the central control station by means of an audible and visual indicator. For the
purposes of annunciation, zoning must be in accordance with the following:
1. When the system serves more than one building, each building must be considered separately.
2. Each floor must be considered a separate zone.
3. When one or more risers serve the same floor, each riser must be considered a separate zone.
§ 915.5 Elevators.
§ 915.5.1 Standards. Elevators and elevator lobbies must be provided and must comply with the California building code and the following:
§ 915.5.2 General. At least one elevator cab must be assigned for fire department use, which serves all floors of the building. All provisions
hereinafter are in reference to said elevator cab(s).
§ 915.5.2.1 Size. The size of the elevator cab must have dimensions as specified in section 915.5.2.1.1.
§ 915.5.2.1.1 Ambulance Stretcher. The elevator cab must be provided with adequate dimensions to accommodate an ambulance type stretcher in
accordance with the provisions of section 3002.4a.1 of California building code.
§ 915.6 Standby Power.
§ 915.6.1 General. An on-site standby power system conforming to the electrical code must be provided. In the event of failure of the normal power
source, the standby power system must provide an alternate source of electrical power to serve at least the designated loads as set forth in section
915.6.2 at full power. The system may consist of an on-site generator or a system of batteries, or both. The installation must be in accordance with
this code, nationally recognized standards, and any policies of the fire code official.
§ 915.6.2 Loads. The power load requirements for sizing the standby power system must include, without limitation to the following:
1. Exit signs and exit path illumination;
2. Fire alarm system;
3. Elevator(s) assigned for fire department use;
4. Electrically driven fire pumps (if provided);
5. Smoke control systems;
6. Stairwell pressurization;
7. Lighting circuits supplying all elevator cabs, elevator lobbies, generator room, fire pump room, and other areas designated by the fire code
official.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 340/581
§ 915.6.3 Fuel Supplies. On-site fuel supplies for prime movers of a standby power generator must be sufficient for at least 48 hours at the
generator's listed full load. Where fuel supplies require automatic transfer into a primary tank from a secondary fuel storage tank, the fuel transfer
system must be provided with redundant fuel pumps to insure reliability. The fuel supply tank provided must be capable of storing at least 200% of
the calculated amount of fuel needed.
§ 915.7 Emergency Electrical System.
§ 915.7.1 General. Electrical systems and equipment specified in section 915.6 are classed as emergency systems and must be installed in
accordance with this code, NFPA 110, NFPA 111 and policies of the fire code official. Such systems must operate within 10 seconds of failure to
normal power supply. Such emergency power supply may be separate from the standby power required for fire pumps and elevators assigned for fire
department use.
§ 915.7.2 Emergency Systems. The following are classed as emergency systems:
1. Exit signs and means of egress illumination.
2. Fire alarm system.
3. Fire detection system.
4. Sprinkler alarm system.
5. Elevator cab lighting.
6. Smoke control systems.
§ 915.8 Means Of Egress.
§ 915.8.1 General. Means of egress must comply with the provisions of section 915.8.
§ 915.8.2 Stairway Enclosures. All stairways used for exiting must be protected by an exit enclosure designed in accordance with the California
building code, section 1020.1 and this section.
§ 915.8.2.1 Construction. Construction of stairway enclosures must be in accordance with the California building code, section 1005.3.2.1023.
§ 915.8.2.2 Extent Of Enclosure. Stairway enclosures must be continuous and must fully enclose all portions of the stairway. Exit enclosure must
exit directly to the exterior of the building or include an exit passageway on the ground floor, leading to the exterior of the building. Each exit
enclosure must extend completely through the roof and be provided with a door that leads onto the roof.
§ 915.8.2.3 Openings And Penetrations. Openings and penetrations must be as specified in the California building code, section 1020.1.11023.4
and 1023.5.
§ 915.8.2.4 Pressurized Enclosures. A pressurized stairway enclosure must be provided for all mid-rise buildings whenever a complete floor is in
excess of 55 feet (16 764 mm) from the lowest point of fire department access. The pressurized stairway must be designed and pressurized as
specified in the California building code, section 909.20.
§ 915.8.2.4.1 Vestibules. Pressurized stairway enclosures, serving mid-rise buildings must be provided with a pressurized entrance vestibule on
each floor that complies with the California building code, section 909.20.
§ 915.8.2.4.1.1 Vestibule Size. Vestibule size must be not less than 44 inches in width and not less than 72 inches in the direction of travel.
§ 915.8.2.4.1.2 Vestibule Construction. Vestibules must have walls, ceilings and floors of not less than two-hour fire resistive construction.
§ 915.8.2.4.1.3 Vestibule Doors. Vestibule doors must comply with California building code, section 909.20.
§ 915.8.2.4.1.4 Pressure Differences. The minimum pressure difference within a vestibule must comply with California building code, section
909.20.
§ 915.8.2.4.1.5 Standpipes. Fire department standpipe connections and valves serving the floor must be within the vestibule and located in a
manner so as not to obstruct egress when hose lines are connected and charged.
§ 915.8.2.5 Locking Of Stairway Doors. All stairway doors that are locked to prohibit access from the stairway side must have the capability of
being unlocked simultaneously, without unlatching, upon a signal from the fire control room. Upon failure of normal electrical service, or activation of
any fire alarm, the locking mechanism must automatically retract to the unlocked position. Hardware for locking of stairway doors must be state fire
marshal listed and approved by the fire code official by permit before installation. Stairway doors located between the vestibules and stairway shaft
must not be locked.
§ 915.8.2.6 Communications. A telephone or other two-way communications system connected to an approved emergency service which operates
continuously must be provided at not less than every third floor in each required exit stairway vestibule.
§ 1031.10 Fire Escape Maintenance. Fire escapes must be kept clear and unobstructed at all times, must be maintained in good working order at
all times and must receive an annual inspection by a Los Angeles fire department regulation 4 certified individual. The inspection records must
remain on site for fire department review.
§ 1103.2 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage In Existing Buildings is adopted.
§ 3304.8 Fire Retardant Plastic Sheeting And Tarpaulins. Fire retardant tarpaulins and sheeting must be used to barricade construction areas
from occupied building spaces and to provide floor or wall protection in occupied buildings.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 341/581
§ 5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. The possession, sale, use, and/or
discharge of "safe and sane" fireworks is prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Storage and handling of fireworks as allowed by section 5604.
2. Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as allowed in section 5606 and Health And Safety Code division 11.
3. The use of fireworks for fireworks displays, pyrotechnic before a proximate audience and pyrotechnic special effects in motion pictures,
television, theatrical or group entertainment productions are allowed in title 19, division 1, chapter 6 Fireworks reprinted in section 5608 and Health
And Safety Code division 11.
§ 5601.7 Seizure Of Fireworks. The fire code official and police authority have the authority to seize, take and remove fireworks stored, sold,
offered for sale, used or handled in violation of the provisions of title 19, California code of regulations, chapter 6 and California Health And Safety
Code, chapter 9.
§ 5601.7.1 Financial Responsibility. See section 104.11.4 Financial Responsibility for cost recovery of enforcement of section 5609.1. Fireworks
may be identified as hazardous waste by the state of California; violators shall be responsible for any disposal fees.
Appendix B § B105.2 Buildings Other Than One- And Two-Family Dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than oneand
two-family dwellings is specified in table B105.1.
Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow up to 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is protected with an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.1.1 or 903.1.2. The resulting fire-flow must not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5678
l/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in table B105.1.
Section N101 General.
§ N101.1 Scope. These regulations apply to temporary haunted houses, ghost walks, or similar amusement uses, where decorative materials and
confusing sounds and/or visual effects are present.
§ N101.2 Permits. An operational permit is required for haunted houses, ghost walks, or similar amusement uses in accordance with appendix
N101.2.
§ N101.2.1 Permit Documents. The permit application must include a dimensioned site plan and floor plan.
A site plan showing the following:
1. The proximity of the event building(s) to other structures or hazardous areas.
2. The path of travel from the event building or area to the public way.
3. The location of exterior evacuation assembly points.
A floor plan showing the following:
1. Dimensions of the area being used (include total square footage, width, and types of exits, aisles, or interior exit pathways, etc.).
2. The path of travel must include the layout of any mazes, mirrors or other display items that may confuse the egress paths.
3. A brief description of what will be depicted in each room or area along the walk or course including the type of special effects to be utilized.
4. Location of exits, exit signs, and emergency lighting.
5. Location of electrical panel(s) and light switches.
6. Identification of what the normal or prior use of the structure(s) being used is (e.g., auditorium, school, church).
7. Accessible egress routes.
8. When required, areas of refuge.
9. When required by section 318.9, fire alarm panel location, manual fire alarm boxes, and horn/strobe locations.
10. Portable fire extinguisher locations.
11. The location and fuel capacity of all generators.
§ N101.3 El Segundo Department Of Planning And Building Safety Approval. Approval to operate a temporary amusement haunted house or
similar use or to change the approved of use of an existing building, or portion thereof, for temporary amusement haunted house or similar use or to
change the approved of use of an existing building, or portion thereof, for temporary amusement haunted house or similar use requires approval by
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 342/581
the El Segundo department of planning and building safety before the fire department's final construction document approval and issuance of an
operational permit.
Section N102 Definitions.
§ N102.1 [CFC 202] Decorative Materials. All materials applied over the building interior finish for decorative, acoustical or other effect (such as
curtains, draperies, fabrics, streamers and surface coverings) and all other materials utilized for decorative effect (such as batting, cloth, cotton, hay,
stalks, straw, vines, leaves, trees, moss and similar items), including foam plastics and materials containing foam plastics. Decorative materials do
not include floor coverings, ordinary window shades, interior finish and materials 0.025 inch (0.64 mm) or less in thickness applied directly to and
adhering tightly to a substrate.
§ N102.2 Haunted House. A building or structure usually used during the Halloween season for amusement or entertainment purposes. A haunted
house may or may not be considered a special amusement building depending on the layout and effects employed.
§ N102.3 Ghost Walks. Similar to haunted houses and may include both indoor and outdoor areas where the means of egresses are similarly not
readily identifiable.
§ N102.4 [CBC 411.2] Special Amusement Building. A special amusement building is any temporary or permanent building or portion thereof that
is occupied for amusement, entertainment or educational purposes and that contains a device or system that conveys passengers or provides a
walkway along, around or over a course in any direction so arranged that the means of egress path is not readily apparent due to visual or audio
distractions or is intentionally confounded or is not readily available because of the nature of the attraction or mode of conveyance through the
building or structure.
Section N103 General Requirements.
§ N103.1 Allowable Structures. Temporary amusement haunted houses, ghost walks, and similar amusement uses which meet the definition of a
special amusement building can only be located in structures that comply with the provisions for special amusement buildings in accordance with the
California building code when the planned layout and effects employed meet the definition of a special amusement building.
§ N103.2 Tents Or Membrane Structures. Tents and membrane structures may be used when in compliance with all applicable requirements of this
appendix and when the total floor area of the tent is less than 1,000 square feet and the travel distance to an exit from any location is less than 50
feet.
§ N103.3 Fire Evacuation Plans. A fire safety and evacuation plan that complies with section 404 of the California fire code must be submitted and
approved.
§ N103.4 Staffing. The event must be adequately staffed by qualified person(s) to control the occupant load and assist patrons in exiting should an
evacuation become necessary. Staffing level is determined upon review of plans and may be established at the discretion of the fire code official.
§ N103.5 Occupant Load. Maximum occupant load must conform with chapter 10 table 1004.1.1. A sign stating maximum occupancy must be
posted in a visible location near the entrance. The attendant(s) must control the flow of patrons so as not to exceed this limit.
§ N103.6 Exits. Exiting must be in accordance with chapter 10 and this section.
1. Two exits must be provided from each room with an occupant load of 50 or more. Required exit doors shall swing in the direction of egress.
2. Illuminated exit signs must be provided at each exit serving an occupant load of 50 or more.
3. Exit doors with a lock or latch are prohibited when serving an occupant load of 50 or more unless it constitutes panic hardware.
4. When tents or membrane structures are approved for use, curtains are not allowed to cover the exits.
5. Emergency lighting must be provided in exit pathways.
6. Exhibits and decorative materials cannot obstruct, confuse, or obscure exits, exit pathways, exit signs, or emergency lights.
7. Additional exit pathway markings, such as low level exit signs and directional exit path markings may be required.
§ N103.7 Fire Protection. Temporary amusement haunted houses, ghost walks, and similar amusement uses which meet the definition of a special
amusement building must be provided with fire protection systems in accordance with appendix N103.7.
Exception: When the total floor area of haunted houses or indoor portions of ghost walks are less than 1,000 square feet and the travel distance
to an exit is less than 50 feet.
§ N103.7.1 Fire Sprinkler Protection. An automatic fire sprinkler system is required for haunted houses and indoor portions of ghost walks. Fire
sprinkler systems must comply with section 903.
§ N103.7.2 Fire Detection Systems. An approved automatic fire detection system shall be provided in accordance with section 907.2.12 as required
for special amusement buildings.
§ N103.7.3 Alarm. Activation of any single smoke detector, the fire sprinkler system, or other automatic fire detection device shall be in accordance
with section 907.2.12.1.
§ N103.7.4 Emergency Voice Alarm. Special amusement buildings must provide an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 343/581
with section 907.2.12.3.
§ N103.7.5 Portable Fire Extinguishers. See section N103.16.
§ N103.8 Electrical. When required, a permit shall be obtained from the local building official.
§ N103.8.1 Extension Cords. Extension cords shall be UL listed and must be appropriate for the intended use.
§ N103.8.2 Power Taps. Only UL listed relocatable power taps with overcurrent protection may be used when the number of outlets provided is
inadequate. Power strips must be plugged directly into the outlet, and cannot be plugged into one another in series.
§ N103.8.3 String Lighting. Manufacturer's installation instructions must be followed for the maximum allowable number of string lights that can be
connected. When connecting string lights together, the total amperage of all string lights must be calculated to ensure they do not exceed the
amperage for the extension cord and circuit.
§ N103.8.4 Protection. All extension cords and power strips must be adequately protected from foot traffic.
§ N103.8.5 Portable Generators. When portable generators are utilized, they must be diesel fuel type and located a minimum of 20 feet away from
all structures.
§ N103.8.6 Additional Electrical Requirements. See California fire code section 605 for additional electrical requirements.
§ N103.9 Decorative Materials And Interior Finishes. Interior wall, ceiling, and floor finishes must be class A rated in accordance with the
California building code. Also see California fire code chapter 8.
§ N103.9.1 Decorative Materials. All decorative materials must be inherently flame retardant, or be treated with a California state fire marshal (SFM)
listed flame retardant material. If the decorative material is treated with SFM listed flame retardant material by a non-SFM licensed applicator, the
SFM labeled container and sales receipt must be provided to the fire code official for inspection purposes. Also see fire code chapter 8.
§ N103.9.2 Flame Test. Flame retardant material testing must be completed in accordance with section 803.5 of the California fire code as
referenced from the California code of regulations, title 19, division 1, article 3, section 3.21(a) and (b). Proof of testing shall be provided.
§ N103.9.3 Placement Of Decorative Materials. Decorative materials, props and/or performer platforms cannot obstruct, confuse, or obscure exits,
exit signs, exit pathways, emergency lighting or any component of fire protection systems and equipment (e.g. fire extinguishers, fire alarm systems,
fire sprinklers, etc.) inside or outside the building.
§ N103.10 Smoke Generators. The fire code official may restrict use of smoke-generating equipment if it is determined to be incompatible with
smoke alarm(s). Care and consideration must be used with respect to smoke generator and smoke alarm locations. Smoke generator and smoke
alarm locations shall be approved by the fire code official.
§ N103.11 Display Of Motor Vehicles. Display of motor vehicles must be in accordance with section 2402.18 of the California fire code.
§ N103.12 Inspections. A fire and life safety inspection must be conducted by the fire code official before any haunted house, ghost walk or special
amusement building is made available for public use.
§ N103.13 Signs. "No Smoking" signs must be conspicuously posted at the main entrance and throughout the exhibit.
§ N103.14 Prohibited Areas. Inside storage or use of flammable and/or combustible liquids, gases, and solids is prohibited. Open flames are
prohibited.
§ N103.15 Maintenance. Good housekeeping must be maintained throughout exhibit and exit pathways, at all times. The means of egress system
cannot be obstructed during event operations.
§ N103.16 Portable Fire Extinguishers. Fire extinguishers must have a minimum 2A-10B:C rating. Fire extinguishers must be properly mounted
and be visible and accessible at all times. Clearly identify locations with signs or reflective tape. Fire extinguishers must be located within 50 feet
travel distance from anywhere in the building or structure.
(Ord. 1532, 12-6-2016)
13-9-3: GEOGRAPHICAL LIMITS:
Geographic limits referred to in certain sections of this code are established as follows:
Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited.
The limits referred to in sections 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 in which the storage of class I flammable liquids or class II combustible liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is restricted are established as the city of El Segundo's corporate boundaries.
Exceptions: Such use is allowed in the following zoning districts:
4. The storage of class I flammable liquids or class II combustible liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is allowed in M-1 and M-2
zones;
5. The storage of class II combustible liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is allowed in C-0, MM, MU-N, MU-S or P-F zones;
Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.
The limits referred to in section 6104.2 in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas in excess of an aggregate of 2,000 gallons water capacity is
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 344/581
restricted are established as the city of El Segundo's corporate boundaries.
Exceptions:
1. The storage of liquefied petroleum gas in excess of an aggregate of 2,000 gallons water capacity is allowed in the M-2 zone, when located at
least one-half (1/2) mile from property zoned or designated for residential use and at least one-half (1/2) mile from existing residential development
with a density greater than one (1) dwelling unit per acre and at least one-half (1/2) mile from any hotel or motel.
2. The storage of liquefied petroleum gas in excess of an aggregate of 2,000 gallons water capacity is allowed in M-1 zone with a conditional use
permit issued by the planning department.
(Ord. 1532, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 10
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
13-10-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California existing building code ("CEBC"), 2016 edition, published at title 24,
part 10, of the California code of regulations, including appendix A, chapters A1, A3, A4, and A6, is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments,
additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of the CEBC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as
required by law. (Ord. 1533, 12-6-2016)
13-10-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Section 1.8.8 of the CEBC is hereby amended as follows:
CEBC 1.8.8 Appeals Board, is deleted in its entirety. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal code, will
govern the administration of the CEBC.
(Ord. 1533, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 11
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
13-11-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the California green building standards code, 2016 edition, published at title 24,
part 11, of the California code of regulations ("CGBSC") is adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One
true copy of the CGBSC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1534, 12-6-2016)
13-11-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE:
Section 101.12 is added to the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code to read as follows:
101.12 Fee For Mandatory Measures. A fee of ten percent (10%) of the plan check/permit fee shall be assessed to verify compliance with the
mandatory measure of this code.
Section 101.12.1 is added to the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code to read as follows:
101.12.1 Fee For Tier Measures. When tier 1 or tier 2 measures need to be verified by the enforcing agency, an additional ten percent (10%) of the
plan check/permit fee shall be assessed.
Section 101.13 is added to the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code to read as follows:
101.13 Board Of Appeals. The 2016 California building code, as incorporated into the El Segundo municipal code, will govern the administration of
the CGBSC.
Section 202 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to include the term "sustainability" to read as follows:
Sustainability. Consideration of present development and construction impacts on the community, the economy, and the environment without
compromising the needs of the future.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 345/581
Section 301.1 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to include the green building measures specified as mandatory in the application checklists contained in
this code. Voluntary green building measures are also included in this code the application checklists and may be included in the design and
construction of structures covered by this code, but are not required unless they are adopted by a city or county as specified in section 101.7.
Section 301.1.1 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
301.1.1 Additions And Alterations [HCD]. The mandatory provisions of chapter 4 shall be applied to additions or alterations of existing residential
buildings where the additions or alterations increase the building's conditioned area, volume, or size. The requirement shall apply only to and/or
within the specific area of the addition or alteration. Code sections relevant to additions and alterations shall only apply to the portions of the building
being added or altered within the scope of the permitted work.
Note: On and after January 1, 2014, residential buildings undergoing permitted alterations, additions or improvements shall replace noncompliant
plumbing fixtures with water-conserving plumbing fixtures. Plumbing fixture replacement is required prior to issuance of a certificate of final
completion, certificate of occupancy or final permit approval by the local building department. See Civil Code section 1101.1, et seq., for the definition
of a noncompliant plumbing fixture, types of residential buildings affected and other important enactment dates.
Section 5.408.3 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
5.408.3 Excavated Soil And Land Clearing Debris [BSC-CG]. 100 percent of trees, stumps, rocks and associated vegetation and soils resulting
primarily from land clearing shall be reused or recycled. For a phased project, such material may be stockpiled on site until the storage site is
developed.
Exception: Reuse, either on- or off-site, of vegetation or soil contaminated by disease or pest infestation.
Notes:
1. If contamination by disease or pest infestation is suspected, contact the county agricultural commissioner and follow its direction for recycling or
disposal of the material. (http://acwm.lacounty.gov/wps/portal/acwm)
2. For a map of known pest and/or disease quarantine zones, consult with the California department of food and agriculture. (www.cdfa.ca.gov)
3. Contaminated soil shall not be reused and shall be disposed of or remediated in accordance with relevant regulations.
Section A4.105.2 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A4.105.2 Reuse Of Materials. Use salvaged, refurbished or reused materials for a minimum of 2.5 percent of the total value, based on estimated
cost of materials on the project. Materials which can be easily reused include but are not limited to the following:
1. Light fixtures.
2. Plumbing fixtures.
3. Doors and trim.
4. Masonry (reused masonry may only be used for flatwork).
5. Electrical devices.
6. Appliances.
7. Foundations or portions of foundations.
Note: Reused material must be in compliance with the appropriate title 24 requirements.
Section A4.106.5, table A4.106.5.1(1), table A4.106.5.1(2), table A4.106.5.1(3), and table A4.106.5.1(4) of the 2016 edition of the California green building
standards code are amended to read as follows:
A4.106.5 Cool Roof For Reduction Of Heat Island Effect. Roofing materials for tier 1 and tier 2 buildings shall comply with this section:
Exceptions:
Roof constructions that have a thermal mass over the roof membrane including areas of vegetated (green) roofs, weighing at least 25 lbs/sf.
Roof areas covered by building integrated solar photovoltaic panels and building integrated solar thermal panels.
TABLE A4.106.5.1(1)
TIER 1 - LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 346/581
Roof Slope Climate Zone Minimum 3-Year Aged Solar Reflectance Thermal Emittance SRI
2:12 13 & 15 0.63 0.75 75
2:12 10 - 15 0.20 0.75 16
TABLE A4.106.5.1(2)
TIER 2 - LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL
Roof Slope Climate Zone Minimum 3-Year Aged Solar Reflectance Thermal Emittance SRI
2:12 2, 4, 6 - 15 0.650.68 85 7882
2:12 2, 4, 6 - 15 0.230.28 85 2027
TABLE A4.106.5.1(3)
TIER 1 - HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS, HOTELS, AND MOTELS
Roof Slope Climate Zone Minimum 3-Year Aged Solar Reflectance Thermal Emittance SRI
2:12 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 0.550.63 0.75 6475
2:12 2 - 15 0.20 0.75 16
TABLE A4.106.5.1(4)
TIER 2 - HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS, HOTELS, AND MOTELS
Roof Slope Climate Zone Minimum 3-Year Aged Solar Reflectance Thermal Emittance SRI
2:12 2 - 15 0.650.68 0.750.85 7882
2:12 2 - 15 0.230.28 0.750.85 2027
Section A4.303.4 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A4.303.4 Nonwater Supplied Urinals And Composting Toilets. Nonwater supplied urinals or composting toilets are installed throughout the scope
of the permit or comply with sections 1101.1 thru 1101.8 of the California Civil Code, whichever is the most restrictive.
Where approved, hybrid urinals, as defined in chapter 2, shall be considered waterless urinals.
Section A4.404.3 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A4.404.3 Building Systems. Use premanufactured building systems to eliminate solid sawn lumber whenever possible. One or more of the
following premanufactured building systems is used throughout:
1. Composite floor joist or premanufactured floor framing system
2. Composite roof rafters or premanufactured roof framing system
3. Panelized (SIPS, ICF or similar) wall framing system
4. Other methods approved by the enforcing agency
Section A4.405.1 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A4.405.1 Prefinished Building Materials. Utilize prefinished building materials which do not require additional painting or staining when possible.
One or more of the following building materials that do not require additional resources for finishing are used:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 347/581
1. Exterior trim not requiring paint or stain
2. Windows not requiring paint or stain
3. Siding or exterior wall coverings which do not require paint or stain
Section A4.405.4 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A4.405.4 Use Of Building Materials From Rapidly Renewable Sources. One or more of the following materials manufactured from rapidly
renewable sources or agricultural by-products is used for a minimum of 2.5 percent of the total value, based on estimated cost of materials on the
project:
1. Insulation
2. Bamboo or cork
3. Engineered products
4. Agricultural based products
5. Other products acceptable to the enforcing agency
Note: The intent of this section is to utilize building materials and products which are typically harvested within a 10-year or shorter cycle.
Section A4.407.1 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A4.407.1 Drainage Around Foundations. Install foundation and landscape drains which discharge to a dry well, sump, bioswale or other approved
on-site location except when not required by state code or locally approved ordinance.
Section A5.106.4.1 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A5.106.4.1 Reserved.Short-Term Bicycle Parking. If the project is anticipated to generate visitor traffic, provide permanently anchored bicycle
racks within 200 feet of the visitors' entrance, readily visible to passers-by, for 15 percent of visitor motorized vehicle parking capacity, with a
minimum of one two-bike capacity rack.
Section A5.106.4.3 and table A5.106.4.3 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A5.106.4.3 Changing Rooms. For buildings with over 10 tenant-occupants, provide changing/shower facilities for tenant-occupants only in
accordance with table A5.106.4.3 or document arrangements with nearby changing/shower facilities.
TABLE A5.106.4.3
Number Of
Tenant-Occupants
Shower/Changing
Facilities Required2
2-Tier (12" x 15" x 72")
Personal Effects
Lockers1,2 Required
0-10 01 unisex shower 01
11-50 1 unisex shower 2
51-100 1 unisex shower 3
101-200 1 shower stall per gender 4
Over 200 1 shower stall per gender for each 200 additional tenant-occupants
One 2-tier locker for each 50 additional tenant-occupants
1. One 2-tier locker serves two people. Lockers shall be lockable with either padlock or combination lock.
2.Tenant spaces housing more than 10 tenant-occupants within buildings sharing common toilet facilities need not comply; however, such common
shower facilities shall accommodate the total number of tenant occupants serviced by the toilets and include a minimum of one unisex shower and
two 2-tier lockers.
Note: Additional information on recommended bicycle accommodations may be obtained from Sacramento Area Bicycle Advocates.
Section A5.106.6.1 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A5.106.6.1 Reduce Parking Capacity. With the approval of the enforcement authority, employ strategies to reduce on-site parking area by 20
percent by
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 348/581
1. Use of on street parking or compact spaces, illustrated on the site plan or
2. Implementation and documentation of programs that encourage occupants to carpool, ride share or use alternate transportation.
Note: Strategies for programs may be obtained from local TMAs.
Section A5.406.1 of the 2016 edition of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
A5.406.1 Choice Of Materials. Compared to other products in a given product category, choose materials proven to be characterized by one or
more of the following for a minimum of 5 percent of the total value, based on estimated cost of materials on the project.
(Ord. 1534, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 12
MOVING BUILDINGS
13-12-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Conditions For Issuance Or Denial: It is unlawful for any person to move a building, structure or garage over, upon or along any street
to a location within the corporate limits of the City, or to perform any part of the moving work, unless the building or the garage has first been examined
and posted in the manner in this Chapter hereinafter required, and a permit in writing so to do for each and every separate moving operation has been
applied for and obtained from the Building Inspector. Nothing herein shall be deemed applicable to the moving of a structure from one location on a lot
to another location on the same lot.
B. Permit Fee; Application: Before a house moving permit is issued, the persons proposing to do the work shall pay to the City fees as hereinafter required
and shall complete an application form furnished by the Building Inspector and shall set forth such information thereon as the Building Inspector may
reasonably require, in order to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. The Building Inspector shall then cause to be made an examination of the
building or structure proposed to be moved, and the location to which it is proposed to move the same, if such location is within the City.
C. Contents Of Permit; Filing:
1. Attached to the building permit shall be a sketch of the building as it will look when finally placed upon the location to which it is proposed to be
moved, showing the type of plumbing to be installed; the remodeling, if any to be done on the inside, and if the roof requires replacing, the type and
kind of roofing material that will be used; and in addition to the foundation, the permit shall state the type and kind of driveway to be installed to the
garage, if any; the type and kind of steps or porch to be built both in front and back, electric wiring and such other requirements as the Building
Inspector may require in order to bring the building up to the minimum community standards, both in structure and appearance. Provided, further,
that if there is a garage in connection with the house, that the permit shall also specify the same general requirements as set forth for the house. The
improvements outlined above shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of the house moving permit.
2. The applicant for a moving permit shall, at the time of making the application, file with the Building Inspector a full and complete certified copy of the
building permit previously issued for the building.
D. Restrictions On Issuance: No permit shall be issued to move and relocate any building or structure within the City which is so constructed or in such
condition as to be dangerous; or which is infested with pests or is unsanitary; or which, if it be a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation; or
which is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or is in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its location at the proposed site would cause
appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements on both sides of the street within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed location; or if the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws of the City; or if the structure is of a type otherwise prohibited at the proposed
location by any other law or ordinance; or if the proposed moving or relocation would violate any other law or code or violate or disturb the public safety,
welfare or peace. Provided, however, that if the condition of the building or structure, in the reasonable judgment of the Building Inspector, admits of
practical and effective repair and its proposed moving or relocation does not violate any law or ordinance, such Inspector may issue a permit for such
moving and relocation upon condition as hereinafter provided and complying with the other provisions of this Chapter. The Building Inspector shall, in
granting any permit, impose thereon such terms and conditions as he may deem reasonable and proper, including, but not limited to, the requirements
of changes, alterations, additions, or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure, set forth in subsection C of this Section, to the end that the
moving or relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to the property and improvements, or
either, in the area, as hereinabove limited, to which it is to be moved. The terms and conditions upon which any permit may be granted shall be written
upon the permit or attached in writing thereto.
E. Application For Permit: Any person desiring a permit shall make a written application therefor to the Building Inspector. The application shall include the
information that must be stated in the permit as more fully set forth in subsections A through D of this Section. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-2: PERMIT FEE; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
A. Fee Established: Every applicant desiring a permit for the relocation of a building shall, with his application, pay to the City the sum of fifty dollars
($50.00) as an inspection fee.
B. Compliance: The house moving permit shall be subject to compliance with all requirements of the vehicle and traffic code provisions and other
regulations of the City. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 349/581
A. Bond Required:
1. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, no house moving permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall first post with the Building
Inspector a bond executed by the owner of the premises where the building or structure is to be located, as principal and by a surety company
authorized to do business in this State, as surety. The bond shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney as to form and, in the event of
approval, shall be filed with the Building Inspector.
2. The bond, which shall be in form joint and several, shall name the City as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to twice the cost of the work
required to be done in order to comply with all of the conditions of the house moving permit, as estimated by the Building Inspector, and not less than
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may post a bond executed by the owner, as principal, which is
secured by a deposit of cash in the amount named above and conditioned as required in the case of a surety bond; such as so executed is
hereinafter called a "cash bond" for the purpose of this Section.
B. Conditions:
1. Every bond posted pursuant to this Section shall be conditioned as follows:
a. Each and all of the terms and conditions of this Chapter and of the house moving permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector;
b. All of the work required to be done pursuant to the terms and conditions of the house moving permit shall be fully performed and completed, within
ninety (90) days after the date of the issuance by the Building Inspector of the house moving permit. The time limit herein specified or the time limit
specified in any permit, may be extended for good and sufficient cause by the Building Inspector.
2. No such extension of time shall be valid unless written and no such extension shall release any surety upon any bond.
C. Default In Performance:
1. Whenever the Building Inspector shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice
thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond. The notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the
period of time deemed by the Building Inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. After receipt of the notice, the surety
must, within the time limit therein specified, either cause the required work to be performed or, failing therein, must pay to the Building Inspector twice
the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice. Upon the receipt of such money, the City shall proceed by such mode as it deems
convenient, to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of said
sum of money in hand therefor.
2. If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default as provided above shall be given to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the time
specified, the City shall proceed without delay and without further notice of proceedings whatever, to use the cash deposit, or any portion of the
deposit, to cause the required work to be done, by contract or otherwise, in the discretion of the City. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit shall,
upon the completion of the work, be returned to the depositor, or to his successors or assigns, after deducting the cost of the work, plus fifteen
percent (15%) thereof, to cover cost of supervision and direction of work of completion.
D. Option To Demolish: When any default has occurred, on the part of the principal under the preceding provisions, the surety shall have the option, in lieu
of completing the work required, to demolish the building or structure, and to clear, clean and restore the site, within ninety (90) days of said default. If
the surety defaults, the City shall have the same option. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
E. Term: The term of each bond posted pursuant to this Chapter shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion, to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector, of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the house moving permit. The completion shall be evidenced
by a statement of completion signed by the Building Inspector, a copy of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk, upon receipt of a copy
of the statement, shall and is, hereby authorized and directed to exonerate the bond and furnish a letter of exoneration to any surety or principal upon
the bond upon request. When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor, or to his successors or assigns, upon the
termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere in this Section provided. (Ord. 687, 3-11-1968)
F. Access: The Building Inspector, the surety, and the duly authorized representatives of either, shall have access to the premises described in the house
moving permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the
house moving permit with reference to the relocation of a structure, the surety, or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the Building
Inspector, or any person employed or engaged on his behalf, shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove
or demolish the building or structure. It is unlawful for the owner, or his representatives, successors, or assigns or any other person, to interfere with or
obstruct the ingress to or egress from the premises of any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the City engaged in the work of
completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a house moving permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the
performance of the terms or conditions thereof. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-4: EXAMINATION OF BUILDING; POSTING NOTICE:
Upon receiving an application for a permit to move a building, the Building Inspector shall make an examination of the building described in the application
and shall examine the proposed location. If it is found that no ordinance or law will be violated and that the public welfare, safety or peace will not be
endangered, he shall cause a notice to be posted on the front of the building which is desired to be moved. The notice shall also state the location of the
house by street and number, and the location of the lot or land to which it is proposed to move said building, together with the name of the applicant. (Ord.
671, 10-9-1967)
13-12-5: APPEAL:
The applicant, or any person who may feel aggrieved by any ruling or action of the Building Inspector, may appeal to the City Council within ten (10) days
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 350/581
for hearing thereon, whereupon the City Council shall hear the same and make its final determination of the matter in accordance with the information
presented. (Ord. 671, 10-9-1967)
Chapter 13
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
13-13-1: BLOCK DEFINED:
"Block," within the meaning of this Chapter, means that portion of any street between two (2) cross streets, or between a cross street and an abutting
street, or between two (2) abutting streets. In cases of abutting streets, the prolonged center line of the abutting streets shall be the dividing line of the
blocks; provided, however, that all blocks exceeding six hundred sixty feet (660') in length shall be considered two (2) blocks. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-2: NUMBERING ENTRANCES TO BUILDINGS:
A. Placement: All entrances from the public streets of the City to buildings or structures within the City shall be numbered as hereinafter provided. The
number of each and every such entrance shall be placed in a conspicuous place upon or immediately adjacent to the door or gate closing such
entrance. Each figure of the number shall be at least two inches (2") in height and of corresponding width. The appropriate number of any entrance to
any building or structure shall be placed thereon as herein provided within five (5) days after the receipt by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or
subtenant of such building of a notice from the Building Inspector of the number designated for such building or structure, and all numbers, other than
the numbers provided for in this Chapter for the respective entrances, shall be removed from every building by the owners, occupants, lessees, tenants
or subtenants thereof within five (5) days from the service of the notice designating the appropriate numbers to be placed thereon.
B. Designation: It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to designate the respective numbers for buildings or structures fronting on streets heretofore
laid out, or hereafter to be laid out or extended, and which may at this time, or at any future time, be included within the present or future boundaries of
the City. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-3: STARTING POINTS FOR NUMBERING:
The following shall be the respective starting points or dividing lines on buildings or structures fronting on streets heretofore laid out, or hereafter to be laid
out or extended, namely: the street now known as El Segundo Boulevard shall be the starting point or dividing line for all numbers from north to south, and
the street now known as Main Street shall be the dividing line of all numbers from east to west. Numbers shall begin at the above-named starting points or
dividing lines, and continue to the termini of the respective streets. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-4: ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS:
The numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of the streets shall be odd numbers, and the numbers on the southerly and easterly sides of the streets
shall be even numbers. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-5: NUMBERS USED IN EACH BLOCK:
One hundred (100) numbers or as many thereof as may be necessary, shall be allotted to each block. Number 100 shall be the first number used at the
respective beginning points on the sides of the streets, which are to contain the even numbers, and number 101 for the sides which are to contain the odd
numbers. At the beginning of the second block from the starting point, the first numbers shall be 200 and 201 respectively, and so continue throughout the
system. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
13-13-6: FEET ALLOWED FOR EACH NUMBER:
Twenty foot (20') frontage shall be allowed for each number to be calculated from the end of the block at which the number begins. On all streets, the
numbering shall be done as if the streets extended to the dividing line of the City as defined in Section 13-13-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 320, 11-12-1947)
Chapter 14
OIL AND GAS WELLS
13-14-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal, agent or otherwise, to drill, bore or otherwise sink or dig, or operate or maintain any
oil or gas well or to commence, carry on or prosecute the erection of any derrick or other structures for use in connection with any such well, or to
maintain the same in any portion of the City without a valid, current and subsisting permit from the City Council so to do first had and obtained.
B. Application For Permit; Contents And Information:
1. Application for the permit required by subsection A of this Section to drill, bore or otherwise sink or bore any oil or gas well and to erect and maintain
the usual and necessary structures in connection therewith, shall be made to the City Council, in writing, by the applicant for the permit, stating the
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 351/581
name of the applicant, the definite location of the proposed well and appurtenant structures, the purpose for which the same is to be drilled, bored or
otherwise sunk or dug, and a statement that if the permit is granted, the well will be drilled, bored or otherwise sunk or dug at the location shown in
the application and that the permit for the same contemplated hereunder, if granted by the City Council, may contain a provision as a condition
thereof that the well will be located at the place so designated and that otherwise the permit shall lapse and become and remain void.
2. Each application for the permit required by subsection A of this Section shall be accompanied by two (2) duplicate maps or plats correctly showing
the exterior boundaries of the property covered by the lease under or pursuant to which the well applied for is to be drilled, together with the name
and address of the lessor and the description of the property owned by each respective lessor; and, also the area covered by any adjoining leases
owned or drilled by the applicant, or in which the applicant is interested, as the City Council deems that the public peace, health, safety, interest and
convenience of the City requires that the City Council be fully advised with reference to such matters when considering the application. The
respective areas shall be designated either by colored boundary lines or by shading so as to accurately indicate the extent thereof respectively.
C. Filing Of Application: On and after the effective date hereof, all applications for permits to construct derricks and prospect and drill for oil within the City
shall be filed on application forms to be furnished by the City and the City Council reserves the right to refuse to consider any application not so filed.
(Ord. 211, 11-24-1937)
D. Issuance; Signing Of Permit: When the City Council has authorized the issuance of any permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the
same shall be signed by the Director of Building Safety. (Ord. 855, 7-16-1974)
E. Misrepresentation Of Facts In Application: Any permit issued upon an application filed in accordance with subsection B of this Section may contain a
provision as a condition thereof, that any misrepresentation of fact contained in the application shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit and all
rights of the permittee therein named shall cease and terminate. (Ord. 211, 11-24-1937)
F. Permit Fee: Until the further order of the City Council, no fee shall be charged for the permit required by subsection A of this Section. (Ord. 226, 12-6-
1939)
13-14-2: BOND REQUIREMENT:
A. Bond Required; Conditions:
1. Every permittee shall, either before or at the time of securing his permit, and a permittee now operating under a permit heretofore granted, deliver to
the City Clerk a bond approved by the City Attorney as to form and by the Mayor as to surety, for the principal sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) payable to the City, indemnifying the City against any loss which may be suffered by the City or any public property therein located, or by
any public street, avenue, alley, way or place within the City, by reason of the drilling or redrilling or existence or operation, abandonment or conduct
of the well referred to in his permit, or the violation of the terms and conditions of his permit, or any of them, or the failure of the permittee to remove
the derrick or its appurtenances, or any act, whether of commission or omission on the part of the permittee, or any agent or contractor employed in
connection with the well referred to in the respective permit, or any agent or contractor acting under the direction of the permittee.
2. Any permittee now engaged or who shall hereafter engage in the drilling or redrilling or existence or operation, abandonment or conduct of five (5) or
more wells at any one or the same time, may file with the City Clerk one bond approved by the City Attorney as to form and by the Mayor as to
surety, for the principal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to cover all operations of the permittee, indemnifying the City against any loss
which may be suffered by the City, or any public property therein located, or by any public street, avenue, alley, or place within the City, by reason of
drilling or redrilling or existence or operation, abandonment or conduct of the wells, or the violation of the terms and conditions of any permit issued
to the permittee, or the failure of the permittee to remove any derrick or its appurtenances, or any act, whether of commission or omission on the part
of the permittee, or any agent or contractor employed in connection with any well for which a permit has been granted to the permittee, or any agent
or contractor acting under the direction of the permittee, in lieu of a two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) bond for each well for which a permit has been
granted.
3. Should the permittee who has filed a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) bond, properly abandon, in accordance with the terms of his permit, any well
covered by the bond, such bond may, with the consent of the City Council, if all of the obligations thereunder as to the permits have been satisfied,
be terminated and cancelled and the surety thereon be relieved of all obligations thereunder, upon the filing by the permittee of a two thousand dollar
($2,000.00) bond as hereinabove provided, for each well on which the permittee is still obligated by reason of the permits issued to him.
B. Keeping Bond In Effect: A good and sufficient bond as hereinabove provided shall at all times be kept in full force and effect by the permittee covering
each and every well for which the permittee has been granted a permit, until he has been released from the obligation by completion of the terms of the
permit issued to him, and a consent to the release has been granted by the City Council. Unless the permittee keeps the bond in full force and effect,
as hereinabove provided, then and in that event the City Council may declare the permit forfeited, and all rights of the permittee therein named
thereunder shall cease and terminate. (Ord. 266, 12-23-1942)
13-14-3: OPERATING CHARGE:
A. Amount:
1. Each person holding a permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall pay for each derrick, well or operations referred to in or authorized by
any permit, a license fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, plus two cents ($0.02) per barrel. The fee shall be payable annually in
advance and shall be based on an estimate of the number of barrels anticipated to be produced during the license period. Upon renewal of the
license, the estimate of the number of barrels upon which the previous license fee was calculated shall be adjusted to reflect the actual number of
barrels produced; and a new estimate for the renewal license period shall be submitted, but in no case shall the estimate be less than the fee paid for
the preceding tax period. If the actual number of barrels exceeds the estimate, the licensee shall pay to the City the difference; if the actual number
of barrels is less than the estimate, no refund shall be made but a credit shall be allowed on the following year's license fee.
2. Only the first annual charge shall be prorated. No such license fee or operating charge, or any part thereof, shall be refunded. The license fee or
operating charge must continue to be paid for each well as long as drilling operations, drilling, mining, pumping or other operations in or about the
same continue, including the production therefrom of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substance from a flowing well, and as long as the derrick remains
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 352/581
standing, and until the well referred to in the permit has been fully, completely and satisfactorily abandoned in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Division of Oil and Gas of the Department of Natural Resources of the State and of the City, relating to the abandonment of the
wells, and until the premises relating to the well have been cleaned up and restored as nearly as reasonably possible to the same condition as that in
which they existed at the time of the granting of the permit. (Ord. 1054, 8-16-1983)
B. Payment Date: The first license fee or operating charge established by subsection A of this Section shall become due and payable on the effective date
hereof as to all wells, permits for which were issued prior to the effective date, and for all wells, permits for which are hereafter issued, shall become
due and payable on the date of the granting of the respective permits by the City Council. The annual fees or charges prescribed in this Chapter shall
thereafter become due and payable to the Director of Finance on the first day of each and every calendar year. If any license fee or operating charge
prescribed is not paid within fifteen (15) days after the same becomes due and payable, a penalty shall accrue upon the same, in the sum of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). Unless the license fee and the penalty thereon are paid within fifteen (15) days after the date upon which the same become
delinquent, then and in that event the City Council may declare the permits forfeited, and all rights of the permittee therein named thereunder shall
cease and terminate. (Ord. 855, 7-16-1974)
13-14-4: FENCE, ENCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS:
No person owning, having possession of or in control of any oil well or any oil well site within the City shall maintain or allow to exist thereon, therein or
thereabout any sump or drainage basin, or any moving parts or machinery in use or intended to be used at the oil well or oil well site, unless the sump or
drainage basin or machinery or moving parts are securely enclosed by an adequate noncombustible ventilated type fence, screen or housing sufficient to
prevent the entry of minors. The fence or screen shall be not less than six feet (6') high, and if equipped with gates, the gates must be not less than six
feet (6') high and equipped with adequate locks, lock latches or other securing devices to effectively prevent the entry of minors. A single adequate fence
or screen may be used to enclose more than one oil well or oil well site and appurtenances. Fences, screens or housings required by this Section must be
approved by the Building Inspector, or his representative. (Ord. 460, 7-22-1955)
ARTICLE A. OIL DRILLING DISTRICTS
13-14A-1: PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES:
A. It is hereby declared that oil drilling and oil production and related processes when conducted in "urbanized areas", as the term is herein defined, may
be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare; and that the extension of oil drilling into such areas in the City in which drilling has not
already been permitted is justified only by reason of recognizing the material and social value of developing natural resources; that oil and other
hydrocarbon substances constitute property within the meaning of the constitutional provisions guaranteeing the right of ownership and enjoyment of
such property; by recognizing also the similar constitutional guarantees for the enjoyment of the surface use of real property and improvements
thereon; and the need for invoking such reasonable controls over both the subsurface and surface use of property as may be necessary to assure
maximum enjoyment of each with minimum restrictions to either. It is, therefore, declared to be the object and purpose of this Article to establish
reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and controls for the future drilling for and production of oil or other hydrocarbon substances in the
urbanized areas of the City.
B. More restrictive limitations, safeguards and controls than those which have heretofore been imposed in metropolitan and urbanized areas are deemed
necessary in the public interest to effect practices which will not only provide for a more economic recovery of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon
substances, but which will also take into consideration the surface uses of land, as such uses are indicated by the value and character of the existing
improvements in or near districts where oil drilling or production are hereinafter permitted, the desirability of the area for residential or other uses, or
any other factor relating to the public health, comfort, safety and general welfare. It is contemplated that extensive urbanized areas may be explored for
oil by directional drilling methods by which surface drilling and production operations are limited to a few small, controlled drilling sites so located and
spaced as to cause the least detriment to the community and to the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Article shall, for the purposes of this Article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
Section:
CONTROLLED DRILLING SITE: That particular location upon which surface operations incident to oil well drilling or deepening and the production of oil or
gas may be permitted under the terms of this Chapter 15, pursuant to a permit obtained; and by virtue of a variance granted by the Zoning Ordinance.
URBANIZED AREAS: Shall refer to any improved or vacant property in residential, business or light industrial zones, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance
of the City, Title 15 of this Code. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-3: CREATION OF DISTRICTS; APPLICATION:
A. Governing Provisions:
1. The provisions of this Article shall apply to the creation of all oil drilling districts in urbanized areas. The provisions of the Zoning Ordinance relating
to variances shall govern the procedure relative to the creation of oil drilling districts in urbanized areas. In addition to the procedure set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance relating to variances, the City Planning Commission shall, by written resolution, find that the property involved is in an "urbanized
area" as herein defined, and the resolution shall contain a statement setting forth the physical improvements, amount of land subdivided, zoning and
other pertinent considerations upon which the finding is based.
2. Where uncertainty exists as to whether a particular area shall be considered urbanized, any person contemplating filing a petition for the creation of
an oil drilling district may, prior to the filing thereof, request the Planning Commission to determine the status of the area sought to be included in the
district. The Planning Commission shall thereafter, by written resolution, determine the status of the area, based upon the considerations mentioned
in this Section, and in the resolution shall state the facts upon which the determination is based.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 353/581
B. Authority Of Applicant; District Boundaries: Each application for the creation of an oil drilling district under the provisions of this Article shall contain a
statement that the applicant has the proprietary or contractual authority to drill for and produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances under the
surface of at least fifty one percent (51%) of the property to be included in the district. The district described in the application shall be not less than
twenty (20) acres in area, including all streets, ways and alleys within the boundaries thereof, and shall be substantially compact in area, and the
boundaries thereof shall follow public streets, ways or alleys so far as may be practicable. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-4: STANDARD CONDITIONS:
All oil drilling districts established under the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the conditions in the following subsections:
A. Minimum Area; Location: Each district shall not be less than twenty (20) acres in area, including all streets, ways and alleys within the boundaries
thereof; provided further, that if a proposed district is not adjacent to an existing district, that the area in between shall be of such size as to allow a
suitable future district to be formed.
B. Site Number And Area:
1. Not more than one controlled drilling site shall be permitted for each twenty (20) acres in any district and the site shall not be larger than two (2)
acres when used to develop a district approximating the minimum size; provided, however, that where the site is to be used for the development of
larger oil drilling districts or where the Planning Commission and City Council require that more than one oil drilling district be developed from one
controlled drilling site, the site may, at the discretion of the Planning Commission and City Council, be increased by not more than two (2) acres for
each twenty (20) acres included in the district.
2. An alternative standard of locating drilling sites may be employed in any part of the urbanized areas where permanent building improvements do not
occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the property within a radius of four hundred feet (400') from any proposed drilling site; provided further, that
drilling sites for individual wells as provided in this subsection shall be located not closer than four hundred feet (400') to any other well; and,
provided further, that individual wells thus drilled shall not exceed one to each five (5) acres comprising any drilling area as defined in this subsection.
C. Well Number: The number of wells which may be drilled from any controlled drilling site shall not exceed one well to each five (5) acres in the district to
be exploited from the site.
D. Drilling Variance: Each applicant for a variance to drill for and produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances on a controlled drilling site must have
the proprietary or contractual authority to drill for oil under the surface of at least fifty one percent (51%) of the property in the district to be exploited.
E. Property Owner Participation:
1. Concurrently with the filing of an application for the establishment of an oil drilling district, the applicant shall execute and file in favor of each owner
of lands within the district for which the application is made and who is not then a party to the oil and gas lease, operating agreement or other
contract under which the applicant claims the right to conduct oil development operations, a written offer giving to each owner the right to participate
in the proceeds of the production by exercising either of the following options:
a. To join within one year from the date thereof in the execution of the oil and gas lease, operating agreement or other contract under which applicant
claims the right to conduct oil drilling operations within the district; or
b. At any time prior to the commencement of drilling operations in connection with the first well to give applicant written notice of owner's election to
participate with applicant in the development and operations in the district as a tenant in common and agree to advance his pro rata share of the
cost of the drilling and development operations, owner's interest to be computed on the basis that the square foot area of his particular lot or parcel
of land bears to the total square foot area of the district.
2. The offer hereby required must remain open for acceptance for a period of one year after the granting of the variance. During the period the offer is
in effect, the applicant, or his successor in interest, shall impound all royalties to which the owners or any of them may become entitled in a bank or
trust company in the State with proper provisions for payment to the record owners of property in the district who had not signed the lease at the time
the variance was granted, but who accept the offer in writing within the one year period. Any such royalties remaining in any bank or trust company
at the time the offer expires, which are not due or payable as hereinabove provided, shall be paid pro rata to those owners who, at the time of the
expiration, are otherwise entitled to share in the proceeds of the production.
F. Bond: Each applicant to whom a variance is granted under this Article shall post with the City Planning Commission a satisfactory corporate surety bond
in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in favor of the City, conditioned upon the performance by the applicant of each and all of the conditions,
provisions, restrictions and requirements of this Article, and all additional conditions, restrictions or requirements that are imposed by the Planning
Commission and City Council. No extension of time that may be granted by the Planning Commission and City Council, or any change of specifications
or requirements that may be approved or required by them or by any other officer or department of the City or any other alteration, modification or
waiver affecting any of the obligations of the grantee made by any City authority or by any other power or authority whatsoever shall be deemed to
exonerate either the grantee or the surety on any bond posted pursuant to this Article. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-5: APPLICATIONS FOR VARIANCES:
Applications for variances to create controlled drilling sites and to permit the drilling for and production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances thereon
shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance relating to variances. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-6: VARIANCE CONDITIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 354/581
In granting a variance to drill for oil in any district created under this Article, the City Planning Commission and the City Council shall include in the
variance all conditions and limitations designated in or required by the ordinance enacted by the City Council in creating the district, and in addition
thereto, the City Planning Commission and the City Council may include any other conditions or limitations not in conflict therewith which they may deem
appropriate in order to give proper effect to the stated purposes of this Article. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-7: OPTIONAL CONDITIONS:
For the guidance and convenience of the Planning Commission and the City Council, certain optional conditions, most likely to be required, are
enumerated:
A. Drilling Commencement And Completion: Drilling operations shall be commenced within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the variance or
within such additional period as the City Planning Commission and the City Council may, for good cause, allow, and thereafter shall be prosecuted
diligently to completion, or else abandoned strictly as required by law and the premises restored to their original condition as nearly as practicable so to
do. If a producing well is not secured within twelve (12) months, the well shall be abandoned and the premises restored to its original condition as
nearly as practicable so to do. The City Planning Commission and the City Council shall, for good cause, allow additional time for the completion of the
well.
B. Equipment; Mufflers: An internal combustion engine or steam-driven equipment may be used in the drilling of the well and, if an internal combustion
engine or steam-driven equipment is used, mufflers shall be installed on the mud pumps and engines.
C. Electrical Power: Pumping and other power operations (other than drilling) shall at all times be carried on only by electrical power and such power shall
not be generated on the controlled drilling site or in the district.
D. Multiple Well Drilling: Drilling operations shall be carried on or conducted in connection with only one well at a time in any one such district, and the well
shall be brought in or abandoned before operations for the drilling of another well are commenced; provided, however, that the City Planning
Commission and the City Council may permit the drilling of more than one well at a time after the discovery well has been brought in.
E. Reduction Of Annoying Factors: All oil drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable,
dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for and the production of oil, gas
and other hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they may become, from
time to time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance.
F. Screening: All tools, pipe and other equipment used in connection with any production operations, when conducted under the provisions of subsection
13-14A-4B1 of this Article, shall be screened from view.
G. Time For Moving Materials Or Equipment: No materials, equipment, tools or pipe used for either drilling or production operations shall be delivered to or
removed from the controlled drilling site, except between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day, except in case of
emergency incident to unforeseen drilling or production operations.
H. Fire Extinguishers: Fire extinguishers as approved by the Fire Department, and of sufficient number as required by the Fire Department, shall be
maintained on the premises at all times during the drilling and production operations.
I. Removal Of Equipment After Completion Of Well: Within sixty (60) days after the drilling of each well has been completed, and the well placed on
production, the derrick, all boilers and all other drilling equipment shall be entirely removed from the premises, unless such derrick and appurtenant
equipment is to be used within a reasonable time limit determined by the City Planning Commission and the City Council for the drilling of another well
on the same controlled drilling site.
J. Building To House Production Equipment: No oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substance may be produced from any well permitted under the provisions of
subsection 13-14A-4B1 of this Article, unless all equipment necessarily incident to the production is completely enclosed within a building, the plans for
the building to be approved by the Department of Building. This building shall be of a permanent type, of attractive design and constructed in a manner
that will eliminate as far as practicable, dust, noise, noxious odors and vibrations or other conditions which are offensive to the senses, and shall be
equipped with such devices as are necessary to eliminate the objectionable features mentioned above. The architectural treatment of the exterior of the
building shall also be subject to the approval of the City Planning Commission and the City Council.
K. Screening Equipment: No oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances may be produced from any well permitted unless all equipment necessarily incident
to the production is appropriately screened. A plot plan showing the type and extent of the screening shall be subject to the approval of the City
Planning Commission and the City Council.
L. Underground Pipeline: There shall be no tanks or other facilities for the storage of oil erected or maintained on the premises and all oil produced shall
be transported from the drilling site by means of an underground pipeline, without venting products to the atmospheric pressure at the production site.
M. Production Tanks: Not more than two (2) production tanks shall be installed for each well being drilled, neither one of which shall have a rated capacity
in excess of one thousand (1,000) barrels. The plans for the tanks, including the plot plan showing the location thereof on the property, shall be
submitted to and approved in writing by the Planning Commission and the City Council before the tanks and appurtenances are located on the
premises, and the tanks and appurtenances shall be kept painted and maintained in good condition at all times.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 355/581
N. Protection And Screening Of Production Tanks: Any production tank extending above the surface of the ground shall be reasonably screened by
appropriate planting, and shall be effectively protected by surrounding dykes having a capacity within the enclosed area not less than the capacity of
the tanks surrounded.
O. Refinery, Dehydrating Or Absorption Plant: No refinery, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on
the premises at any time.
P. Signs: No sign shall be constructed, erected, maintained or placed on the premises or any part thereof, except those required by law or ordinance to be
displayed in connection with the drilling or maintenance of the well.
Q. Toilet And Washing Facilities: Suitable and adequate sanitary toilet and washing facilities shall be installed and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
R. Landscaping: The controlled drilling site or any part thereof shall be adequately landscaped, except for those portions occupied by any required
structure, appurtenance or driveway, and all such landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Plans showing the type and extent of
the landscaping shall first be submitted to and approved by the City Planning Commission and the City Council.
S. Insurance: The holder of the variance, his successors and assigns, must at all times be insured to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) against liability in tort arising from the drilling, or production or activities or operations incident thereto, conducted or carried on under the
variance or by virtue thereof. The policy of insurance, which may include self-insurance, issued pursuant thereto shall be subject to the approval of the
City Attorney, and duplicates shall be furnished to him. Each such policy shall be conditioned or endorsed to cover such agents, lessees or
representatives of the variance holder as may actually conduct drilling, production or incidental operations permitted by the variance. (Ord. 312, 5-7-
1947)
13-14A-8: DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR ZONE VARIANCE:
The City Planning Commission and City Council may deny any application for a zone variance to create a controlled drilling site if they find that there is
available and reasonably obtainable in the same district or in an adjacent or nearby district within a reasonable distance, one or more other locations
where controlled drilling could be conducted with greater safety and security, with appreciably less harm to other property, or with greater conformity to the
zoning plans of the City. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-9: EXISTING WELLS EXCEPTED:
The provisions of this Article are not applicable to wells existing prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-10: LOCATION OF SITE NEAR PUBLIC WAYS:
The "controlled drilling site" as defined in Section 13-14A-2 of this Article shall not be so located as to include any portion of any dedicated public alley or
street, nor shall it be so located as to include any area contained within the limits of any street, alley or any other public area when designated as such in
the Master Plan or Official Plan of the City. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
13-14A-11: SUPPLEMENTAL TO LAND USE PLAN:
The provisions of this Article are supplemental to the Land Use Plan of the City, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 312, 5-7-1947)
Chapter 15
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
13-15-1: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition, published
by the International Council Of Building Officials is adopted by reference. One true copy of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, is
on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1535, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 16
POSTDISASTER ASSESSMENT STANDARDS
13-16-1: POSTDISASTER ASSESSMENT STANDARDS ADOPTED:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the procedures for postearthquake safety evaluation of buildings (ATC-20)
including appendices A through F, and addendum (ATC-20-2) including appendices A and B, published by the Applied Technology Council, is adopted by
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 356/581
reference, subject to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth below. One true copy of ATC-20 and ATC-20-2, are on file in the office of the
building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1536, 12-6-2016)
13-16-2: POSTDISASTER ASSESSMENT:
Chapter 1 Post Disaster Safety Assessment Placards
Section 1-1 Intent:
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any disaster. The chapter
further authorizes the building safety division, as well as authorized representatives of the division, to post the appropriate placard at each entry point
of a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.
Section 1-2 Application Of Provisions:
The provisions of this article are applicable following each disaster for which a state of emergency has been declared by the city council, state, or
federal government, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city.
Section 1-3 Definition:
Safety Assessment: Means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining whether continued
occupancy should be permitted following a disaster.
Section 1-4 Placards:
A. The following are descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate whether buildings or structures may be occupied after
a disaster. The format of the placard is provided in the "Post Disaster Safety Assessment Plan" published by the California governor's office of
emergency services.
1. Green "Inspected - Lawful Occupancy Permitted" is to be posted on any building or structure where no apparent structural hazard has been
found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.
2. Yellow "Limited Entry" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged where the damage has resulted in some form of
restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard shall note in general terms the type of damage encountered.
3. Red "Unsafe - Do Not Enter Or Occupy" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy
poses a threat to life or safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstances except as
authorized in writing by the building safety department. El Segundo city approved safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these
buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard shall note in
general terms the type of damage encountered.
B. The name of the department, its address and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.
C. Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard shall not be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized
representative of the city of El Segundo building safety division.
Chapter 2 Post-Disaster Demolition
Section 2-1 Intent:
This chapter establishes demolition criteria for all buildings and structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been
declared by the city council, state, or federal government, to the degree where demolition is a viable alternative to repair.
Section 2-2 Application Of Provisions:
The provisions of this article are applicable following each disaster for which a local emergency has been declared by the city council, state, or
federal government, to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city.
Section 2-3 Definitions:
Condemn And Condemned: Shall also mean no person shall enter the building or structure for any reason without the express written permission
of the director of planning and building safety or his designee.
Event: Any occurrence, which results in the declaration of an emergency, and shall include but not limited to, fires, wind storms, earthquakes and
floods.
Section 2-4 Demolition Criteria:
A. If after the event, and during any state of emergency, the director of planning and building safety determines that any building or structure poses
an imminent threat to public health and safety and that protection of the public health and safety requires immediate demolition of the building or
structure, or a portion of a building or structure, the director or his designee shall, without contacting the owner or providing a hearing to the
property owner, order that said building or structure be demolished immediately. Upon the order of the director or designee, the city shall
immediately demolish said building or structure. Such demolition shall be performed in the interest of public health and safety without
condemnation hearings otherwise required by the El Segundo municipal code.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 357/581
B. If after the event, the director of planning and building safety determines that any building or structure poses a hazard, but not an imminent
threat to the public health and safety, the director or his designee shall notify the building owner of such determination, and the reasons thereof
by certified mail return receipt deposited in the United States mail no later than five days after the determination is made. The notice shall set
forth the date, time, and place of a hearing which the director or his designee shall conduct, and also state that during the hearing the building
owner may present any evidence to explain why the building or structure should not be condemned. The decision of the director or his designee
to condemn the building or structure unless all required repairs are made shall be final. In making the final decision, the director or his designee
shall consider: 1) all evidence presented at the hearing by the owner or his or her representative; 2) the nature of the hazard presented by the
building or structure; and 3) the likelihood of personal injury or death occurring if the building or structure is not condemned.
C. For any building or structure which the owner has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or owner's representative, shall follow the
established procedures for securing a demolition permit.
(Ord. 1536, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 17
HOUSING CODE
13-17-1: ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM HOUSING CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the uniform housing code, 1997 edition, published by the International Conference
Of Building Officials ("UHC") is adopted by reference. One true copy of the UHC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public
inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1537, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 18
EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
13-18-1: PURPOSE:
A. Public Safety: The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects
of earthquakes on unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings constructed before 1934. Such buildings have been widely recognized for their
sustaining of life hazardous damage as a result of partial or complete collapse during past moderate to strong earthquakes.
B. Seismic Resistance: The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of
life loss or injury and will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to an existing building which complies with these
standards. This chapter shall not require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems to be altered unless they constitute a hazard to
life or property.
C. Identification And Classification: This chapter provides systematic procedures and standards for identification and classification of unreinforced masonry
bearing wall buildings based on their present use. Priorities, time periods and standards are also established under which these buildings are required
to be structurally analyzed and anchored. Where the analysis determines deficiencies, this chapter requires the building to be strengthened or
demolished. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-2: SCOPE:
A. Application Of Chapter: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings constructed or under construction prior to March 20, 1933, or for which
a building permit was issued prior to March 20, 1933, which on the effective date hereof have "unreinforced masonry bearing walls" as defined herein.
B. Exception: This chapter shall not apply to detached one- or two-family dwellings and detached apartment houses containing fewer than five (5) dwelling
units and used solely for residential purposes. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the applicable definitions in sections 2302 and 2312 of the building code of the city, and the following shall apply:
BUILDING CODE, CITY OF LOS ANGELES: Shall refer to the 1985 Los Angeles city building code.
DIVISION OF BUILDING SAFETY: Shall refer to the building and safety division of the development services department of the city of El Segundo.
ESSENTIAL BUILDING: Any building housing a hospital or other medical facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas, and those structures which
are necessary for emergency postearthquake operations.
HIGH RISK BUILDINGS: Any building not classified an essential building having an occupant load of one hundred (100) occupants or more.
Exception: A high risk building shall not include the following:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 358/581
A. Any building having exterior walls braced with masonry cross walls or wood frame cross walls spaced less than forty feet (40') apart in each story.
Cross walls shall be full story height with a minimum length of one and one-half (11/2) times the story height.
B. Any building used for its intended purpose, as determined by the division, for less than twenty (20) hours per week.
LOW RISK BUILDING: Any building not classified an essential building having an occupant load of less than twenty (20) occupants.
MEDIUM RISK BUILDING: Any building not classified as a high risk building or an essential building having an occupant load of twenty (20) occupants or
more.
UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL: A masonry wall having all of the following characteristics:
A. Provides the vertical support for a floor or roof.
B. The total superimposed load is over one hundred (100) pounds per linear foot.
C. The area of reinforcing steel is less than fifty percent (50%) of that required by section 2407 of the building code of the city. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990;
amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-4: RATING CLASSIFICATIONS:
A. Ratings Established: The rating classifications as exhibited in section 13-18-10, table 88-A of this chapter, are hereby established and each building
within the scope of this chapter shall be placed in one such rating classification by the division of building safety. The total occupant load of the entire
building shall be used to determine the rating classification.
B. Exceptions: For the purpose of this chapter, portions of buildings constructed to act independently when resisting seismic forces may be placed in
separate rating classifications. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Structural Analysis: The owner of each building within the scope of this chapter shall cause a structural analysis to be made of the building by a civil or
structural engineer or architect licensed by the state, and if the building does not meet the minimum earthquake standards specified in this chapter, the
owner shall cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such standards or cause the building to be demolished.
B. Time Limits: The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall comply with the requirements set forth above by submitting to the
development services department, building safety division, for review within the stated time limits:
1. Within two hundred seventy (270) days after the service of the order, a structural analysis shall be made by a civil or structural engineer or architect
licensed by the state. Such analysis, which is subject to approval by the division of building safety, shall demonstrate that the building meets the
minimum requirements of this chapter; or
2. Within two hundred seventy (270) days after the service of the order, the structural analysis and plans for the proposed structural alterations of the
building necessary to comply to the minimum requirements of this chapter; or
3. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after service of the order, plans for the installation of wall anchors in accordance with the requirements
specified in subsection 13-18-7C of this chapter; or
4. Within two hundred seventy (270) days after the service of the order, plans for the demolition of the building.
C. Obtain Building Permit; Complete Work: After plans are submitted and approved by the division of building safety, the owner shall obtain a building
permit, commence and complete the required construction or demolition within the time limits set forth in section 13-18-10, table 88-B of this chapter.
These time limits shall begin to run from the date the order is served in accordance with subsections 13-18-6A and B of this chapter.
D. Extended Time Limits: Owners electing to comply with subsection B3 of this section are also required to comply with subsection B2 or B4 of this
section; provided, however, that the two hundred seventy (270) day period provided for in such subsections B2 and B4 of this section and the time
limits for obtaining a building permit, commencing construction and completing construction for complete structural alterations or building demolition set
forth in section 13-18-10, table 88-B of this chapter, shall be extended in accordance with in section 13-18-10, table 88-C of this chapter. Each such
extended time limit, except the time limit for commencing construction, shall begin to run from the date the order is served in accordance with
subsection 13-18-6B of this chapter. The time limit for commencing construction shall commence to run from the date the building permit is issued.
(Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-6: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Service Of Order: The division shall issue an order, as provided in subsection B of this section, to the owner of each building within the scope of this
chapter in accordance with the minimal time periods for service of such orders set forth in section 13-18-10, table 88-C of this chapter. The minimum
time period for the service of such orders shall be measured from the effective date of this chapter. The division shall, upon receipt of a written request
from the owner, order a building to comply with this chapter prior to the normal service date for such building set forth in this section.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 359/581
B. Contents Of Order: The order shall be in writing and shall be served either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown on the
last equalized assessment, and upon the person, if any, in apparent charge or control of the building. The order shall specify that the building has been
determined by the division to be within the scope of this chapter and, therefore, is required to meet the minimum seismic standards of this chapter. The
order shall specify the rating classification of the building and shall be accompanied by a copy of section 13-18-5 of this chapter, which sets forth the
owner's alternatives and time limits for compliance.
C. Appeal Form Order:
1. The owner or person in charge or control of the building may appeal the division's initial determination that the building is within the scope of this
chapter to the board of examiners and appeals. Such appeal shall be filed with the building official within sixty (60) days from the service date of the
order described in subsection B of this section. Any such appeal shall be decided by the board of examiners and appeals no later than sixty (60)
days after the date that the appeal is filed. Such appeal shall be made in writing upon appropriate forms provided therefor by the division, and the
grounds thereof shall be stated clearly and concisely.
2. Appeals or requests for slight modifications from any other determinations, orders or actions by the division pursuant to this chapter shall be made in
accordance with procedures established in chapter 1 of this title.
D. Recordation:
1. At the time that the division serves the aforementioned order, the division shall file with the office of the county recorder a certificate stating that the
subject building is within the scope of this chapter. The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to structurally analyze the
building and to structurally alter or demolish it where compliance with this chapter is not exhibited.
2. If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the scope of this chapter, or is structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces
required by this chapter as a result of structural alterations or an analysis, the division shall file with the office of the county recorder a certificate
terminating the status of the subject building as being classified within the scope of this chapter.
E. Enforcement: If the owner or other person in charge or control of the subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the division pursuant to
this chapter within any of the time limits set forth in section 13-18-5 of this chapter, the division shall order that the entire building be vacated and that
the building remain vacated until such order has been complied with. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within ninety (90) days
after the date the building has been ordered vacated or such additional time as may have been granted by the board of examiners and appeals, the
building official may order its demolition in accordance with the provisions of section 13-18-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-
6-2016)
13-18-7: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN:
A. General:
1. Every structure within the scope of this chapter shall be analyzed and constructed to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces assumed to act
nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axes of the structure in accordance with the following equation:
v = IKCSW - - - (88-1)
2. The value of IKCSW need not exceed the values set forth in section 13-18-10, table 88-D of this chapter, based on the applicable rating classification
of the building.
B. Lateral Forces On Elements Of Structures:
1. Equation:
a. Parts or portions of structures shall be analyzed and designed for lateral loads in accordance with subsection A of this section but not less than the
value from the following equation:
Fp = ICp SWp - - - (88.2)
b. For the provisions of this subsection, the product of IS need not exceed the values as set forth in section 13-18-10, table 88-E of this chapter.
2. Exception: Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not having a rating classification of I may be analyzed in accordance with section 13-18-8 of this
chapter.
The value of Cp need not exceed the values set forth in section 13-18-10, table 88-F of this chapter.
C. Anchorage And Interconnection: Anchorage and interconnection of all parts, portions and elements of the structure shall be analyzed and designed for
lateral forces in accordance with section 13-18-10, table 88-F of this chapter, and the equation Fp = Cp SWp as modified by section 13-18-10, table 88-
E of this chapter. Minimum anchorage of masonry walls to each floor or roof shall resist a minimum force of two hundred (200) pounds per linear foot
acting normal to the wall at the level of the floor or roof.
D. Level Of Required Repair: Alterations and repairs required to meet the provisions of this chapter shall comply with all other applicable requirements of
this code unless specifically provided for in this chapter.
E. Required Analysis:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 360/581
1. General: Except as modified herein, the analysis and design relating to the structural alteration of existing structures within the scope of this chapter
shall be in accordance with the analysis specified in chapter 23 of the building code of the city.
2. Continuous Stress Path: A complete, continuous stress path from every part or portion of the structure to the ground shall be provided for the
required horizontal forces.
3. Positive Connections: All parts, portions or elements of the structure shall be interconnected by positive means.
F. Analysis Procedure:
1. General: Stresses in materials and existing construction utilized to transfer seismic forces from the ground to parts or portions of the structure shall
conform to those permitted by the code and those materials and types of construction specified in section 13-18-8 of this chapter.
2. Connections: Materials and connectors used for interconnection of parts and portions of the structure shall conform to the code. Nails may be used
as part of an approved connector.
3. Unreinforced Masonry Walls:
a. Except as modified herein, unreinforced masonry walls shall be analyzed as specified in sections 2406 and 2409 to withstand all vertical loads as
specified in chapter 23 of the building code of the city in addition to the seismic forces required by this chapter.
b. No allowable tension stress will be permitted in unreinforced masonry walls. Walls not capable of resisting the required design forces specified in
this division shall be strengthened or shall be removed and replaced.
4. Exceptions:
a. Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not classified as a rating classification I pursuant to section 13-18-10, table 88-A of this chapter, may be
analyzed in accordance with section 13-18-8 of this chapter.
b. Unreinforced masonry walls which carry no design loads other than their own weight may be considered as veneer if they are adequately
anchored to new supporting elements.
G. Combination Of Vertical And Seismic Forces:
1. New Materials: All new materials introduced into the structure to meet the requirements of this section which are subjected to combined vertical and
horizontal forces shall comply with the building code of the city.
2. Existing Materials: When stresses in existing lateral force-resisting elements are due to a combination of dead loads plus seismic loads, the
allowable working stress specified in the code may be increased one hundred percent (100%). However, no increase will be permitted in the stresses
allowed in section 13-18-8 of this chapter and the stresses in members due only to seismic and dead loads shall not exceed the values permitted by
section 2303(d) of the building code of the city.
3. Allowable Reduction Of Bending Stress By Vertical Load: In calculating tensile fiber stress due to seismic forces required by this chapter, the
maximum tensile fiber stress may be reduced by the full direct stress due to vertical dead loads. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-8: MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION:
A. General: All materials permitted by this code, including their appropriate allowable stresses and those existing configurations of materials specified
herein, may be utilized to meet the requirements of this chapter.
B. Existing Materials:
1. Unreinforced Masonry Walls:
a. Unreinforced masonry walls analyzed in accordance with this section may provide vertical support for roof and floor construction and resistance to
lateral loads. The bonding of such walls shall be as specified in section 2403(a) of the building code of the city of El Segundo.
b. Tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may be neglected if the wall does not exceed the height or length to thickness ratio and
the in-plane shear stresses due to seismic loads as set forth in section 13-18-10, table 88-G of this chapter.
c. If the wall height-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits, the wall may be supported by vertical bracing members designed in accordance with
chapter 23 of the building code of the city. The deflection of such bracing member at design loads shall not exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the wall
thickness.
Exception: The wall may be supported by flexible vertical bracing members designed in accordance with section 13-18-7 of this chapter if the
deflection at design loads is not less than one-fourth (1/4) nor more than one-third (1/3) of the wall thickness.
d. All vertical bracing members shall be attached to floor and roof construction for their design loads independently of required wall anchors.
Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the unsupported height of the wall nor ten feet (10').
e. The wall height may be measured vertically to bracing elements other than a floor or roof. Spacing of the bracing elements and wall anchors shall
not exceed six feet (6'). Bracing elements shall be detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall by components of vertical
displacements of the floor or roof.
2. Existing Roof, Floors, Walls, Footings And Wood Framing: Existing materials, including wood shear walls utilized in the described configuration, may
be used as part of the lateral load resisting system; provided, that the stresses in these materials do not exceed the values shown in section 13-18-
10, table 88-H of this chapter.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 361/581
C. Strengthening Of Existing Materials: New materials, including wood shear walls, may be utilized to strengthen portions of the existing seismic resisting
system in the described configurations; provided, that the stresses do not exceed the values shown in section 13-18-10, table 88-I of this chapter.
D. Alternate Materials: Alternate materials, designs and methods of construction may be approved by the division in accordance with the provisions of
section 105 of the uniform building code.
E. Minimum Acceptable Quality Of Existing Unreinforced Masonry Walls:
1. General Provisions: All unreinforced masonry walls utilized to carry vertical loads and seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the wall plane
shall be tested as specified in this subsection. All masonry quality shall equal or exceed the minimum standards established herein or shall be
removed and replaced by new materials. Alternate methods of testing may be approved by the division. The quality of mortar in all masonry walls
shall be determined by performing in-place shear tests or by testing eight inch (8") diameter cores. Nothing shall prevent pointing with mortar of all
the masonry wall joints before the tests are first made. Prior to any pointing, the mortar joints must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and
deteriorated mortar. Mortar for pointing shall be type S or N except masonry cements shall not be used. All preparation and mortar pointing shall be
done under the continuous inspection of a registered special inspector. At the conclusion of the inspection, the inspector shall submit a written report
to the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the building setting forth the result of the work inspected. Such report
shall be submitted to the division for approval as part of the structural analysis. All testing shall be performed in accordance with the requirements
specified in this subsection by a testing agency approved by the division. An accurate record of all such tests and their location in the building shall
be recorded and these results shall be submitted to the division for approval as part of the structural analysis.
2. Number And Location Of Tests: The minimum number of tests shall be two (2) per wall or line of wall elements resisting a common force, or one per
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of wall surface, with a minimum of eight (8) tests in any case. The exact test or core location shall be
determined at the building site by the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the subject building.
3. In-Place Shear Tests: The bed joints of the outer wythe of the masonry shall be tested in shear by laterally displacing a single brick relative to the
adjacent bricks in that wythe. The opposite head joint of the brick to be tested shall be removed and cleaned prior to testing. The minimum quality
mortar in eighty percent (80%) of the shear tests shall not be less than the total of thirty (30) psi plus the axial stress in the wall at the point of the
test. The shear stress shall be based on the gross area of both bed joints and shall be that at which movement of the brick is first observed.
4. Core Tests: A minimum number of mortar test specimens equal to the number of required cores shall be prepared from the cores and tested as
specified herein. The mortar joint of the outer wythe of the masonry core shall be tested in shear by placing the circular core section in a
compression testing machine with the mortar bed joint rotated fifteen degrees (15°) from the axis of the applied load. The mortar joint tested in shear
shall have an average ultimate stress of twenty (20) psi based on the gross area. The average shall be obtained from the total number of cores
made. If test specimens cannot be made from cores taken, then the shear value shall be reported as zero.
F. Testing Of Shear Bolts:
1. One-fourth (1/4) of all new shear bolts and dowels embedded in unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested by a registered special inspector using a
torque calibrated wrench to the following minimum torques:
Bolts Or Dowels Foot-Pounds
1/2 inch diameter 40
5/8 inch diameter 50
3/4 inch diameter 60
2. No bolts exceeding three-fourths inch (3/4") shall be used. All nuts shall be installed over malleable iron or plate washers when bearing on wood and
heavy cut washers when bearing on steel.
G. Determination Of Allowable Stresses For Design Methods Based On Test Results:
1. Design Shear Values:
a. Design seismic in-plane shear stresses shall be substantiated by tests performed as specified in subsections E3 and E4 of this section.
b. Design stresses shall be related to test results obtained in accordance with section 13-18-10, table 88-J of this chapter. Intermediate values
between three (3) and ten (10) psi may be interpolated.
2. Design Compression And Tension Values: Compression stresses for unreinforced masonry having a minimum design shear value of three (3) psi
shall not exceed one hundred (100) psi. Design tension values for unreinforced masonry shall not be permitted.
H. Rod Anchors; Testing: Five percent (5%) of the existing rod anchors utilized as all or part of the required wall anchors shall be tested in pullout by an
approved testing laboratory. The minimum number tested shall be four (4) per floor, with two (2) tests at walls with joists framing into the wall and two
(2) tests at walls with joists parallel to the wall. The test apparatus shall be supported on the masonry wall at a minimum distance of the wall thickness
from the anchor tested. The rod anchor shall be given a preload of three hundred (300) pounds prior to establishing a datum for recording elongation.
The tension test load reported shall be recorded at one-eighth inch (1/8") relative movement of the anchor and the adjacent masonry surface. Results of
all tests shall be reported. The report shall include the test results as related to the wall thickness and joist orientation. The allowable resistance value
of the existing anchors shall be forty percent (40%) of the average of those tested anchors having the same wall thickness and joist orientation.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 362/581
I. Wall Anchorage; Testing: Qualification tests for devices used for wall anchorage shall be tested with the entire tension load carried on the enlarged head
at the exterior face of the wall. Bond on the part of the device between the enlarged head and the interior wall face shall be eliminated for the
qualification tests. The resistance value assigned the device shall be twenty percent (20%) of the average of the ultimate loads. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990;
amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-9: INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLAN:
A. General: In addition to the seismic analysis required elsewhere in this chapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of
the building shall determine and record the information required by this section on the approved plans.
B. Construction Details: The following requirements with appropriate construction details shall be made part of the approved plans:
1. All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof level by tension bolts through the wall as specified in section 13-18-10, table 88-I of this
chapter, or by approved equivalent at a maximum anchor spacing of six feet (6'). Anchors installed in accordance with section 91.810(q) of the city of
Los Angeles building code shall be accepted as conforming to this requirement.
All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at all floors with tension bolts through the wall or by existing rod anchors at a maximum anchor
spacing of six feet (6'). All existing rod anchors shall be secured to the joists to develop the required forces. The division may require testing to verify
the adequacy of the embedded ends of existing rod anchors. Tests when required shall conform to subsection 13-18-8H of this chapter.
When access to the exterior face of the masonry wall is prevented by proximity of an existing building, wall anchors conforming to section 13-18-10,
table 88-I, items 5 and 6 of this chapter, may be used.
Alternative devices to be used in lieu of tension bolts for masonry wall anchorage shall be tested as specified in subsection 13-18-8I of this chapter.
2. Diaphragm chord stresses of horizontal diaphragms shall be developed in existing materials or by addition of new materials.
3. Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported on masonry, ledges or columns shall be installed to support vertical loads of the
roof or floor members.
4. Parapets and exterior wall appendages not capable of resisting the forces specified in this chapter shall be removed, stabilized or braced to ensure
that the parapets and appendages remain in their original position.
5. All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall be pointed with type S or N mortar. Prior to any pointing, the wall surface must be
raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. All preparation and pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a
registered special inspector certified to inspect masonry or concrete. At the conclusion of the project, the inspector shall submit a written report to the
division setting forth the portion of work inspected.
6. Repair details of any cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry wall required to resist forces specified in this chapter.
C. Existing Construction: The following existing construction information shall be made part of the approved plans:
1. The type and dimensions of existing walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof members.
2. The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof.
3. The extent and type of parapet corrections which were performed in accordance with the building code of the city.
4. Accurately dimensioned floor plans and masonry wall elevations showing dimensioned openings, piers, wall thickness and heights.
5. The location of cracks or damaged portions of unreinforced masonry walls requiring repairs.
6. The type of interior wall surfaces and if reinstalling or anchoring of ceiling plaster is necessary.
7. The general condition of the mortar joints and if the joints need pointing. (Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-10: TABLES:
TABLE 88-A
RATING CLASSIFICATIONS
Type Of Building Classification
Essential building I
High risk building II
Medium risk building III
Low risk building IV
TABLE 88-B
TIME LIMITS FOR COMPLIANCE
Required Action Obtain Building Commence Complete
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 363/581
By Owner Permit Within Construction Within Construction Within
Complete structural alterations or building demolition 1 year 180 days1 3 years
Wall anchor installation 180 days 270 days 1 year
Note:
1. Measured from date of building permit issuance.
TABLE 88-C
SERVICE PRIORITIES AND EXTENDED TIME PROVISIONS
Rating Classification But Less Than 7 Years Minimum Time
Classification Load
Time If Wall
Anchors Are Installed
Periods For
Service Of Order
I
(Highest priority)
Any 1 year 0
II 100 or more 3 years 90 days
III 100 or more 5 years 1 year
More than 50 but less than 100 6 years 2 years
More than 19, but less than 51 6 years 3 years
IV
(Lowest priority)
Less than 20 7 years 4 years
TABLE 88-D
HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTORS BASED
ON RATING CLASSIFICATION
Rating Classification IKCSW
I
II
III
0.186
0.133
0.100
TABLE 88-E
HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTORS "IS"
FOR PARTS OR PORTIONS OF STRUCTURES
Rating Classification IS
I
II
III
1.50
1.00
0.75
TABLE 88-F
HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTOR "C" FOR PARTS OR PORTIONS OF
BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES
Part Or Portion Of Buildings
Direction Of Force
Value
Of C
Exterior bearing and nonbearing walls; interior bearing walls and partitions; interior nonbearing walls and partitions
over 10' in height; masonry fences over 6' in height
Normal to flat
surface
0.20
Cantilever parapet and other cantilever walls, except retaining walls Normal to flat
surface
1.00
Exterior and interior ornamentations and appendages Any direction 1.00
When connected to or a part of a building; towers, tanks, towers and tanks plus contents, racks over 8'3" in height
plus contents, chimneys, smokestacks and penthouses
Any direction 0.20
When connected to or a part of a building: Rigid and rigidly mounted equipment and machinery not required for
continued operation of essential occupancies
Any horizontal
direction
0.20
Tanks plus effective contents resting on the ground Any direction 0.12
Floors and roofs acting as diaphragms In the plane of the 0.12
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 364/581
diaphragm
Prefabricated structural elements, other than walls, with force applied at center of gravity or assembly Any horizontal
direction
0.30
Connections for exterior panels or elements Any direction 2.00
Notes:
See subsection 13-18-7B of this chapter for use of Cp.
When located in the upper portion of any building with a ratio of 5 to 1 or greater, the value shall be increased by 50 percent.
For flexible and flexibly mounted equipment and machinery, the appropriate values for C shall be determined with consideration given to both the
dynamic properties of the equipment and machinery and to the building or structure in which it is placed.
The Wp for storage racks shall be the weight of the racks plus contents. The value of C for racks over 2 storage support levels in height shall be 0.16
for the levels below the top 2 levels.
The design of the equipment and machinery and their anchorage is an integral part of the design and specification of such equipment and machinery.
The structure to which the equipment or machinery is mounted shall be capable of resisting the anchorage forces (see also section 2312(g) of the
building code of the city of El Segundo).
Floor and roofs acting as diaphragms shall be designed for a minimum force resulting from a Cp of 112 applied to Wp unless a greater force results
from the distribution of lateral forces in accordance with section 2312(e) of the building code of the city of El Segundo.
TABLE 88-G
ALLOWABLE VALUE OF HEIGHT-THICKNESS RATIO OP UNREINFORCED
MASONRY WALLS WITH MINIMUM QUALITY MORTAR
Buildings With Crosswalls As Defined By Section 91.8803 All Other Buildings
Walls of one-story buildings 16 13
First story wall of multi-story buildings 16 15
Walls in top story of multi-story buildings 14 9
All other walls 16 13
Notes:
Minimum quality mortar shall be determined by laboratory testing in accordance with subsection 13-18-8E of this chapter.
This table is not applicable to buildings of rating classification I. Walls of buildings within rating classification I shall be analyzed in accordance with
subsection 13-18-7E of this chapter.
TABLE 88-H
VALUES FOR EXISTING MATERIALS
New Materials Or Configuration Of Materials Allowable Values
1.
Horizontal diaphragms:
a.
Roofs with straight sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing 100 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
b.
Roofs with diagonal sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing
400 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
c.
Floors with straight tongue and groove sheathing 150 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
d.
Floors with straight sheathing and finished wood flooring 300 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
e.
Floors and diagonal sheathing and finished wood flooring 450 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
f. Floors or roofs with straight sheathing and plaster applied to the joist or
rafters
Add 50 lbs. per foot to the allowable values for items 1a and
1c
2. Shear walls 100 lbs. per foot each side for seismic shear
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 365/581
Wood stud walls with lath and plaster
3.
Plain concrete footings f = 1,500 psi unless otherwise shown by tests
4.
Douglas fir wood Allowable stress same as no. 1 D. F.
5.
Reinforcing steel f = 18,000 lbs. per square inch maximum
6.
Structural steel f = 20,000 lbs. per square inch maximum
Notes:
Material must be sound and in good condition.
The wood lath and plaster must be reattached to existing joists or rafters in a manner approved by the division.
Stresses given may be increased for combinations of loads as specified in subsection 13-18-7G2 of this chapter.
TABLE 88-I
ALLOWABLE VALUES OF NEW MATERIALS USED
IN CONJUNCTION WITH EXISTING CONSTRUCTION
New Materials Or Configuration Of Materials Allowable Values
1.
Horizontal diaphragms: Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing
straight sheathing with ends of plywood sheets bearing on joists or rafters
and edges of plywood located on center of individual boards
100 lbs. per foot in table 25-J of the El Segundo city building code
for blocked diaphragms
2.
Shear walls:
a.
Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing wood studs. No
value shall be given to plywood applied over existing plaster or wood
sheathing
Same as values specified in table 25-K of the El Segundo city
building code
b.
Drywall or plaster applied directly over existing wood studs 75% of the values specified in table 47-I of the El Segundo city
building code
c.
Drywall or plaster applied to plywood sheathing over existing wood
studs
331/3% of the values specified in table 47-I of the El Segundo city
building code
3.
Shear bolts: Shear bolts and shear dowels embedded a minimum of 8"
into unreinforced masonry walls. Bolt centered in a 21/2" diameter hole
with drypack or nonshrink grout around circumference of bolt or dowel
100% of the values for plain masonry specified in table 24-J of the
El Segundo city building code. No values larger than those given
for 3/4" bolts shall be used
4.
Tension bolts: Tension bolts and tension dowels extending entirely
through unreinforced masonry walls secured with bearing plates on far
side of wall with at least 30 sq. in. of area
1,200 lbs. per bolt or dowel
5.
Wall anchors:
a.
Bolts extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 21/2" round plate
under the head. Install as specified for shear bolts. Spaced not closer
than 12" on centers
600 lbs. per bolt
b.
Bolts or dowels extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 21/2"
round plate under the head and drill at an angle of 221/2° to the
horizontal. Installed as specified for shear bolts
1,200 lbs. per bolt or dowel
6.
Infilled walls: Reinforced masonry infilled openings in existing
unreinforced masonry walls with keys or dowels to match reinforcing
Same as values specified for
unreinforced masonry walls
7.
Reinforced masonry: Masonry piers and walls reinforced per section
2407(c) of the El Segundo city building code
Same as values specified in table 14-H of the El Segundo city
building code
8.
Reinforced concrete: Concrete footings, walls and piers reinforced as
specified in division 26 of the El Segundo city building code and designed
for tributary loads
Same as values specified in table 24-H of the El Segundo city
building code
9.
Existing foundation loads: Foundation loads for structures exhibiting no
evidence of settlement
Calculated existing foundation loads due to maximum dead load
plus live load may be increased 25% for dead load, and may be
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 366/581
increased 50% for dead load plus seismic load required by this
chapter
Notes:
Bolts and dowels to be tested as specified in subsection 13-18-8F of this chapter.
Bolts and dowels to be 1/2 inch minimum in diameter.
Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electric rotary drill. Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchor and shear
bolt nuts.
TABLE 88-J
ALLOWABLE SHEAR STRESS FOR
TESTED UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS
80 Percent Of Test
Results In psi Not Less Than
Average Test
Results Of Cores In psi
Seismic In-Plane
Shear Based On Gross Area
30 plus axial stress 20 3 psi1
40 plus axial stress 27 4 psi1
50 plus axial stress 33 5 psi1
100 plus axial stress or more 67 or more 10 psi maximum1
Note:
1. Allowable shear stress may be increased by addition of 10 percent of axial stress due to the weight of the wall directly above.
(Ord. 1152, 3-6-1990; amd. Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-11: ADOPTION OF APPENDIX V; VOLUNTARY SEISMIC RETROFIT:
§ 13-18-V100: Voluntary Earthquake Hazard Reduction In Existing Reinforced Concrete And Reinforced Masonry Wall Buildings With Flexible
Diaphragms.
§ 13-18-V101: Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of
earthquakes on reinforced concrete and masonry wall buildings with flexible diaphragms designed under the building codes in effect before January
1, 1995. These buildings are potentially hazardous and prone to significant damage, including possible collapse, in a moderate to major earthquake.
These structures typically shelter large numbers of persons and property for retail, food markets, food distribution centers, warehousing, aerospace,
industrial/manufacturing and general business and office use. Their continued use after an earthquake is also essential to the local economy and its
post-earthquake recovery.
The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of loss of life or injury
on both subject and adjacent properties and will not necessarily prevent all earthquake damage to an existing building which complies with these
standards. This chapter cannot require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems to be altered unless they constitute a hazard
to life or property.
This chapter provides voluntary retrofit standards for deficient wall anchorage systems on structures that are not subject to the mandatory provisions
of this chapter. When fully followed, these standards will strengthen the portion of the structure that is most vulnerable to earthquake damage.
§ 13-18-V102: Scope.
The voluntary provisions of this chapter apply to existing buildings of the following types:
1. Cast-in-place reinforced concrete or masonry wall buildings with flexible diaphragms designed under building codes in effect before January 1,
1995.
2. Tilt-up concrete wall buildings with flexible diaphragms designed under the building codes in effect before January 1, 1995, but after January 1,
1976.
All existing reinforced masonry or concrete buildings with flexible diaphragms, including tilt-up concrete wall buildings, designed under the building
code in effect on or after January 1, 1995, must be designed in conformance with chapter 16 of the CBC.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 367/581
§ 13-18-V103: Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the applicable definitions in chapter 2, chapter 16, chapter 19 and chapter 23 of this code; chapter 1, chapter 3,
chapter 4, chapter 5, chapter 6 and chapter 11 of ASCE 7, and the following apply:
Anchorage System is the system of all structural elements and connections, which support the concrete or masonry wall in the lateral direction,
including diaphragms and subdiaphragms, wall anchorage and continuity or cross tie connectors in subdiaphragms and main diaphragms.
Commenced Construction is construction pursuant to a valid building permit that has progressed to the point that one of the called inspections as
required by the department has been made and the work for which the inspection has been called has been judged by the department to be
substantial and has been approved by the department.
Existing Building is an erected building for which a legal building permit and a certificate of occupancy have been issued.
Flexible Diaphragm is any diaphragm constructed of wood structural panel, diagonal or straight wood sheathing, metal decking without a structural
concrete topping, or horizontal rod bracing.
Historical Building is any building designated or currently in the process of being designated as a historical building by an appropriate federal, state
or city jurisdiction.
Reinforced Concrete Wall is a concrete wall that has 50 percent or more of the reinforcing steel required for reinforced concrete in chapter 19.
Reinforced Masonry Wall is a masonry wall that has 50 percent or more of the reinforcing steel required by chapter 21.
Retrofit is strengthening or structurally improving the lateral force resisting system of an existing building by alteration of existing or addition of new
structural elements.
Tilt-Up Concrete Wall is a form of precast concrete panel construction either cast in the horizontal position at the site and after curing, lifted and
moved into place in a vertical position, or cast off-site in a fabricator's shop.
§ 13-18-V104: Analysis And Design.
V104.1. Wall Panel Anchorage. Concrete and masonry walls must be anchored to all floors and roofs which provide lateral support for the wall. The
anchorage must provide a positive direct connection between the wall and floor or roof construction capable of resisting a horizontal force equal to 30
percent of the tributary wall weight for all buildings, and 45 percent of the tributary wall weight for essential buildings, or a minimum force of 250
pounds per linear foot of wall, whichever is greater. The required anchorage must be based on the tributary wall panel assuming simple supports at
floors and roof.
Exception: An alternate design may be approved by the building official when justified by well-established principles of mechanics.
V104.2. Special Requirements For Wall Anchors And Continuity Ties. The steel elements of the wall anchorage systems and continuity ties must
be designed by the allowable stress design method using a load factor of 1.7. The 1/3 stress increase permitted by chapter 16 cannot be permitted
for materials using allowable stress design methods. The strength design specified in chapter 19 using a load factor of 2.0 in lieu of 1.4 for
earthquake loading, must be used for the design of embedment in concrete. Wall anchors must be provided to resist out-of-plane forces,
independent of existing shear anchors.
Exception: Existing cast-in-place shear anchors may be used as wall anchors if the tie element can be readily attached to the anchors and if the
engineer or architect can establish tension values for the existing anchors through the use of approved as-built plans or testing, and through
analysis showing that the bolts are capable of resisting the total shear load while being acted upon by the maximum tension force due to seismic
loading. Criteria for analysis and testing must be determined by the building official.
Expansion anchors are not allowed without special approval of the building official. Attaching the edge of plywood sheathing to steel ledgers is not
considered as complying with the positive anchoring requirements of the code; and attaching the edge of steel decks to steel ledgers is not
considered as providing the positive anchorage of this code unless testing and analysis are performed, which establish shear values for the
attachment perpendicular to the edge of the deck.
V104.3. Development Of Anchor Loads Into The Diaphragm. Development of anchor loads into roof and floor diaphragms must comply with
chapter 12 of ASCE 7.
Exception: If continuously tied girders are present, then the maximum spacing of the continuity ties is the greater of the girder spacing or 24 feet
(7315 mm). In wood diaphragms, anchorage cannot be accomplished by use of toe nails or nails subject to withdrawal, nor must wood ledgers, top
plates or framing be used in cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension. The continuous ties required by chapter 12 of ASCE 7 must be in addition
to the diaphragm sheathing. Lengths of development of anchor loads in wood diaphragms must be based on existing field nailing of the sheathing
unless existing edge nailing is positively identified on the original construction plans or at the site. At reentrant corners, continuity collectors may be
required for existing return walls not designed as shear walls, to develop into the diaphragm a force equal to the lesser of the rocking or shear
capacity of the return wall, or the tributary shear but not exceeding the capacity of the diaphragm. Shear anchors for the return wall must be
commensurate with the collector force. If a truss or beam other than rafters or purlins is supported by the return wall or by a column integral with
the return wall, an independent secondary column is required to support the roof or floor members whenever rocking or shear capacity of the
return wall is governing.
V104.4. Anchorage At Pilasters. Anchorage of pilasters must be designed for the tributary wall anchoring load per section V104.1 of this code,
considering the wall as a two-way slab. The edge of the two-way slab must be considered "fixed" when there is continuity at pilasters, and
considered "pinned" at roof or floor levels. The pilasters or the walls immediately adjacent to the pilasters must be anchored directly to the roof
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 368/581
framing such that the existing vertical anchor bolts at the top of the pilasters are by-passed without causing tension or shear failure at the top of the
pilasters.
Exception: If existing vertical anchor bolts at the top of the pilasters are used for the anchorage, then additional exterior confinement must be
provided. The minimum anchorage at a floor or roof between the pilasters must be that specified in section V104.1 of this code.
V104.5. Symmetry. Symmetry of connectors in the anchorage system is required. Eccentricity may be allowed when it can be shown that all
components of forces are positively resisted and justified by calculations or tests.
V104.6. Minimum Roof Member Size. Wood members used to develop anchorage forces to the diaphragm must be of minimum nominal width for
new construction and replacement. All such members must be designed for gravity and earthquake forces as part of the wall anchorage system. For
existing structural members, the allowable stresses must be without the 1/3 stress increase per section V104.2.
V104.7. Combination Of Anchor Types. To repair and retrofit existing buildings, a combination of different anchor types of different behavior or
stiffness is prohibited. The capacity of the new and existing connectors cannot be added.
V104.8. Prohibited Anchors. Usage of connectors that were bent or stretched from the intended use is prohibited.
V104.9. Crack And Damage Repairs, Evaluation Of Existing Structural Alterations. The engineer or architect must report any observed
structural conditions and structural damage that have imminent life safety effects on the buildings and recommend repairs. This includes alterations
such as openings cut in existing wall panels without a building permit. Evaluations and repairs must be reviewed and approved by the building
official.
V104.10. Miscellaneous. Existing mezzanines relying on the concrete or masonry walls for vertical or lateral support must be anchored to the walls
for the tributary mezzanine load. Walls depending on the mezzanine for lateral support must be anchored per sections V104.1, V104.2 and V104.3 of
this code.
Exception: Existing mezzanines that have independent lateral and vertical support need not be anchored to the concrete or masonry walls.
Existing interior masonry or concrete walls not designed as shear walls, which extend to the floor above or to the roof diaphragm must also be
anchored for out-of-plane forces per section V104.1, V104.2 and V104.3 of this code. In the in-plane direction, the walls may be isolated or must
be developed into the diaphragm for a lateral force equal to the lesser of the rocking or shear capacity of the wall, or the tributary shear but not
exceeding the diaphragm capacity.
V104.11. Historical Buildings. Qualified historical buildings must be permitted to use alternate building standards or deviations from this chapter in
order to preserve their original or restored architectural elements and features.
§ 13-18-V105: Materials Of Construction.
All materials permitted by this code.
§ 13-18-V106: Information Required On Plans.
V106.1. General. In addition to the seismic analysis required elsewhere in this chapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic
analysis of the building must record the information required by this section on the approved plans.
V106.2. Information Required. The plans must accurately reflect the results of the engineering investigation and design and show all pertinent
dimensions and sizes for plan review and construction. The following must be provided:
1. Floor plans and roof plans must show the existing framing construction, diaphragm construction, proposed wall anchors, cross-ties and
collectors. Existing nailing, anchors, ties and collectors must also be shown on the plans if these are part of the design, and these structural
elements need to be verified in the field.
2. At elevations where there is alterations or damage, the details must show the roof and floor heights, dimensions of openings, location and extent
of existing damage, and proposed repair.
3. Typical concrete or masonry wall sections with wall thickness, height, and location of anchors must be provided.
4. Details must include the existing and new anchors and the method of development of anchor forces into the diaphragm framing; existing and
new cross-ties, existing and new or improved support of the roof and floor girders at pilasters or walls.
V106.3. Engineer's Or Architect's Statement. The responsible engineer or architect must state on the approved plans, the following:
1. "I am responsible for this building's seismic strengthening design of the tilt-up concrete wall anchorage system in compliance with the minimum
seismic resistance standards of chapter V1 of the California Building Code, as adopted by the El Segundo Municipal Code." or when applicable:
2. "The Registered Deputy Inspector, required as a condition of the use of structural design stresses requiring continuous inspection, will be
responsible to me, the California Licensed Engineer or Architect, as required by Section 1704 of the California Building Code, as adopted by the El
Segundo Municipal Code."
§ 13-18-V107: Required Building Maintenance.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 369/581
Every building within the scope of this chapter which has been analyzed to demonstrate compliance or structurally altered to comply with the
minimum earthquake standards in this chapter must be maintained in conformity with the requirements of this chapter in effect at the time of such
analysis or structural alteration.
TABLE NO. V1-A
RATING CLASSIFICATIONS
Classification Occupant Load
Essential n/a
Group I 300 or more
Group II 100 to 299
Group III 50 to 99
Group IV Less than 50
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-12: ADOPTION OF VOLUNTARY PRESCRIPTIVE PROVISIONS FOR SEISMIC STRENGTHENING OF CRIPPLE WALLS
AND SILL PLATE ANCHORAGE OF LIGHT, WOOD FRAME RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
§ 13-18-V200: Voluntary Prescriptive Provisions For Seismic Strengthening Of Cripple Walls And Sill Plate Anchorage Of Light, Wood-Frame Residential
Buildings. Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, chapter A3 of the California existing building code ("CEBC"), 2016 edition,
published at title 24, part 10, of the California code of regulations, is adopted by reference. One true copy of the CEBC, is on file in the office of the building
official and is available for public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-13: ADOPTION OF VOLUNTARY EARTHQUAKE RISK REDUCTION IN WOOD FRAME RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS WITH
SOFT, WEAK OR OPEN FRONT WALLS:
§ 13-18-V300: Voluntary Earthquake Risk Reduction In Wood-Frame Residential Buildings With Soft, Weak Or Open Front Walls. Pursuant to California
Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8, chapter A4 of the California existing building code ("CEBC"), 2016 edition, published at title 24, part 10, of the
California code of regulations, is adopted by reference. One true copy of the CEBC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public
inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
13-18-14: ADOPTION OF VOLUNTARY EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING CONCRETE BUILDINGS:
§ 13-18-V400: Voluntary Earthquake Hazard Reduction In Existing Concrete Buildings. Pursuant to California Government Code § 50022.1 to 50022.8,
chapter A5 of the international existing building code ("IEBC"), 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference.
Sections A502 through A507 are amended as follows: All references to "international building code" shall be amended to read "2016 California building
code ("CBC") as amended by the El Segundo municipal code". One true copy of the IEBC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for
public inspection as required by law.
(Ord. 1538, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 19
SOLAR ENERGY CODE
13-19-1: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM SOLAR ENERGY AND HYDRONICS CODE:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 50022.1 to 50022.8, the uniform solar energy and hydronics code ("USEHC"), 2015 edition, published
by the International Association Of Plumbing And Mechanical Officials/American National Standards Institute (IAPMO/ANSI) is adopted by reference. One
true copy of the USEHC, is on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection as required by law. (Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-2: EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS; PURPOSE:
This chapter implements the solar rights act as codified at Government Code section 65850.5 to achieve timely and cost effective installations of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning set forth in this code, the act, or regulations promulgated in accordance with
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 370/581
applicable law.
ACT: The solar rights act as codified at Government Code section 65850.5.
DIRECTOR: The city manager, or designee. In the absence of a different designation by the city manager, the director of planning and building safety, or
designee, is the director.
ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL: Utilization of office equipment and software used for communicating including, without limitation, telephone, facsimile
machine, office automation equipment (computer terminals or personal computers, including laptops) and communications software applications such as
electronic mail and internet browsers.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES OR IT: Any system, device, hardware, software, or other equipment designed and used for transmitting or receiving
communications by any form of electronic mail (e-mail) or any network of interconnected computers, including, without limitation, the internet, as used for
such purposes.
INTERNET OR WORLD WIDE WEB: A global network connecting multiple information technologies from schools, libraries, businesses, or private homes,
using a common set of communication protocols.
REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS: On a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly
decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.
RESTRICTIONS THAT DO NOT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM OR DECREASE ITS EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED
PERFORMANCE:
A. For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent (10%) of the cost of the system, but in no case
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent (10%), as
originally specified and proposed.
B. For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent (10%) as originally specified and proposed.
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: All of the following:
A. A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.
B. A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city
and all state and local health and safety standards.
C. A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.
D. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Either of the following:
A. Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.
B. Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-4: APPLICABILITY:
A. This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.
B. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted before the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small
rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like kind replacements do not require a
permit. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-5: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
A. All solar energy systems must meet applicable legal health and safety standards and requirements.
B. Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications must be certified
by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California plumbing and mechanical codes, as adopted by this code.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 371/581
C. Solar energy systems for producing electricity must meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California electrical code,
the Institute Of Electrical And Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable,
rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-6: DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR:
A. All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application must be made available on the internet.
B. Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by information technologies is available to all small residential rooftop solar
energy system permit applicants. All forms, applications, and other documents may be signed electronically in accordance with Government Code
section 16.5.
C. The director must develop a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply to
be eligible for expedited review.
D. The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) must substantially conform to recommendations for
expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the "California Solar Permitting Guidebook"
adopted by the governor's office of planning and research.
E. All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code sections 65850.55, 66015,
and 66016; along with Health And Safety Code section 17951. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
13-19-7: PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. The director must implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems.
The director must issue a ministerial building permit on the same day for over the counter applications or within three (3) business days for electronic
submittals, upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. The director may require
an applicant to apply for an administrative use permit if the director finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a
specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions must be in writing and may be appealed to the planning commission in
accordance with this code.
B. Review of the application is limited to whether the application meets applicable law.
C. If an administrative use permit is required, the director may deny an application for the use permit if the director makes written findings based upon
substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings must include the basis for the rejection of the potential
feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with this code.
D. Any condition imposed on an application must be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
E. The director cannot condition approval of an application on by requiring formation of an association.
F. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for issuing an expedited permit must be sent to the applicant for resubmission.
G. Only one inspection is required and must be performed by the director for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.
H. The inspection must be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections.
I. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 1510, 8-4-2015; amd. Ord. 1539, 12-6-2016)
Chapter 20
RESERVED
(Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
Chapter 21
PERMIT PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 372/581
13-21-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to provide an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, as defined, that will encourage the
timely and cost-effective installation of such stations, in compliance with Government Code section 65850.7. This chapter is intended to achieve these
goals while protecting public health and safety. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
BUILDING OFFICIAL OR OFFICIAL: The City's building official or designee.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION OR CHARGING STATION: An electric vehicle supply equipment station, of any level, that delivers electricity
from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle and is designed and built in compliance with 24 California Code of Regulations
section 625.1, et seq., as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, or as it may be amended.
NONCONFORMING CHARGING STATION: Any charging station that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable laws at the time it was
installed, but which, due to enactment of this chapter, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the
property is located.
SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT: A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the City found the electric vehicle charging station application complete. (Ord. 1555, 9-
5-2017)
13-21-3: APPLICABILITY:
A. Except for any charging station located on publicly-owned property, this chapter applies to the permitting of all charging stations in the City.
B. Unless modified after the effective date of this chapter, a nonconforming charging station is exempt from this chapter. The routine operation and
maintenance of such nonconforming charging station, or like-kind replacements, do not require a permit. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-4: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. All electric vehicle charging stations must meet all applicable health and safety standards and requirements, as set forth in Federal, State, County, and
Municipal codes and regulations.
B. Electric vehicle charging stations must meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by applicable law including, without limitation,
the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters
Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-5: APPLICATION AND DOCUMENTS:
A. All documents required for the submission of a charging station application will be made available on the City's website and at City Hall.
B. Applicants may submit the required permit application and documents by submitting them either via electronic mail or the internet or by delivering them
to the Planning and Building Department. An applicant's electronic signature will be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of
a wet signature.
C. The building official, or designee, will adopt a checklist of all requirements with which the charging stations must comply to be eligible for expedited
review. The electric vehicle charging station permit process, standard(s) and checklist(s) must substantially conform to recommendations for permitting
of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" published by the Office of Planning and Research, including the
checklist and standards contained in the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist".
D. If the building official deems the application incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional
information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance must be sent to the applicant within ten (10) days after submission of
the application. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-6: PERMIT REVIEW REQUIREMENTS; APPEALS:
A. Review of an electric vehicle charging station permit application is limited to whether the application meets local, State, and Federal health and safety
requirements, and whether the charging station poses any specific, adverse impact on public health or safety. If the application meets the requirements
of the approved checklist and standards, and the proposed charging station does not pose any specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety,
the building official must approve the application and issue any required, nondiscretionary permits.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 373/581
B. If the building official determines, based on the application, that the proposed charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public
health and safety, the building official may require an "electric vehicle charging station use permit". The permit may include conditions designed to
mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
C. The building official must notify an applicant whether the application has been approved and that a nondiscretionary permit will be issued, or,
alternatively, whether the applicant must obtain an electric vehicle charging station use permit, within thirty (30) days after the submission of a complete
application.
D. An application for an electric vehicle charging station can only be denied if the building official finds that: 1) the proposed installation would have a
specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety, and 2) there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. These
findings must be presented in writing, must include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact, and
must be based upon substantial evidence in the record.
E. A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact may include, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition,
or mitigation imposed by the City on a prior successful application for an electric vehicle charging station use permit, where the proposed charging
station is similarly situated to the charging station in that prior successful application.
F. Any decision by the building official made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the Board of Appeals in accordance with the California Building
Code, as adopted and amended by chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 1555, 9-5-2017)
13-21-7: FEES:
The applicant must pay to the City an application fee. Such fee will be fixed and established by the City Council from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 1555,
9-5-2017)
Title 14
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
14-1-1: AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this title is to regulate and control the design and improvement of subdivisions in conformance with the California Government Code. State
law allows cities to not only adopt local standards applicable to their jurisdictions, but also requires adoption of provisions which reflect existing state law.
This title is therefore intended to highlight significant local provisions which will be useful for the citizens of El Segundo and future developers. However, all
the provisions of this title shall not be construed as the only requirements for subdivisions, but are intended to be used in conjunction with the applicable
provisions of state law and, as such, shall not supersede those provisions. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ADVISORY AGENCY: A designated official or an official body charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement
of proposed divisions of real property, the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon, or having the authority by local ordinance to approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove maps. The city has charged the planning commission with this role.
SUBDIVIDER: A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided, real property into a
subdivision for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities acting in such capacity are not "subdividers".
SUBDIVISION: The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized
county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except for leases of
agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or
railroad rights of way. "Subdivision" includes a "condominium project", as defined in section 1351 of the California Civil Code, a "community apartment
project", as defined in section 11004 of the California Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a
"stock cooperative", as defined in section 11003.2 of the California Business and Professions Code. As used in this section "agricultural purposes" means
the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.
VESTING TENTATIVE MAP: A tentative map which has been filed, processed and approved in accordance with the vesting tentative map statute, and this
chapter, and which has printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map". (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. 2000 Code)
14-1-3: PARCEL MAPS REQUIRED:
A. Filing And Recording: A parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the subdivision
map act1 except for subdivisions created by short term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days' notice in writing) of a portion of an
operating right of way of a "railroad corporation" defined as such by section 230 of the California Public Utilities Code; provided, however, that upon a
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 374/581
showing made to the director of community, economic and development services, based upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates
such a map, this exception shall not apply. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. Requirements: Such maps shall meet all the requirements of the subdivision map act, and of this title. Each such parcel map shall show all dedications
or offers of dedication thereon and the director of public works may require in addition or substitution thereof at the director of public work's option, such
dedication or offers of dedication to be made by deed. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-4: FILING OF TENTATIVE MAP:
A. Map Filing: Tentative maps, including vesting tentative maps, shall be filed with the director of community, economic and development services in
accordance with city requirements and the California Government Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. Public Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map and tentative parcel map, and notice thereof shall be given as
provided in subsections C and D of this section, consistent with sections 65090 and 65091 of the California Government Code. Any interested person
may appear at such a hearing and shall be heard. The planning commission is empowered to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative
maps and tentative parcel maps.
C. Hearing Notice: Whenever a public hearing is held pursuant to this title, notice of the time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the hearing
body or officer, a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description, in text or diagram of the location of the property, if any,
shall be provided. This notice shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than ten (10) days
before the date of the public hearing.
D. Public Hearing Notification: The public hearing notice shall also be mailed or delivered to the following people/entities at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing:
1. Either the owner of the subject real property or the owner's duly authorized agent;
2. The project applicant;
3. Each agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to
provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected; and
4. All owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred feet (300') of the real property that is the subject of
the hearing. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-5: TENTATIVE MAP PROCESSING FEE:
Every person submitting a tentative map shall pay a processing fee established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1334, 4-17-2001)
14-1-6: FINDINGS FOR DENIAL:
The planning commission shall deny approval of a tentative map, vesting tentative map or a parcel map for which a tentative map was not required, if it
makes any of the following findings consistent with section 66474 of the California Government Code:
A. That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans as specified in section 65451 of the California Government Code.
B. That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
C. That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development.
D. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
E. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
F. That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems.
G. That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of
property within the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
14-1-7: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
Upon approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the city shall determine whether to apply the following conditions:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 375/581
A. Waiver Of Direct Access Rights: The planning commission may, if applicable, impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street
shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on a final map as abutting said street.
B. Dedication Of Parcels For Public Ways: The planning commission shall require the subdivider to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of
all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets, alleys, including access rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public
easements. The subdivider shall also improve or agree to improve all streets, alleys, including access rights, drainage, public utility easements and
other public easements.
C. Install Improvements: The subdivider may be required to install improvements which contain additional size, capacity or number for the benefit of
property not within the subdivision. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed for this additional size, capacity or number in a manner prescribed by
the city.
D. Reimbursement For Facilities: If a local drainage or sanitary sewer plan or map has been adopted requiring payment of fees or has established an area
of benefit for bridges or major thoroughfares, the city may impose and collect a reasonable charge on property within the area benefited. The city may
enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider to reimburse said subdivider for the cost of said facilities. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
E. Soils Report: A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the state in accordance with section 14-1-9 of this chapter and based
upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted to the director of community, economic and development services for every subdivision. A preliminary
soils report may be waived by the director of community, economic and development services, provided the director of community, economic and
development services finds that due to the knowledge the city has as to qualities of the soils in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
F. Grading And Erosion Control: Every map approved pursuant to this title shall be conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and
erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property set forth in this code.
G. Fees: Development-related fees, intended to offset the cost of providing both map checking and other required public services, may be applied as
warranted by the type and size of the subdivision.
H. Local Transit Facilities:
1. A requirement may be imposed for the dedication or irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as bus
turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision consistent with section 66475.2 of the
California Government Code if:
a. The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred (200) dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density
shown on the adopted general plan or contains one hundred (100) acres or more; and
b. The City Council finds that transit services are or will within a reasonable time period be made available to such subdivision.
2. The provisions of this Section do not apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing
apartment building which is more than five (5) years old and when no new dwelling units are added.
I. Park And Recreation Areas:
1. A requirement may be imposed to reserve those areas of real property within the subdivision for use as parks, recreational facilities, fire stations,
libraries or other public uses, subject to the following conditions:
a. The requirement is based upon an adopted specific plan or an adopted general plan containing policies and standards for those uses, and the
required reservations are in accordance with those policies and standards.
b. An ordinance has been in effect for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the filing of the tentative map.
c. The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an
orderly and efficient manner.
d. The amount of land reserved will not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible.
2. In the event the reserved area is not acquired within the prescribed period, the subdivider shall make those changes as are necessary to permit the
reserved area to be developed for the intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-8: APPEALS:
All appeals of the Planning Commission and necessary actions shall be prepared consistent with Title 15, Chapter 25 of this Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-
1993)
14-1-9: SOILS REPORT:
A. Expansive Soils: If the City has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems
which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services prior to approval of the final map or parcel map. The soils report shall be prepared in accordance
with the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code. Such soils investigation shall be done by a civil engineer registered in this State, who shall
recommend the appropriate corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 376/581
where such soils problems exist consistent with section 66491 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-
2000)
B. Deleterious Chemicals: If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of rocks or liquids containing deleterious chemicals which, if not corrected,
could cause construction materials such as, but not limited to, concrete, steel, and ductile or cast iron to corrode or deteriorate, a soils investigation of
each potentially affected lot in the subdivision may be required.
C. Recommended Action: The Planning Commission may approve a subdivision which has soils problems if it determines that the recommended action is
likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and the recommended action can be incorporated into the construction of each
structure. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-10: IMPROVEMENT SECURITY:
A. Options; Approval:
1. Options: Whenever the City requires the furnishing of security in connection with the performance of any act or agreement, the security shall be one
of the following at the option of and subject to the approval of the City Engineer and consistent with section 66499 of the California Government
Code:
a. Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties.
b. A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing
deposits of public monies.
c. An irrevocable instrument of credit from: 1) an agency of the State, Federal, or local government when any agency of the State, Federal or local
government provides at least twenty percent (20%) of the financing for the portion of the act; or an agreement requiring security; or 2) one or more
financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or Federal Government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or
agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment; or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.
d. A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the City, provided the City finds that it would not be in the public
interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than two (2) years after the recordation of the map.
e. Any form of security, including security interests in real property, which is acceptable to the City and specified by ordinance thereof.
2. Recording:
a. Any contract or security interest in real property entered into as security for performance pursuant to subsection A1d or A1e of this Section, shall
be recorded with the County Recorder. The recorded contract or security document shall be indexed in the Grantor Index to the names of all record
owners of the real property as specified on the map and in the Grantee Index to the City.
b. The City Engineer may at any time release all or any portion of the property subject to any lien or security interest created by this subdivision or
subordinate the lien or security interest to other liens or encumbrances, provided:
(1) He determines that security for performance is sufficiently secured by a lien on other property; or
(2) That the release or subordination of the lien will not jeopardize the completion of agreed upon improvements.
B. Amount:
1. Types Of Security: All of the following types of improvement security shall be provided:
a. One hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated cost of the improvement, which shall include all design, construction, and construction
engineering (including 10 percent) or act to be performed conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement;
b. One hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed securing payment to the contractor, the
subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act; and
c. Twenty percent (20%) of total estimated cost of improvements necessary to guarantee or warranty the work for a period of one year following
completion or acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished.
2. Additional Amount: If the improvement security is furnished by a duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount beyond that described above
shall be included as determined by the City Engineer as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, which may be incurred by
the City to enforce the obligation secured. The improvement security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the
work to the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the original estimated cost of the improvement.
C. Release: The improvement security required hereunder shall be released in the following manner:
1. Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work,
subject to the provisions of subsection C2 of this Section.
2. City staff may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon
application therefor by the subdivider; provided, however, that no such release shall be for an amount less than ten percent (10%) of the total
improvement security given for faithful performance of the act or work and that the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than fifty percent
(50%) of the total improvement security given for faithful performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the
City Council authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the
completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this Title, the Subdivision Map Act or the improvement agreement.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 377/581
3. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, his subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall, within six (6)
months after the completion and acceptance of the act or work, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims filed and which notice has
been given to the legislative body. An additional amount determined by the City Council may be required to assure the performance of any other
obligations secured by the City. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the
security was given.
4. No security given for the guaranty or warranty of work shall be released prior to the identified expiration period thereof.
D. Forfeiture: Upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any improvement, acts or obligations within the time specified, the City Council may determine
that the subdivider is in default and cause the improvement security or such portion thereof as is necessary to complete the work or act and any other
secured obligations of the subdivider to be forfeited to the City. Prior to such determination, the City shall either serve written notice upon the person
responsible for the performance ten (10) days prior to City Council action, or by registered mail twenty (20) days prior to City Council action. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-11: SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS; FUNDING; HEARING:
A. Public Hearing: No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is held by the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of Section 14-1-4 of this Chapter and the City Council finds that the fee or charge and the area of benefit or local benefit
district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.
B. Notice Of Hearing: In addition to the notice required by Section 14-1-4 of this Chapter, written notice of the hearing shall be provided to:
1. The subdivider and to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized assessment role.
2. The potential users of the supplemental improvements as can be ascertained at the time.
C. Notice To Engineer: Such notice shall be mailed by the city engineer at least ten (10) days prior to the date established for hearing. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-
1993)
14-1-12: EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL:
A. Expiration: The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map expires twenty four (24) months after the date the map was
first approved or conditionally approved.
B. Extension Or Stay: The person filing the tentative map may request an extension, pursuant to Government Code section 66452.6(e), or stay, pursuant
to Government Code section 66452.6(c), of an approved tentative map by filing a written application with the director of community, economic and
development services, before the map's expiration date. The application must state the reasons for requesting the extension or stay. The planning
commission will either approve, conditionally approve or deny extension requests. Within forty (40) days after receiving an application for a stay, the
planning commission must either approve the requested stay for a period not exceeding five (5) years or deny the application.
C. Time Limit On Extensions And Stays: Each extension of tentative map approval or conditional approval may be allowed for a period not exceeding one
year from the anniversary date of the map's original approval. The total time of extensions cannot exceed five (5) years. The stay may be for the period
of time during which a lawsuit involving the tentative map is or was pending in a court of competent jurisdiction, not to exceed five (5) years. The
ultimate length of the extension or stay must be consistent with the subdivision map act (Government Code sections 66410 through 66499.58).
D. Effect Of Map Modification On Extension Or Stay: Modifications of a tentative map after approval or conditional approval cannot extend the time limits
imposed by this section, unless an extension or stay is specifically granted.
E. Hearings, Notices, Fees And Appeals On Map Extensions And Stays: Title 15, chapters 25, "Appeal Or Review", and 27, "Hearings, Notices And Fees",
of this code govern with respect to extension and stay requests made pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1371, 2-3-2004)
14-1-13: FINAL MAP; MONUMENTS:
At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards
described in section 8771 of the California Business and Professions Code, so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. The
engineer or surveyor shall also set the following additional monuments:
A. Boundaries:
1. Boundary monuments at or near boundary corners and at intermediate points, approximately one thousand feet (1,000') apart or at such lesser
distances as may be necessary to ensure accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty. The precise position of
each such monument shall be shown on the final map. Such durable monument shall be not less substantial than an iron pipe of a two inch (2")
outside diameter, not less than two and one-half feet (21/2') in length, with plug and tack, and set at least two feet (2') into the ground or as may be
approved by the city engineer. For the purposes of this title, a lead and tack set in permanent concrete or masonry shall be considered a durable
monument.
2. The approximate elevation of the top of each monument with respect to the surface of the ground shall be shown on the final map.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 378/581
B. Setting Monuments:
1. Street centerline monuments shall be set to mark the intersections of streets, intersections of streets with the map boundary, or to mark either the
beginning and end of curves or the points of intersection with tangents or other intermediate points.
2. Each monument shall be durable and substantial and conform to the standards established by the city engineer.
3. For each centerline intersection monument set, the engineer or surveyor shall furnish to the city engineer a set of notes showing clearly the ties
between such monument and a sufficient number (normally 4) of durable distinctive reference points or monuments. Such reference points or
monuments may be leads and tacks in sidewalks, or two inch by two inch (2" x 2") stakes set back of the curb line and below the surface of the
ground, or such substitute as appears to be not more likely to be disturbed.
4. Such act shall be of such quality, form and completeness and shall be on paper of such quality and size as may be necessary to conform to the
standardized office records of the city engineer. All such notes shall be indexed and filed by the city engineer as a part of the permanent public
records of his office.
5. All monuments necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall be set or referenced prior to recordation of the final map. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993)
14-1-14: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
Conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project shall comply with all
provisions of state law, including sections 66427.1 and 66452.51 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 2
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
14-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the approval of a tentative map that provides certain statutorily vested rights to a subdivider
under the vesting tentative maps statute (California Government Code section 66498.1 et seq.). This chapter implements and supplements that statute.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-2: FILING PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION:
A. Whenever a tentative map is required, the applicant may file a vesting tentative map instead.
B. A vesting tentative map shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" before the city may accept it for filing.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this title shall apply to a vesting tentative map and processed as provided in section 14-1-
4 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
D. Such information as is ordinarily required under the provisions of this title for the filing of a tentative map shall also be required for the filing of a vesting
tentative map. Supplemental information as relates to the vesting nature of the proposed vesting tentative map may also be required by the director of
community, economic and development services. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
14-2-3: DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
A. Development Rights Created: The approval of a vesting tentative map confers a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the city's ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the city determines the application is complete.
B. Duration Of Development Rights: The right to proceed with development, as set forth in subsection A of this section, accrues from the date of approval
of a vesting tentative map by the planning commission and continues for one year following the timely recordation of a final map or parcel map. If a
project covered by a single vesting tentative map is divided into phases and more than one final map is recorded, the one year period begins for each
phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.
C. Expiration Of Development Rights:
1. The right to proceed with development as set forth in subsection A of this section accrues from the date of approval of the tentative map by the
planning commission or city council; however, it expires on the date the vesting tentative map expires unless a final map is approved before then.
2. The time within which a final map may be recorded is governed by section 14-1-12 of this title and California Government Code section 66452.6.
3. If the subdivider submits a complete application for building and has satisfied all requirements for the issuance of a building permit during the one
year specified in subsection B of this section, the right to proceed with development continues until the building permit, or any extension thereof,
expires.
4. If a final map is recorded based upon a vesting tentative map and the development rights expire, the final map remains in effect without the
development rights.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 379/581
D. Extension Of Time For Exercise Of Development Rights:
1. The one year specified in subsection B of this section is automatically extended by the amount of time necessary to complete processing of a
grading permit, or design or architectural review, if the length of time necessary for city review exceeds thirty (30) days.
2. Before the expiration of the one year period specified in subsection B of this section, a subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one
year extension. See title 15, chapter 25 of this code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-4: AMENDMENT:
A subdivider may apply to the planning commission for an amendment to a vesting tentative map at any time before the expiration of the vesting tentative
map. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-5: RIGHT TO CONDITION OR DENY APPROVAL:
A. This chapter does not:
1. Enlarge or diminish the types of conditions which the city may impose on a development; or
2. Diminish or alter the city's power to protect against a condition dangerous to the public health or safety.
B. The city may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension, amendment or entitlement relating to a vesting tentative map if it determines that either:
1. The failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the community in a condition dangerous to their health or safety; or
2. The condition or denial is required to comply with state or federal law. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-6: FEES:
Every person submitting a vesting tentative map shall pay a processing fee as established by resolution. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-2-7: EXPIRATION OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL:
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map and the conditions under which an extension of time or stay is granted shall be consistent
with section 14-1-12 of this title. (Ord. 1371, 2-3-2004)
Chapter 3
MERGER OF PARCELS
14-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a procedure by which two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner and which do
not conform to minimum development standards of the underlying zoning district may be merged. This procedure is adopted pursuant to sections
66451.10 et seq., of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. Parcels Held By Same Owner: The provisions and procedures set forth in this Chapter shall be applicable to two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land
held by the same owner, whether that ownership is absolute or "qualified", as defined by California Civil Code section 680, notwithstanding those
provisions of this Code which exempt older substandard lots, where:
1. The parcels were created under the provisions of this Code regulating subdivisions or any prior ordinance or State law regulating the division of land
or which were not subject to any prior law regulating the division of land; and
2. At least one of the contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the City
Zoning Ordinance, Title 15 of this Code.
B. Sale Of Contiguous Parcels: Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed or interpreted to prohibit the sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels
of land, or any of them, where the same have not been merged pursuant to the procedure set forth herein. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Application for a merger of parcels shall be accompanied by the following:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 380/581
A. City application;
B. City fees;
C. Exhibit displaying properties involved; and
D. Any additional materials as required by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-
18-2000)
14-3-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR MERGER:
Any two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner which are subject to the merger procedures set forth herein as provided in
Section 14-3-3 of this Chapter, may be merged if all of the following requirements are satisfied:
A. Undeveloped: At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit
was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.
B. Conditions: With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:
1. Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger;
2. Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;
3. Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;
4. Does not meet slope stability standards;
5. Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;
6. Its development would create health or safety hazards; or
7. Is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993)
14-3-5: DETERMINATION OF OWNERSHIP:
For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that a notice of
intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to Section 14-3-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-6: NOTICE OF INTENTION TO DETERMINE STATUS:
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall:
A. Issuance; Contents: Mail by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property, and mail by first class mail to the owners of abutting property
a notice of intention to determine status. As used in this Title, "abutting property" means property that is contiguous to the property that is the subject of
the application or is separated from it only by a street or alley. Such notice shall state that:
1. The affected parcels may be merged pursuant to the merger provisions of this Chapter;
2. The owner may file a written request with the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services any time within thirty (30) days after the
date the notice of intention to determine status is recorded for a hearing before the Planning Commission and may present evidence at the hearing
that the property does not meet the requirements for merger; (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
3. That the notice of intention to determine status was filed for recording with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office on the same date such notice
was mailed to the property owner and to the owners of the abutting property; and
4. That if a hearing is not requested, the Planning Commission will proceed to determine whether the parcels should be merged.
B. Filing: File the notice of intention to determine status with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office on the same date that the notice is mailed to the
property owner. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-7: PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING:
A. Issuance Of Notice: Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing on the determination of status, the Director of Community, Economic and
Development Services shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission, and shall so notify the property
owner by certified mail, and the owners of abutting property by first class mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty (60) days following
the receipt of the property owner's request therefor, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the Planning Commission and the
property owner. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 381/581
B. Present Evidence: At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet
the requirements for merger as set forth in Sections 14-3-3 and 14-3-4 of this Chapter.
C. Determination:
1. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged and shall
notify the owner of its determination as soon thereafter as practicable.
2. The Planning Commission may, at the close of the hearing, determine that the parcels are not to be merged, notwithstanding the fact that the
affected parcels have met all the requirements set forth in Sections 14-3-3 and 14-3-4 of this Chapter for a merger. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-8: DETERMINATION WITHOUT HEARING; NOTICE TO OWNER:
A. Failure To File Request: If the property owner fails to file a request for hearing within the thirty (30) day period as provided in Section 14-3-6 of this
Chapter, the Planning Commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination as to whether the affected parcels are to be merged.
B. File Notice Of Merger: If the Planning Commission makes a determination of merger, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services
shall file a notice of merger no later than ninety (90) days after the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status as provided in Section 14-3-6 of
this Chapter, and shall notify the property owner of such determination by certified mail.
C. Determination Not To Merge: If the Planning Commission makes a determination not to merge the parcels, the Director of Community, Economic and
Development Services shall follow the procedure set forth in Section 14-3-10 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
14-3-9: NOTICE OF MERGER; EFFECTIVE DATE:
A. Notice To County: If the Planning Commission determines that the affected parcels are merged, the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services shall file for record with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and
particularly describing the real property to be merged. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. Time Of Filing: Said notice of merger shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing on determination of status as
provided in Section 14-3-7 of this Chapter, unless a timely appeal from the Planning Commission's determination is filed pursuant to Title 15, Chapter
25 of this Code.
C. Effective Date: A merger of parcels becomes effective on the date the notice of merger is duly filed with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993)
14-3-10: RELEASE OF NOTICE OF INTENTION TO DETERMINE STATUS:
If the Planning Commission determines that the affected parcels are not to be merged, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services
shall:
A. File With County: File for record with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office a release of notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to
subsection 14-3-6B of this Chapter, specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property; and
B. Notify Owner: Mail a copy of the release to the then current owner of record. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
14-3-11: APPEALS:
All appeals shall be processed as provided by Title 15, Chapter 25 of this Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 4
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
14-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a procedure by which the size or configuration of two (2) or more existing parcels may be adjusted, provided:
A. Land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel;
B. A greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created; and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 382/581
C. The adjustment is approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
14-4-2: FILING PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION:
A. Filing Request: All requests for a lot line adjustment shall be filed with the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services on an approved
City application form.
B. Filing Documentation: A lot line adjustment request shall include the required number of copies of the following materials:
1. Grant deeds and/or title report for all properties;
2. A legal description of each existing and new lot/parcel to be created; (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
3. A plat map or maps displaying each existing and new lot or parcel; (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
4. City application forms; and
5. Processing fees. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-4-3: PROCESSING PROCEDURES:
A. Lot Line Adjustment Request: Once an application has been deemed acceptable for filing, the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services shall distribute the lot line adjustment request for review and comment to all other appropriate City departments. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. Decision Of Director: Within thirty (30) days of accepting the application as complete, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services
shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the lot line adjustment.
C. Certificate Of Compliance: Upon approval or conditional approval of the lot line adjustment, the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services shall issue a certificate of compliance indicating the City's acceptance and approval of the request.
D. Grant Deed: The applicant shall have a new grant deed recorded which reflects the approved lot line adjustment and provide the City with a copy.
E. Record Of Survey: A record of survey shall not be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by section 8762 of the California Business and
Professions Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
14-4-4: EVALUATION CRITERIA:
The evaluation of a lot line adjustment shall be limited to determining whether or not the new lot or parcel created conforms to existing zoning and building
codes. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-4-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
A. Conditions: The Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall not impose conditions or exactions on the approval of a lot line
adjustment, except:
1. To conform to local ordinances.
2. To facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.
B. Maps: No tentative map, parcel map, or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
14-4-6: APPEALS:
All appeals shall be processed as provided by Title 15, Chapter 25 of this Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 5
WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP
14-5-1: PURPOSE:
A waiver of parcel map provides a procedure whereby adequate information and improvements are already available to forego the need to prepare a final
map and prepare only a tentative map. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 383/581
14-5-2: FILING PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION:
A. Filing Request: All requests for a waiver of parcel map shall be filed with the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services on an
approved City application form. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. Filing Documentation: A request for the waiver of parcel map shall include the following materials:
1. Preliminary title report.
2. A tentative map prepared consistently with the filing requirements for tentative maps.
3. City application forms.
4. Processing fees. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-5-3: PROCESSING PROCEDURES:
A. Distribution Of Request: Once an application has been deemed accepted for filing, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services
shall distribute the waiver of parcel map request for review and comment to the City divisions and departments.
B. Notice And Hearing: The notification, hearing and review process shall be consistent with that described in Section 14-1-4 of this Title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
14-5-4: EVALUATION CRITERIA:
The evaluation of the waiver of parcel map shall include the following findings:
A. Consistency with the provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title.
B. The area requirements are consistent with the property's zoning.
C. The design of the subdivision and existing level of improvements are consistent with City standards.
D. The flood water drainage control is consistent with City standards.
E. All adjoining improved public roads are consistent with City standards.
F. Water supply availability and sanitary disposal facilities are adequate.
G. The site provides adequate provisions for environmental protection. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-5-5: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The Planning Commission shall impose those conditions of approval necessary to ensure the adequate health and safety of future residents or users.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
14-5-6: APPEALS:
All appeals shall be processed as provided by Title 15, Chapter 25 of this Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Title 15
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE; INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS
15-1-1: PURPOSE; TITLE:
A precise land use plan for the City is hereby adopted and established to serve the public health, safety, and general welfare and to provide the economic
and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources. This title shall be known as the ZONING CODE. This title is the primary
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 384/581
tool for implementing the goals, objectives, and policies of the El Segundo General Plan, pursuant to mandated provisions of the State Planning and
Zoning Law1, the California Environmental Quality Act2, and other applicable State and local requirements. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement
between parties. When this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall
control. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-1-3: PERMISSIVE ORDINANCE:
This title shall be considered a permissive ordinance, whereby only those uses or facilities that are listed are hereby allowed, except as provided through
an administrative determination, an administrative use permit, or other discretionary action. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The Director of Community, Economic and Development Services or his/her duly designated representative is hereby designated as the enforcing agent of
this title and any amendments thereto. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction or administrative body
to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The City Council hereby declares that it
would have adopted this title and each chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more
portions of this title might be declared invalid. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
ABUTTING/ABUTTING PROPERTY: Two (2) or more parcels sharing a common boundary of at least one (1) point. However, as used in chapter 24 of this
title, this definition shall also include property that is separated only by a street or alley.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 385/581
ACCESSORY: A building, part of a building or structure, or use which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building,
structure or use on the same lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure that is physically detached from, on the same lot as, and incidental and subordinate to
the principal building or structure. "Accessory building or structure" includes, but is not limited to, accessory dwelling units, garages, gazebos,
greenhouses, playhouses, storage and tool sheds, and workshops.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or
more persons. The unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family
dwelling is situated. The term "accessory dwelling unit" includes:
A. An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.
B. A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.
ACCESSORY USE: A use of a portion of land or building that is customarily and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building, is located on the same lot as the principal use and is dependent upon the principal use for the majority of its utilization or activity. Accessory uses
typically are very small in proportion to the principal use.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 386/581
ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Advertising structures and signs.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: A structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster, bill,
printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary.
Neither "advertising structures" nor "signs", as used in this title includes:
A. Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer;
B. Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty or by any person in giving legal notice; and
C. Directional, warning or information signs or structures required or authorized by law or by Federal, State or Municipal authority.
AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who testified personally or through a representative at a public hearing or who informed the staff of the Community,
Economic and Development Services Department in writing, prior to a hearing of an interest in the subject of a hearing; or who, for good cause, was
unable to do either; or who feels the action taken on an application was not consistent with facts as presented.
ALLEY: Any public way or thoroughfare more than ten feet (10'), but not exceeding twenty feet (20') in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the
public for public use.
ALTERATION: Any change or modification of an exterior architectural feature of a designated cultural resource. Alteration shall include, but not be limited
to, a changing or modification of structure, architectural details or visual characteristics and the placement or removal of any exterior objects or
ornamentation affecting the exterior visual qualities of a designated cultural resource. Alterations shall not include ordinary maintenance and repair.
ALTERNATE TRANSPORTATION: The use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, car
pools, vanpools, bus pools, public transit, walking and bicycling.
AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, or a change in the zone boundaries on the zoning map, which map is a part of
this title.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 387/581
AMENITIES: Facilities which enhance the operation of a use and make it more attractive to present and future uses.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
APARTMENT: A residential building designed or used for three (3) or more dwelling units.
APPEALABLE AREA: The entire Coastal Zone in El Segundo as established on a map adopted as part of the El Segundo Local Coastal Program.
APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT: Any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in section 15-
16-3 of this title.
ARBOR: A shelter of shrubs and branches or of latticework intertwined with plant material usually comprised of climbing vines and flowers.
ARCHITECTURAL BUILDING FEATURE: A balcony, column, door, eaves, roof, soffit, window or window trim, shutters or other similar three-dimensional
permanent exterior element of a building or structure that may not create interior floor area, that provides relief from large flat wall planes, breaks up
building wall mass, and lends to the overall form, context and appearance of the building or structure.
ARCHITECTURAL LANDSCAPE FEATURES: Small landscape structures, such as fountains, arbors, trellises, pergolas, colonnades, statuary, benches,
bench walls, landscape planter walls not exceeding three feet (3') in height, and other similar features, as well as works of art which do not contain floor
area. Arbors, trellises, pergolas, colonnades, and other similar features, as well as works of art cannot consist of a roof or side walls greater than twenty
percent (20%) component solid portions when considered as architectural landscape features. These features are not "structures", as defined in this
section, for setback purposes.
ATTACHED: Having a wall or roof in common with another structure, when referring to dwelling units or garages.
ATTIC: The space between the ceiling joists of the top floor or story and the roof of a building.
AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked
vehicles or their parts.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICES: Automobile repair and maintenance, which includes body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission
work, automobile painting, and car washing. Automobile services also include as accessory uses: retail sales and services, and storage of tires, car parts
and other automobile supplies; limited automobile sales. Automobile sales cannot exceed eight (8) automobiles per month; not more than three (3)
automobiles can be displayed at one time.
AVERAGE VEHICLE RIDERSHIP: The figure calculated by dividing the employee population (at a given work site) by the number of vehicles which are
driven by employees (to the work site) arriving at the work site in a four (4) hour window between five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M.,
excluding public transit vehicles and buses serving multiple work sites.
BALCONY: A covered or uncovered platform that can be used as a walking surface, projecting outward from the vertical surface/facade of a building or
structure, and which is directly accessible from floor area located on the same level as the balcony.
BASEMENT: Any floor level below the first story in a building that is more than four feet (4') below grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
perimeter, or is more than eight feet (8') below "grade" at any point.
BAY WINDOW: An extension of the wall area into the yard setback area, for purposes of obtaining additional light and space, but not floor area.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: Any building containing five (5) or fewer guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used or rented or which
are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Said use shall not contain ancillary facilities for conferences or personal services, but may provide meals.
Guest stays shall be limited to fourteen (14) consecutive days. One dwelling unit, on any floor level, in conformance with the requirements of subsection
15-5B-3E of this title shall be allowed for the use of the proprietor of the bed and breakfast inn.
BLOCK: Land, or a group of lots, surrounded by streets or other rights-of-way, other than an alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded
subdivision.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy that is permanently affixed to the ground and contains a roof.
Shipping containers are not buildings.
BUILDING AREA: See definition of floor area (gross).
BUILDING FACE: Horizontal plane of a building facade which may include recessed portions of the building.
BUILDING HEIGHT OR STRUCTURE HEIGHT: Is the vertical distance measured from the grade plane to the highest point of the roof or parapet. See
features listed in section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 388/581
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which the principal use of the site is conducted.
BUILDING SITE:
A. The ground area of one lot; or
B. The ground area of two (2) or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by
this title.
BUS POOL: A vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work following a relatively fixed route and
schedule.
BUSINESS: An establishment intended for the conduct, service, or administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the conduct of professional or
activities service.
CAFE: See definition of restaurant, cafe.
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA)3: A statute that requires all jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of
environmental degradation posed by proposed development.
CANNABIS: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its
seeds, or resin, including cannabis infused in foodstuff or any other ingestible or consumable product containing cannabis. "Cannabis" also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. The term "cannabis" includes "medical cannabis" for the purposes set forth in the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. "Cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
CANNABIS ACCESSORIES: Any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, smoking, or vaporizing cannabis, or
for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the human body.
CANNABIS CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing, cultivating, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming or processing of cannabis.
CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITY: A facility where cannabis is cultivated, prepared, and packaged for sale to cannabis dispensaries, to cannabis
product manufacturing facilities, or to other cannabis cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.
CANNABIS DELIVERY: The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any
technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under this division, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate
the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or cannabis products.
CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis are
offered, made available to, or provided, either individually or in any combination, with or without remuneration, for medical, recreational, or other purposes.
CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION: The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between State-licensed entities for commercial use
purposes.
CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENT: A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis testing facility, a cannabis product manufacturing facility, or a cannabis
dispensary.
CANNABIS MANUFACTURE: To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.
CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING FACILITY: A facility where cannabis and cannabis products are manufactured, prepared and packaged for
sale to other cannabis product manufacturing facilities or to cannabis dispensaries, but not to consumers.
CANNABIS PRODUCTS: Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 389/581
CANNABIS-RELATED ACTIVITY: Any commercial cannabis activity, cultivation of cannabis, delivery of cannabis or cannabis products, distribution of
cannabis or cannabis products, dispensing of cannabis or cannabis products, manufacture of cannabis or cannabis products, sale of cannabis or cannabis
products, and the operation or establishment of a cannabis or medical cannabis cooperative, dispensary, delivery service, or provider. "Cannabis-related
activity" does not include the cultivation, planting, harvesting, drying, processing or possession of up to six (6) cannabis plants at one time by persons
twenty one (21) years of age or older when conducted within a single private residence and in a manner consistent with Health and Safety Code section
11362.2 and any other applicable regulations.
CANNABIS STORAGE FACILITY: A facility used for the storage of cannabis, cannabis products or cannabis accessories.
CANNABIS TESTING FACILITY: A facility where cannabis is analyzed and certified for safety and potency.
CAR POOL: A vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis in a light or medium duty passenger
vehicle.
CARETAKER UNIT: A dwelling unit in the Smoky Hollow specific plan area used for a caretaker of the property on which it is located and limited to five
hundred (500) square feet in area.
CEILING: The upper interior surface of a room, opposite and directly above, the finish floor or walking surface.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the Planning Commission approving any proposed alteration, restoration, construction,
removal, relocation, or demolition, in whole or in part, of or to a designated cultural resource.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: An approval issued by the building official prior to occupancy of a building or structure, and after compliance with all
applicable codes and ordinances. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of the building
or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy as set
forth in the Building Code.
CHARITABLE INSTITUTION: A nonprofit, tax exempt organization generally described by the Internal Revenue Service under any of the following
classifications:
A. A community chest, corporation, trust fund, or foundation operated for charitable, religious, educational, scientific, literary purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals;
B. War veterans' organizations; and
C. Domestic fraternal societies, orders and associations operating under the lodge system.
CHURCH: An establishment, the principal purpose which is religious worship and including accessory uses in the principal structure or in separate
buildings, including Sunday school rooms, assembly rooms, kitchen, library room, one-family dwelling unit and day nurseries operated by and on the
church site, but excluding facilities for residences of or training of religious orders.
CLUB: An association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business.
COASTAL ZONE: That area of the City of El Segundo included in the State of California Coastal Zone as described in the California Coastal Act4.
COMMERCIAL:
Financial Institutions: Banks and trust companies, credit agencies, credit unions, investment companies, lending and thrift institutions,
securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers, security and commodity exchanges, vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies. Financial
institutions do not include check cashing or payday loan facilities.
Retail Sales: Alcohol sales (off site), building material stores, convenience stores, general retail stores, and warehouse retail showrooms.
General Retail Stores: Include sales, without limitation, of appliances, art gallery, artists' supplies, bakeries (retail only), bicycles, books and
periodicals, cameras and photographic supplies, clothing and accessories, computer and computer equipment, electronics, department stores, drug
and discount stores, collectible items sales, curio, gift and souvenir shops, dry goods, fabric and sewing supplies, florists and houseplant stores
(indoor), furniture and home furnishings, grocery stores, hardware, hobby materials, household and kitchen goods, jewelry, luggage and leather
goods, musical instruments, parts and accessories, newsstands, orthopedic supplies, pet stores, pet supply stores, pharmacies, religious goods,
small wares, specialty shops, sporting goods and equipment, stationery, and toys and games.
Retail Services: Personal services and business and consumer support services.
Business And Consumer Support Services: Include, without limitation, establishments primarily providing consumers and businesses with services,
including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, as well as the following: business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see
definition of vehicle sales and services: maintenance/repair), computer related services (rental, repair), copying, quick printing, and blueprinting
services, equipment rental businesses within buildings, film processing laboratories, heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the
client site, household appliance and equipment repair services, janitorial and maid services, mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping),
photocopying and photofinishing, protective services (other than office related), window cleaning.
Personal Services: Include, without limitation, barbershops and beauty salons, clothing rental, dry cleaning pick up stores with limited equipment,
hair, nail, facial, and personal care, laundromats (self-service laundries), photo development, shoe repair shops, tailors, tanning salons.
Personal services and business and consumer support services may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 390/581
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY: The cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling,
transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products.
COMMISSARY: A building, part of a building, or structure, which is utilized primarily in the preparation of food and purveying it to off site locations.
Commissaries within the Multimedia Overlay (MMO) District shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Community, Economic and
Development Services that each commissary provides primary service to the multimedia industry.
COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of El Segundo, California.
COMMUTER MATCHING SERVICE: Any system, whether by computer, manual, or mapping methods, which matches commuters residing in one (1)
common area, working in another common area, and having approximately the same work starting and stopping times.
CONDOMINIUM: A single dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling or structure, which is separately owned and which may be combined with an undivided
interest in the common areas and facilities of the property.
CONGREGATE LIVING HEALTH FACILITY: A residential home that provides inpatient care to not more than six (6) persons, including, but not limited to,
basic services such as: medical supervision, twenty four (24) hour skilled nursing and supportive care, pharmacy, dietary, and social recreation. The
primary need of congregate living health facility residents shall be for availability of skilled nursing care on a recurring, intermittent, extended, or continuous
basis. This care is generally less intense than that provided in skilled nursing facilities.
CONSTRUCTION: The building of additions to an exterior architectural feature of a designated cultural resource, or the erection of a new principal or
accessory building or structure contiguous to a designated cultural resource.
CONSTRUCTION YARD: An open or predominantly open area used for the purpose of storing building materials and related equipment for use in the
construction of buildings or structures.
COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
COURTYARD: A court that is open to the sky and is adjacent to or within a building mostly or entirely surrounded by walls and/or buildings on all four (4)
sides.
CRAFTS SHOPS (Sales, Lease, And Rentals): An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area which is utilized primarily
for the manufacture, production, sales, lease, storage, and/or rental of materials utilized in media related production or in their construction, or other
activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services are similar.
CULTURAL RESOURCE: On site improvements, buildings, structures, signs, and/or features (including significant trees or other landscaping located
thereon) having cultural, architectural or historical significance to the citizens of the City of El Segundo.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any type of group daycare programs, including nurseries for children of working parents, nursery schools for children under
minimum age for education in public schools, parent cooperative nursery schools, playgroups for preschool children and programs covering after school
care for school children; provided, the establishment is licensed by the State and the City and is conducted in accordance with State and City
requirements.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 391/581
DAYCARE, LARGE FAMILY: A home which provides family daycare to seven (7) to twelve (12) children, including children under the age of ten (10) years
who reside at the home.
DAYCARE, SMALL FAMILY: A home which provides family daycare to six (6) or fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who
reside at the home.
DECK: An outdoor platform that can be used as a walking surface and outdoor gathering/activity area, typically extending outward from a house, structure,
or other building.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys in part, or in whole, a designated cultural resource.
DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCE: On site improvements, buildings, structures, signs, features (including significant trees or other landscaping),
places, place names, exterior architecture features, landmark sites, historic sites, area (including significant trees or landscaping located thereon) having
cultural, architectural or historical significance to the citizens of the City that has been designated a cultural resource pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
DETACHED: Not having a wall or roof in common with another structure, when referring to dwelling units or garages.
DEVELOPER: The builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be
responsible for implementing the provisions of chapter 16 of this title as determined by the property owner.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction or addition of new building square footage. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.
DIGITAL ARTIST: An individual or group whose primary focus is related to the preparation of computer generated product.
DIRECTOR: The City's Director of Planning and Building Safety.
DISPLAY SURFACE: The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.
DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, drive-through.
DWELLING:
Multiple-Family: A building or portion of a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units designed or arranged for occupancy by three (3) or
more households living independently in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be
owned as condominiums, or offered for rent.
Primary (Or Main Structure): The principal dwelling on a residential lot, which existed prior to the establishment of a secondary ("second unit") or
accessory dwelling unit.
Single-Family: A building containing no more than one (1) dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than one (1) household.
Two-Family: A building containing no more than two (2) dwelling units, designed or arranged for occupancy by two (2) households living
independently.
Unit: Any building or portion thereof that is used as a complete, independent living facility for one (1) or more persons containing permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, as required by the California Building Code.
Unit, Accessory: An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more
persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is
situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:
A. An efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of Health and Safety Code.
B. A manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.
EAVE: The overhanging lower edge of a roof plane that extends up to eighteen inches (18") beyond the facade of a wall attached to said roof plane.
EMERGENCY SHELTER: Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a
homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay in accordance with Health and Safety Code
section 50801(e).
EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA: The portion of total required parking at a development used by on site employees. Unless specified in the City
Zoning/Building Code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:
Type Of Use
Percent Of Total Required
Parking Devoted To Employees
Commercial 30 percent
Office/professional 85 percent
Industrial/manufacturing 90 percent
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 392/581
EMPLOYEE TRANSPORTATION COORDINATOR: An employee, tenant, property owner, property manager, contracted service, or an employer
organization whose function is to promote car pools, vanpools and alternate commute modes. The coordinator shall have a permanent mailing address,
daytime telephone and office convenient to the appropriate employment center.
ENTERTAINMENT (Live): Any act, play, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act, or song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or
more persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance.
ERECTED: The construction of any building or structure or the structural alteration of a building or structure, the result of which would be to change the
exterior walls or roof, to increase the square foot floor area of the interior of the building or structure or to increase the height.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: All of the outer surfaces of an improvement, building or structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color
and texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement,
building or structure.
EXTERIOR PERIMETER WALL HEIGHT: The existing exterior perimeter wall consisting of the framing members, from and including the foundation and
any basement walls, to and including the uppermost floor and top plate of a building. Any portions of the exterior wall for any floor level that is horizontally
offset are also included.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons living together as a single household in a dwelling unit.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons living together as a single household in a dwelling unit.
FAMILY CARE HOME, FOSTER HOME, OR GROUP HOME: Any residential facility, licensed by the State, providing twenty four (24) hour care for six (6)
or fewer foster children, including children who have mental disorders or developmental or physical disabilities and who require special care and
supervision as a result of their disabilities, and children who require nonmedical care in a structured environment that is owned, leased or rented and is the
residence of the foster parent or parents, including their family, in whose care the foster children have been placed. Such services may be provided at
least in part by staff employed by the licensee.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, fast food.
FITNESS CENTER (Also Known As A FITNESS CLUB, HEALTH CLUB And Commonly Referred To As A GYM): A place which houses exercise
equipment for the purpose of physical exercise.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of government, political subdivision, or other
entity used as a signalizing device and usually displayed hanging free from a staff or halyard to which it is attached by one edge.
FLAT ROOF: A roof surface which slopes ten percent (10%) or less.
FLOOR: The horizontal, base surface of a room.
FLOOR AREA: The total horizontal area on all floors, stories or levels, as measured to the interior of a building's perimeter walls, including all floors,
stories or levels of the primary dwelling, attached and detached accessory dwelling units, habitable attic space, and accessory buildings. See subsection
15-4A-6F of this title for additional details when calculating "floor area".
FLOOR AREA (GROSS): The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of garages, vent shafts and
courts. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection
of the roof or floor above.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 393/581
FLOOR AREA (NET): The total horizontal area of all floors, stories or levels, as measured to the interior of a building's perimeter walls. Space devoted to
the following shall not be included when determining the total net floor area within a building or structure:
A. Elevator shafts.
B. Stairwells and stairway enclosures.
C. Courts or atriums.
D. Rooms exclusively holding building operating equipment.
E. Parking spaces at or above grade and access thereto; provided, that in commercial and manufacturing zones:
1. Not less than the front fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor is devoted to commercial/manufacturing use; and
2. At least one full level of parking below grade is provided.
F. Structures devoted exclusively to parking.
G. Restrooms in common areas of nonresidential buildings.
In the M-1 Zone only, the total space devoted to high or medium bay labs may be multiplied by a factor of 0.5 to determine the net floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area or net floor area of all buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area.
FOOD TO GO: See definition of restaurant, food to go.
FREEWAY: A highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands, or in respect to
which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access.
FREIGHT FORWARDING: An establishment primarily engaged in undertaking the transportation of goods from shippers to receivers for a charge covering
the entire transportation, and in turn, making use of the services of other transportation establishments as instrumentalities in effecting delivery.
FULL SERVICE RESTAURANT: See definition of restaurant, full service.
GRADE: The elevation of the surface of the ground of a property.
GRADE DIFFERENTIAL: The difference in ground elevation between the grade plane and the lowest point of the finished grade adjacent to the exterior
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 394/581
walls of the building. A grade differential is exempt when measuring the height of a building or structure. Any portion below the grade plane which exceeds
the maximum permitted grade differential for the zoning district is included in calculating the vertical height of the building. See section 15-2-3 of this title
for exceptions to building height.
GRADE, EXISTING: The surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project at the site.
GRADE, FINISHED: The elevation after the land is cleared, cut, filled, graded, or construction improvements are completed, including but not limited to,
pathways, pavements, hardscape or landscaping are complete.
GRADE, NATURAL: The ground elevation which existed prior to excavation, cut, fill, or landscaping improvements. The Director may assist in establishing
the existing natural grade, based on the surrounding undisturbed existing grade on other portions of the site, or based on adjacent properties to the site, or
the level of the finished sidewalk.
GRADE PLANE: Is a horizontal reference plane representing the average elevation between the highest and lowest point of the natural grade prior to
excavation, fill or construction, measured immediately below or adjacent to the exterior perimeter walls of a building or structure.
GREENHOUSE WINDOW: A window projecting out from a building wall, typically with glass on four (4) sides, which does not provide additional floor area.
HABITABLE AREA: As defined by the California Building Code.
HABITABLE VEHICLE: Any mobile home, camper, house trailer, travel trailer, recreational vehicle or any other vehicle utilized for human habitation, on a
temporary or permanent basis. Habitable vehicle does not include those vehicles located in an authorized mobile home park.
HARDSCAPE: Any durable material (pervious and nonpervious) that is comprised of solid manmade and natural materials used in the built environment
such as: stone, tile, wood, crushed rock, gravel, granite, brick, metal, glass, bitumen, concrete, and masonry. Hardscape projects may include paved
areas, walkways, patios, statuary, walls, pools, fountains, fireplaces, fire pits, stone benches, and architectural landscape features.
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES (OFF SITE): Independent off site facilities used for, but not limited to, the transfer, storage, treatment,
recycling or land disposal of hazardous waste which has been produced at a separate facility. Hazardous waste is any waste or combination of wastes,
which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious nature may exhibit one or more of the following characteristics: toxicity,
corrosivity, flammability or reactivity.
HEAVY MANUFACTURING: Those industrial activities involving the processing, handling and manufacturing of products and research and technological
processes which are not compatible with uses allowed in other zones and largely contribute to nuisance factors, such as noise, vibration, glare, heat, dust,
humidity, odor or any type of potential air or waste pollution and have a potential to be hazardous beyond the site's property lines.
HELICOPTER LANDING FACILITY (HELISTOP): Any landing area used for landing or taking off of private helicopters for the purpose of picking up and
discharging of passengers or cargo. No fueling, refueling or service facilities are permitted.
HIGH AND MEDIUM BAY LABS: Any establishment, building or structure, or portion thereof, used for the assembly, packaging, fabrication, testing and
processing of materials into large and bulky finished products, such as spacecraft. The process may also include the research and development and
prototype production of a product. The interior of the building, or portion thereof used for high and medium bay labs, shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20') in height as measured from the floor to the lowest projection. The number of employees per square foot of net floor area shall not exceed one per one
thousand (1,000).
HIGH OCCUPANCY VEHICLE (HOV): A bus pool, car pool or vanpool vehicle used for employee commuting purposes.
HIGH POINT OF NATURAL GRADE: Is the highest point of the natural grade adjacent to the exterior walls of a building, planned or built, where it is
situated on a sloping lot.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: Any geographically definable small or large area containing buildings, structures, sites and objects linked historically through
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association. The significance of a district is the product of the sense of time and place in
history that individual components collectively convey. This significance may relate to developments during one period or through several periods in
history.
HISTORIC SITE: Any parcel or portion of real property which has special character or special historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological, community
or aesthetic value.
HOME OCCUPATION: The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or nonresidential uses by a resident thereof which is subordinate and incidental to
the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, in compliance with all of the following conditions:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 395/581
A. Not more than two hundred (200) square feet located in the dwelling shall be devoted to the home occupation;
B. There shall be no display of inventory, supplies, materials or merchandise on the premises;
C. No person shall be employed other than the immediate members of the family who reside on the premises;
D. No signs in connection with the home occupation, lighted or unlighted, shall be placed on the premises;
E. The home occupation shall not preempt the required off street parking spaces;
F. The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic not normally associated with residential uses;
G. No home occupation shall be permitted that creates noise, odor, dust, vibration, fumes, smoke, electrical interference or other objectionable
conditions not normally associated with a residential occupancy; and
H. Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations on home occupations, until December 31, 1972, home occupations shall also include home occupations
lawfully in existence on February 28, 1972, pursuant to definition of "certificate of occupancy" of this section as the same read on February 28, 1972.
HOMELESS PERSON: Has the same definition set forth in 42 USC section 11302.
HOSPITAL: An institution for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, which includes surgery, room, board and other services for the ill.
HOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or
which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Said use may also contain such ancillary facilities as conference facilities, personal services or food
preparation and dispensing. Said definition shall also apply to a bed and breakfast operation.
IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, fence, gate, landscaping, tree, wall, parking facility, work of art, or other object constituting a physical
feature of real property, or any part of such feature.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY/DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED; HABILITATIVE: A state licensed facility that provides twenty four (24) hour personal
care, habilitation, developmental, and supportive health services to developmentally disabled persons who have intermittent recurring needs for nursing
services, but have been certified by a physician and surgeon as not requiring availability of continuous skilled nursing care.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY/DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED; NURSING: A state licensed facility that provides twenty four (24) hour personal care
and nursing supervision for developmentally disabled persons who have intermittent recurring needs for skilled nursing care but have been certified by a
physician and surgeon as not requiring availability of continuous skilled nursing care. The facility shall serve medically fragile persons who have
developmental disabilities or demonstrate significant developmental delay that may lead to a developmental disability if not treated.
INTERMODAL TRANSIT FACILITY: A facility which provides safe and convenient automobile, bus, van, bicycle, and pedestrian access to a metro rail
station by providing, among other things, park and ride, kiss and ride, and van pool facilities, motorcycle and bicycle parking, special bus loading areas,
and other passenger amenities such as transit information kiosks, telephones, and bicycle racks.
KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats or any combination thereof, are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons
providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or cat is one of either sex, altered, or unaltered, that has reached the age of
four (4) months.
KITCHEN: Any room or portion of a room within a building designated and/or used or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food, which
may also include a sink, refrigeration, a garbage disposal, and storage.
LATTICE: A structure of interwoven, crossed strips arranged to form a regular pattern of open spaces that is usually made of wood or metal.
LIGHT ASSEMBLY AND PROCESSING: See definition of Light Industrial.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL: Light manufacturing, research and development, and office. "Light manufacturing" is defined as the assembly, packaging, fabrication,
and processing of materials into finished products, rather than the conversion or extraction of raw materials.
LIVE/WORK: The partial use of a dwelling unit for the following commercial uses: artists' studios and workspace for artists and artisans, illustrators,
painters, sculptors, photographers, or other activities related to fine arts (except musicians); and architectural, engineering, industrial design and drafting
and other construction design activities. Live/work uses are in addition to residential purposes and must comply with all the following:
A. Live/work uses may only be located in the medium density residential (MDR) zone of the Smoky Hollow specific plan area;
B. Live/work uses cannot be open to walk-in trade or client visits other than by appointment;
C. Only one employee, other than the resident, may be employed on site;
D. Work activity must be conducted entirely within the individual unit;
E. Outdoor storage is not permitted;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 396/581
F. Live/work uses cannot generate hazardous materials or employ hazardous processes;
G. The live/work use cannot be publicly observed;
H. Live/work activities, such as noise, vibration, dust, odors, fumes, smoke, heat, electrical interference or other similar nuisances, cannot be
perceptible beyond the individual unit;
I. Live/work activities cannot increase pedestrian or vehicle traffic beyond that ordinarily associated with residential occupancy nor can it reduce the
number of required off street parking spaces available for residential use;
J. One wall sign is permitted at the entrance of each individual unit. The wall sign cannot exceed six (6) square feet and cannot extend above or out
from the wall. Signs cannot emit sounds, odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or steam. Signage may be lighted from another source such as
gooseneck lamps. Internally illuminated and neon signs are not allowed. Rooftop signage is not allowed within the zone. Signs cannot contain any
revolving, fluttering, flashing or spinning elements. All signage is subject to city requirements for sign permits.
LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more than five (5) guestrooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with
or without meals, for compensation for more than one week. Guestrooms numbering six (6) or greater shall be considered a hotel.
LOT: A single legally created parcel, tract or area of land, which abuts a street.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one
hundred twenty eight degrees (128°).
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 397/581
LOT COVERAGE:
A. A covered floor area included within and measured from the outside of the exterior walls of a building, including, but not limited to, dwelling units,
lobby area, and elevators; and
B. An area not provided with surrounding exterior walls, if located under a roof or other covering, including, but not limited to, areas covered by
stairways and walkways which provide ingress and egress. Private balconies and decks (not providing required ingress and egress) that are five feet
(5') or less in width as measured from the exterior building wall shall not be included in computing lot coverage. Any portion of private balconies and
decks that extends more than five feet (5') from the building wall shall be included in lot coverage.
C. Uncovered decks and patios, which are thirty inches (30") or more in height are also included in lot coverage.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the lot front line and at right angles to such line, connecting with a line
intersecting the midpoint of the lot rear line and parallel to the lot front line. In the case of a lot having a curved front line, the lot front line, for purposes of
this section, shall be deemed to be a line tangent to the curve and parallel to a straight line connecting the points of intersection of the lot side lines of the
lot with the lot front line.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 398/581
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the lot front line shall be the line
separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 399/581
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing the lot rear line of a triangular or
trapezoidal lot, or of a lot the rear line of which is formed by two (2) or more lines, the following shall apply:
A. For a triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot and farthest removed from the lot front line and at right angles to the
line comprising the depth of the lot shall be used as the lot rear line;
B. In the case of a trapezoidal lot, the rear line of which is not parallel to the lot front line, the lot rear line shall be deemed to be a line at right angles to
the line comprising the depth of the lot and drawn through a point bisecting the recorded lot rear line; or,
C. In the case of a pentagonal lot, the rear boundary of which includes an angle formed by two (2) lines, the angles shall be employed for determining
the lot rear line in the same manner as prescribed for a triangular lot.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 400/581
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line, a street side lot line, or a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET SIDE: The lot line which separates the lot from the street, but is not the front lot line.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 401/581
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot in which the street side lot line is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which the rear of
the reversed corner lot abuts.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 402/581
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having street frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. Such a lot shall be considered to have two (2) front
yards. The depth of each yard shall be based upon the zoning district in which each front yard is located.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 403/581
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles at the rear line of the required front yard.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 404/581
LOW POINT OF NATURAL GRADE: Is the lowest point of the natural grade adjacent to the exterior walls of a building, planned or built, where it is situated
on a sloping lot.
MANUFACTURING: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of goods or equipment.
MINI-MART: A commercial establishment which sells food and beverages and is operated in conjunction with a service station.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, greater than three hundred twenty (320) square feet in gross floor area designed with attached
axles and wheels, which may be used for permanent or semipermanent housing or human occupancy, and which is designed to be drawn by a motor
vehicle. The term shall also include any vehicle meeting the above description which is used for an office, a classroom, a laboratory, processing,
manufacturing, retail sales or other use.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land developed and operated as a unit with individual sites and facilities to accommodate two (2) or more mobile homes.
MOTEL: Any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended or designated to be used, or which are used or rented or which are occupied for
sleeping purposes by guests. Said use shall not contain such ancillary facilities for conferences, personal services, food preparation and dispensing.
MOVIE AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or defined area which is utilized primarily for
the public presentation of film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities that in the opinion of the Director of Community, Economic
and Development Services are similar when developed in combination with multimedia production facilities.
Facilities may include as an accessory use retail sales, recreational activities, ancillary offices, and other uses customary and necessary to a movie
and/or entertainment facility.
MULTIMEDIA: A combination of film, television, music, music video, world wide web, or other related activities that in the opinion of the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services are similar.
MULTIMEDIA ARCHIVE FACILITIES: A building, part of a building, or structure, which is utilized primarily for the storage of media related documents,
equipment, records and/or historical artifacts related to the entertainment industry.
MURAL: A sign consisting of a picture, painting, or other artwork applied to and made integral with an exterior wall surface of a building, structure, fence,
or garden wall.
MUSEUM: A land use involving the collection, documentation, preservation, exhibition, interpretation and public display of objects of historical, scientific,
cultural, or artistic interest for the public benefit. A museum may include ancillary offices, a library, multimedia presentation rooms and storage rooms.
Museums may also include accessory uses such as retail sales, restaurants, cafes, recreational uses, and other ancillary uses customarily associated with
museums.
OFFICE, MEDICAL-DENTAL: A building or group of buildings designed for the use of, and occupied and used by, physicians, chiropractors,
acupuncturists, physical therapists, and dentists and others engaged professionally in such healing arts for human beings as are recognized by the laws of
the State, including such accessory uses as the installation and use of therapeutic equipment, X-ray equipment or laboratories, chemical, biochemical, and
biological laboratories used as direct accessories to the medical-dental professions; dental laboratories including facilities for the making of dentures on
prescription; and pharmacies limited to the retail dispensing of pharmaceuticals and sickroom supplies (but not room or orthopedic equipment); provided
there shall be no exterior display windows or signs pertaining to such accessory uses other than a directory sign.
OFFICES, GENERAL: Offices maintained and used as a place of business conducted by persons whose business activity consists principally of services
to the person as distinguished from the handling of commodities. This does not include medical-dental offices. General offices include, but are not limited
to, the following:
A. Administrative/Business: Establishments providing direct services to consumers, such as credit, lending, and trust agencies, data processing
services, detective agencies, employment, insurance agencies, real estate offices, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services,
government offices and educational institution offices, union offices and utility company offices.
B. Broadcasting Offices And Studios: Commercial and public communications uses, including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations
and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings.
C. Production: Office type facilities occupied by businesses engaged in the production of intellectual property. Production uses include computer
software production and programming services, media postproduction services, graphic design, fashion, photography and commercial art studios,
writers' and artists' offices.
D. Professional: Professional offices include accounting; advertising agencies; architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services; attorneys;
auditing and bookkeeping services; consulting; corporate; counseling services; court reporting services; educational services; literary and talent
agencies; management and public relations services; scientific and research organizations.
OFFICES, MULTIMEDIA RELATED: A building, part of a building, structure, or defined area which is utilized primarily for the office space directly related to
film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DISPLAY: Any card, paper, cloth, metal, glass, wooden, or other display or device of any kind or character whatsoever placed
for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, rock, structure, or thing whatsoever.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: A structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any
outdoor advertising display may be placed.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 405/581
PARKING DEMAND STUDY: An analysis of the total number of parking spaces required in order to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles for
parking purposes by a particular use or site at any given time. The analysis shall consider parking required for all employees, occupants, clients, and
visitors.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PERGOLA: A structure of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of beams and crossing rafters or trelliswork, over which climbing plants are trained
to grow.
PICTURE EQUIPMENT SALES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area which is utilized primarily for the sales,
lease, storage and/or rental of equipment and materials utilized in film, television, music video, multimedia, or other action activities that in the opinion of
the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services are similar.
PLAYHOUSE: A structure to be used, or intended to be used, by children for play purposes.
PORCH (Sometimes Referred To As A VERANDA): An exterior appendage to a building forming a covered approach or vestibule to a doorway. The
covering may have a separate roof from the building, and may have railings and/or supporting columns.
PORTE-COCHERE: A porch roof projecting over a driveway at or adjacent to the entrance to a building that shelters those getting in and out of vehicles.
POSTPRODUCTION FACILITIES: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or defined area, which is utilized primarily for support
activities necessary and incidental to the multimedia industry subsequent to production actions.
PREFERENTIAL PARKING: Parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings, for car pool and vanpool vehicles
which are provided at a reduced cost and/or are in locations considered to be the best or most desirable, such as adjacent to a building entrance or within
a covered or shaded area, if such is not provided for single occupant vehicles.
PRESERVATION: The identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation, or acquisition of cultural resources.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar habitable dwelling.
PROPERTY OWNER: The person or persons shown as the record owner of the property on the latest available assessment roll of the County of Los
Angeles. For the purposes of chapter 16 of this title, "property owner" shall mean the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant
and/or agent. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of chapter 16 of this title, either directly or by delegating such
responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or agent.
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: Any action undertaken by the City or under contract to the City to construct, alter, repair, or maintain any City structure, utility,
or right-of-way.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
A. Public: Public recreational facilities are facilities that are operated by a government agency.
1. Indoor: Examples include, without limitation, indoor entertainment, multipurpose recreational buildings, and studios for dance, art, music,
photography, and martial arts.
2. Outdoor: Examples include, without limitation, athletic fields, ballparks and bleachers, basketball, racquetball, tennis, and volleyball courts, golf
courses, parks and other areas of active or passive recreational usage, swimming pools, trails and bicycle trails.
B. Private/Commercial:
1. Indoor: Examples include, without limitation, arcades, billiard/pool halls, bowling alleys, indoor entertainment, racquetball and tennis courts, and
skating rinks.
2. Outdoor: Examples include, without limitation, amusement centers (arcades, skating rinks, miniature golf, and similar uses), golf courses,
miniature golf, racquetball and tennis courts.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, whose gross floor area is less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet, which
is designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use, and which is either self-propelled, mounted on, or pulled by another vehicle.
Examples include, but are not limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, fifth wheel trailer, or van.
RELOCATION: Any change of the location of a building or structure from its present setting to another setting.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: A process of experimentation, whereby a physical product, such as a biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic,
mechanical and/or optical component is designed, manufactured, tested, and refined. This process does not include uses/activities that do not lead to the
development of a physical product, such as computer modeling, computer software development, soils and other materials testing laboratories, or medical
laboratories. This process does not include the general or mass production of the product.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A twenty four (24) hour residential care facility, licensed by the State, for persons with chronic, life threatening illness who
are eighteen (18) years or older or are emancipated minors, and for family units.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY: A twenty four (24) hour housing arrangement, licensed by the State, chosen voluntarily by the
residents, the resident's guardian, conservator, or other responsible person; where seventy five percent (75%) of the residents are at least sixty two (62)
years of age, or, if younger, have needs compatible with other residents; and where varying levels of care and supervision are provided, as agreed to at
time of admission or as determined necessary at subsequent times of appraisal.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any family home, group care facility, or similar facility, licensed by the State, for twenty four (24) hour nonmedical care of
persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 406/581
REST HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME OR NURSING HOME: A facility serving seven (7) or more persons in which nursing, dietary and/or other
personal services are furnished twenty four (24) hours a day to convalescents, invalids, and aged persons, but in which are kept no persons suffering from
a mental sickness, disease, disorder, ailment, or from a contagious or communicable disease, and in which are performed no surgery, maternity, or other
primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanatoriums or hospitals, or in which no persons are kept or served who normally would be
admittable to a mental hospital.
RESTAURANT: Any business establishment, building, or structure where food or drink are prepared and served for consumption either on or off the
premises, which may also include as accessory uses, service to persons over an interior counter, outside the structure, or from an outdoor service window.
Any restaurant with an automobile service window shall be considered a drive-through restaurant.
RESTAURANT, CAFE: An establishment that sells food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises in conjunction with retail sales of other
goods. A cafe can only be located within a multiuse shopping center, office development, or the commercial portion of a mixed use development in a multitenant
structure. Alternatively, a cafe can exist as an accessory use within a primary permitted use. A cafe must comply with the following:
A. A cafe can only have a limited food and beverage menu. Food sold at cafes must be generally received by customers in a prepackaged or
precooked state that requires little or no preparation. Limited means for heating food (such as a microwave oven or toaster oven) are allowed;
B. Cafes cannot exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) gross square feet (including the area for food consumption);
C. The interior area for food consumption in cafes must be a maximum of four hundred (400) gross square feet of the floor area of the primary
permitted on site use;
D. Seating areas in cafes must be clearly separated from other portions of the use as defined by fixed barriers such as full or partial walls, fencing,
planters, corridors, counters, or permanent display fixtures;
E. Not more than fifteen (15) seats are allowed within cafes;
F. Orders for food or beverages in cafes must be placed and picked up from an interior counter only. No table service is provided;
G. No drive-through window or outdoor service window is allowed;
H. No alcoholic beverages can be served; and
I. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross floor area must be devoted to the sale of nonfood products.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH: Any business establishment, building, or structure where food or drink are prepared and served for consumption
either on or off the premises by order from or service to persons at an automobile service window, and which may also include as accessory uses, service
to persons over an interior counter, outside the structure, or from an outdoor service window.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: A restaurant where customers purchase food and beverages and either consume the food and beverages on the premises
within a short period of time or take the food and beverages off the premises. Typical characteristics of a fast food restaurant include, without limitation, the
purchase of food and beverages at a walk-up window or counter; no table service by a server; payment for food and beverages before consumption; and
the packaging of food and beverages in disposable containers. A restaurant is not to be considered a fast food or takeout restaurant solely on the basis of
incidental or occasional takeout sales.
RESTAURANT, FOOD TO GO: A restaurant or other such establishment designed as a takeout facility in which no food is consumed on the premises and
no provisions are made for that purpose. Provisions for deliveries, catering, drive-through or walk-up facilities are permitted. Food to go uses must meet
the parking requirements for retail uses.
RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE: A restaurant where customers purchase food and beverages and consume the food and beverages on the premises.
Typical characteristics of a full service restaurant, include, without limitation, table service by a server; payment for food and beverages after consumption;
and serving food and beverages in nondisposable containers. A full service restaurant may include incidental or occasional takeout sales.
RESTORATION: The act or process of accurately returning the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time,
the removal of later work, or the replacement of missing earlier work.
RIDESHARING: The cooperative effort of two (2) or more people traveling together, usually to and from work. Car pools, vanpools, bus pools, and taxi
pools are all methods of ridesharing.
ROOF: A structural covering over any portion of a building or structure including the projections beyond the walls or supports of the building or structure.
An open work covering shall not be considered a roof if the upper horizontal surface area of the component solid portions thereof do not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the area of the covering.
ROTUNDA: A round, domed feature, building or portion thereof containing high interior vertical space between the floor and ceiling above.
SCHOOLS, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR HIGH AND HIGH: Institutions of learning which offer instruction in the several branches of learning and study
required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State.
SCHOOLS, PRIVATE: Private schools are educational institutions that include, without limitation, adult level, business, vocational, and trade schools;
boarding schools; colleges and universities; private preschools, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, and high schools; military academies;
professional schools (law, medicine, etc.), seminaries/religious ministry training facilities. Private schools also include specialized nondegree granting
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 407/581
schools offering instruction in: art, ballet and other dance, computers and electronics, cooking, drama, driver education, language, and music.
SEGMENTED GRADE PLANE: Is multiple horizontal grade planes adjacent to different portions of the exterior walls of a single building. Segmented grade
planes are used for measuring the height of structures on sites with a significant natural grade slope.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING: A multiple-family development which is restricted to individuals fifty five (55) years of age or older, and which provides
common facilities, including, but not limited to, kitchen, dining room, game playing area, library, and restrooms.
SERVICE STATION: An area which provides for the sale of gasoline, other fuels and lubricants for motor vehicles, and the fueling of motor vehicles as the
primary use. Accessory services may also be provided, such as retail minimarts, tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage and sale of merchandise
and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, motor vehicle washing, grease racks, and other minor motor vehicle repairs, excluding body and
fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work, and other similar activities.
SETBACK: The minimum required distance between the interior lot line or the edge of public right-of-way and the building line.
SIGN: Any structure, device, or material, temporary or permanent, fixed or portable, moving or stationary, whether located inside or outside a building, that
is visible from any property where the primary purpose of the sign is to convey visual communication. "Sign" does not include the following:
A. Interior signs that are located entirely within an enclosed structure and not visible from the exterior;
B. Building features that are only decorative or architectural and do not include trademarks. Such building features may include minimal lettering or
moving parts.
C. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, without limitation, religious or political symbols when they are permanently
integrated into the structure of a building;
D. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance including, without limitation, tattoos or makeup;
E. Marks on tangible products that identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and that customarily remain attached to the product even after
completion of a sale;
F. Traffic, directional, emergency, warning or informational signs required or authorized by a government agency having jurisdiction;
G. Public utility signs;
H. Advertisements or banners mounted on duly licensed mass transit vehicles including, without limitation, buses and trains, that legally pass through
the City;
I. Insignia located on legal vehicles and watercraft including, without limitation, license plates, registration insignia, noncommercial messages,
messages relating to the business for which the vehicle is an instrument or tool, and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of
vehicles or watercraft;
J. Building marker signs; and
K. Newsracks and newsstands.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 408/581
SIGN, ABANDONED: Any sign which was lawfully erected, but whose use has ceased or whose structure has been abandoned for a period of one year. A
lawfully erected sign structure for a vacant property or building which is actively available for lease is not abandoned unless the Planning and Building
Safety Director determines the sign is a public nuisance, pursuant to section 15-18-8 of this title.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign with action or motion, flashing, or color changes, accomplished through manual, electronic, or other means, but not including,
wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items, and public service signs such as time and temperature units.
SIGN, ANNOUNCEMENT: A temporary sign intended to direct attention to, or advertise a future development, tenant, or business on a property.
SIGN AREA: The face or display area of a sign, including its border only when the border carries or displays part of the message or copy. Supports or
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 409/581
uprights on which such sign is placed are excluded from the sign area calculation. For signs using individual channel letters, the sign area is determined by
not more than two (2) rectangles, of at least six inch (6") width, drawn around the entire grouping of letters or words.
SIGN, BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar flexible material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, State or Municipal flags, "POW/MIA" flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
SIGN, BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light
source. The light source may be fixed, rotate, or give the appearance of movement.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: Any sign erected for the purpose of advertising a product, event, business, person, or subject not located on the premises on which
the sign is located and containing a surface or display area of fifty (50) square feet or more.
SIGN, BUILDING: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.
SIGN, BUILDING MARKER: Any sign indicating the name of a building and/or date of construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of
bronze or other permanent material.
SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign, or part of a sign, that includes copy that can be changed through manual or electronic means, regardless of method
of attachment or materials of construction.
SIGN, COPY: That portion of a sign which contains the letters, words, numbers, pictures, or logos that convey a message to the viewer.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that guides or directs pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign listing the tenants or occupants and their locations throughout building or development.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS (EMCs): An outdoor sign that displays words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically or
mechanically changed by remote or automated means.
SIGN, FIN: A sign which is supported wholly by a one-story building of an open air business or by poles placed in the ground or partly by such a pole or
poles and partly by a building or structure.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is part of a structure that is not attached to a building but is supported from the ground by one or more poles or posts
with or without braces and is permanently mounted in a fixed location.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign with copy that identifies only the business name, product, or service sold, and/or street address of the building upon which
it is placed.
SIGN, INFORMATION: A sign that informs people of the purpose of an object or gives them instruction on the use of something (an example is "air/water",
the location of restrooms or similar information) but does not contain advertising, brand, trade, or center name information.
SIGN, LIGHT EMITTING DIODE OR LED: A sign incorporating light emitting diodes (LED) to display changeable copy. Signs that utilize LEDs for
decorative, artistic or accent purposes, or as the primary source of illumination behind translucent elements are not included in this definition.
SIGN, MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over a public property.
SIGN, MONUMENT OR GROUND: A sign with a solid base that is not attached to a building, where the bottom of the sign is in contact with or close to the
ground.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign which complied with all applicable regulations at the time it was installed, but which now is in conflict with the
provisions of this title.
SIGN, POLE: A freestanding sign that is supported by a pole/post or poles/posts.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A temporary freestanding sign with noncommercial copy erected for an upcoming election.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not
limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as
signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day to day
operations of the business, or is a public transit vehicle designed to carry nineteen (19) or more passengers.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches (6") beyond the surface of
such building or wall. Marquee signs are included in this definition.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof or parapet of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending
vertically above the roof. Signs that are attached to or painted upon a structure attached to the roof of a building are included in this definition.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign, banner, pendant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other
light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.
SIGN, WALL: Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches (6") of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of,
an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign that is placed within three feet (3') of the inside of a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior
of the window.
SOFTSCAPE: Trees, shrubs, flowers, live horticulture plants, vines, ground covers, grasses, shrubs, trees, and may include high quality artificial plants
and durable synthetic grass or artificial turf which are not made with heavy metals or lead with completely pervious backing.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 410/581
SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD): The regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet
Federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San
Bernardino Counties).
SPACE: The location of automobile parking spaces and other accessory uses enumerated herein.
SPECIAL EFFECTS STUDIOS: Space in an outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area, which is utilized primarily for
the creation of special effects for film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities.
STOOP: A raised platform that is approached by steps at the entrance to a building. A stoop may have a roof projecting out from the building wall over the
building entrance that does not have any columns supporting it.
STORE FRONT: The facade or entryway of a retail store which faces the street and is located on the ground floor or street level of a commercial building.
STORY: That portion of building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; or, if there is no floor above, then the
space between such floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused underfloor space is more than six feet (6')
above "grade" as defined herein for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or is more than twelve feet (12') above "grade" as defined herein at
any point, such usable or unused underfloor space shall be considered a "story".
STORY, FIRST: The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a "story", as defined herein. In a building having only one floor level, said floor level shall
be classified as the first story.
STREET: Any thoroughfare or public way which exceeds twenty feet (20') in width and which has been or may be dedicated or deeded to the public for
public use.
STREET LINE: The boundary line between a street and the abutting property.
STREET, SIDE: A street which is adjacent to a corner lot which extends in the general direction of the line determining the depth of the lot.
STROBE LIGHT: A lighting device that uses a flashtube for high speed illumination.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof
joists, girders or rafters, or changes in the exterior dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed
together in some definite manner.
STUDIO/SOUND STAGES AND SUPPORT FACILITIES: Space in an outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or a defined area,
which is utilized primarily for the creation of film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities.
SYNTHETIC GRASS (Also Referred To As ARTIFICIAL TURF): A surface of synthetic fibers made to look like natural grass.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 411/581
TENANT: The lessee or sublessee of a facility space within a development project.
THEATER: A place where plays, operas, motion pictures, or similar activities sanctioned by law or custom are viewed by members of the public.
THEATER AND PERFORMANCE SPACE: An outdoor or indoor area, building, part of a building, structure, or defined area, which is utilized primarily for
rehearsal or research and development related to the presentation of film, television, music video, multimedia, or other related activities that in the opinion
of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services are similar. Such areas may or may not be open to the general public.
TOP OF BUILDING: Is the highest point of a pitched roof or the parapet on a building.
TOWER: A building or structure, usually round or square in plan and characteristically taller than its diameter, forming a part of a larger building and is
often located at a corner of the building.
TRANSIT: Transportation service operated by a public or private agency for use by the general public that utilizes buses or railcars, following a fixed route
and schedule.
TRANSIT SUPPORT FACILITIES: Facilities, including, but not limited to, transit shelters, bus transfer centers, bus bays, park and ride lots, and/or transit
operating or fare subsidies to employees.
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM): The alteration of travel behavior usually on the part of commuters through programs of incentives,
services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as car pooling and van pooling, and changes in work schedules that
move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed workweeks).
TRELLIS (Also Referred To As A PERGOLA): A system of horizontal latticework supported on posts, designed to support growing vines and plants, or to
provide partial shade for outdoor gathering/activity areas.
TRIP REDUCTION: Reduction in the number of work related trips made by single occupant vehicles.
TURRET: A small, slender ornamental tower that begins above ground level that usually projects from a corner of the building to which it is attached.
UNDERGROUND PARKING FACILITIES: A basement equipped, designed, used, or intended to be used, for parking automobiles.
USE: The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be
occupied, including all accessory uses.
VACANCY: A building or structure that is unoccupied by a use, business, or individual, except that buildings which are actively available for lease or
occupancy, or are being remodeled, shall not be considered vacant.
VANPOOL: A vehicle carrying seven (7) or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a van or similar motor vehicle
with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. Vanpools can be formed
using private vans, company owned vans, or third party vans.
VEHICLE: Any motorized form of transportation, including, but not limited to, automobiles, vans, buses, and motorcycles.
VEHICLE LIFT: A stationary mechanical device with four (4) permanently anchored posts that vertically lifts a vehicle to allow the storage of a second
vehicle below and must be designed with an automatic locking mechanism for safety.
VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICES: The sales, rental, repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational
vehicles, boats, and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This includes,
without limitation, the following categories:
Accessories Installation: Minor facilities that specialize in the addition of supplemental convenience items or devices to vehicles that do not involve
the primary operating system of a vehicle (such as motors or transmissions) or structural features (such as body, chassis, or suspension). For
example, these establishments provide installation of alarms, stereos, and window tinting.
Accessory Retail Sales And Services: Includes retail sales and services, storage of tires, car parts and other automobile supplies, and limited
automobile sales. Automobile sales cannot exceed eight (8) automobiles per month; not more than three (3) automobiles can be displayed at one
time.
Car Washes: Permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing
services.
Impounding/Storage: Facilities that provide impounding and storage of towed or impounded vehicles. Does not include towing (see definition of
Vehicle Sales And Services: Towing).
Maintenance/Repair: The installation, replacement, tuning, or maintenance of the various parts, equipment, or operating systems of a vehicle, which
includes body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work, automobile painting, and car washing.
Mobile Home And Recreational Vehicle Sales: Retail establishments selling and/or renting the following new or used vehicles and products: boats,
campers/camper shells, golf carts, jet skis, mobile homes, motor homes, motorcycles, snowmobiles, travel/recreational trailers, and other
recreational vehicles.
Service Stations: See definition of Service Station.
Towing: Facilities that provide vehicle towing. Does not include storage of towed or impounded vehicles (see definition of Vehicle Sales And
Services: Impounding/Storage).
Vehicle Parts Sales: Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation. The term does not
include businesses dealing exclusively in used parts.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 412/581
Vehicle Sales/Rental: Retail establishments selling or renting automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and
accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. The term does not include the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see
definition of Vehicle Sales And Services: Vehicle Parts Sales); bicycle and moped sales (see definition of Commercial: Retail Sales: General Retail
Stores); tire recapping establishments; or "service stations", which are separately defined.
VEHICULAR USE AREA: The paved area of a parcel used for parking spaces, loading areas, driveways, and any other areas generally accessible by
vehicles.
VERANDA: A porch, usually roofed and partly enclosed by a railing, which extends across the front and sides of a house.
VIDEO ARCADE: An establishment having coin operated, slug operated, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image producing devices that show images to one or more persons per machine at any one time.
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION: A building or premises in which goods, merchandise, or equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
WASTE: The remains from either a manufacturing or assembly process, a finished product or a product which is no longer useful in its present form and
may or may not be recycled for future use.
WEB AUTHOR: An individual or group whose primary focus relates to the preparation of or assistance in the preparation of world wide web (www) related
materials, including, but not limited to, www pages, advertisements, connections, or other related activities that in the opinion of the director of community,
economic and development services are similar.
WORK: Any alteration, construction, demolition, relocation, or restoration of a designated cultural resource.
XERISCAPING (Often Incorrectly Spelled ZERO-SCAPING Or XEROSCAPING): Landscaping and gardening that reduces or eliminates the need for
supplemental water from irrigation. It is promoted in regions that do not have easily accessible, plentiful, or reliable supplies of fresh water, and is gaining
acceptance in other areas as access to water becomes more limited. Xeriscaping may be an alternative to various types of traditional gardening.
YARD: An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures except as
otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is that minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel thereto.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 413/581
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line or mean
high tide water line and a line parallel thereto.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 414/581
YARD, REAR LINE OF REQUIRED FRONT YARD: A line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front
yard, extending across the full width of the lot.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 415/581
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear of the required front yard to the front of the required rear yard, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; Ord. 1250, 4-2-1996; Ord. 1257, 6-18-
1996; Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; Ord. 1276, 8-19-1997; Ord. 1283, 11-18-1997; Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998; Ord. 1290, 12-15-1998; Ord.
1307, 4-20-1999; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; 2000 Code; Ord. 1365, 9-2-2003; Ord. 1381, 2-15-2005; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006; Ord. 1397, 8-15-2006; Ord. 1401,
10-3-2006; Ord. 1405, 1-22-2007; Ord. 1425, 2-3-2009; Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010; Ord. 1460, 4-19-2011; Ord. 1476, 2-5-2013; Ord. 1483, 11-5-2013; Ord.
1496, 10-14-2014; Ord. 1497, 10-21-2014; Ord. 1514, 12-1-2015; Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015; Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017; Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017; Ord. 1551, 8-15-
2017; Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017; Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018; Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
15-2-1: REGULATION APPLICATION:
The following regulations shall pertain to the various zoning districts within the City. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-2-2: LIMITATION ON LAND USE; PROHIBITION:
Except as provided in this title, it is unlawful to construct, reconstruct, or structurally alter any building or use any real property for any purpose other than
is specifically permitted in the zone in which the building or land is located. Using any building or real property for a purpose prohibited by Federal law,
State law, or this Code is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1401, 10-3-2006)
15-2-3: EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHT:
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, solar panels and related equipment, or mechanical and similar equipment required to
operate and maintain a building, fire escapes, open-work guardrails, skylights, clock towers, church steeples and other similar architectural elements,
flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, radio antennas, and other similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this title. Light
standards or other light fixtures may be mounted on the roof of a parking structure and must be designed to control glare. Non-permanent accessories,
such as furniture, barbeques, or umbrellas placed on a roof deck may be erected up to a maximum eight feet (8') above the height limits prescribed in this
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 416/581
title. No such penthouse, structure or accessory is allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. Any such structures in Residential Zones
shall be for noncommercial purposes only.
An increase in the maximum allowable building height, up to five feet (5'), may be granted by the Director, subject to the approval of an adjustment
pursuant to chapter 24 of this title. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
15-2-4: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS FOR WALLS AND FENCES:
A. Generally: In any R Zone, a wall or fence forty two inches (42") in height may be located and maintained on any part of a lot. On an interior or corner lot,
a wall or fence not more than six feet (6') in height may be located anywhere on the lot to the rear of the rear line of the required front yard. On a
reversed corner lot, a wall or fence not more than six feet (6') in height may be maintained anywhere on the lot to the rear of the rear line of the
required front yard except within the required triangular open area at the rear constituting a part of the required side yard of the street side. The
provisions of sections 15-2-6 and 15-2-11 of this chapter shall apply to walls and fences adjacent to corners and driveways. Wall and fence heights in
Nonresidential Zones shall be subject to the approval of the Director.
B. Retaining Walls:
1. Where a retaining wall protects a cut slope below the natural grade, as depicted in subsection E, figure 1 of this section, the retaining wall may be
topped by a fence or wall of a height equal to that which would otherwise be permitted at that location. This does not apply to retaining walls which
protect a fill slope.
2. Where a retaining wall contains a fill and is not located in any required setback, as depicted in subsection E, figure 2 of this section, the height of the
retaining wall built to retain the fill is considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence or wall. If required by the California Residential
Code, an open work fence or guardrail, not more than forty two inches (42") in height, may be erected on top of a retaining wall. An "open work
fence" means a fence in which the component solid portions are evenly distributed, vertically oriented, and constitute not more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the total surface area of the fence.
3. A retaining wall located in any required setback, as depicted in subsection E, figures 3A and 3B of this section, may retain a maximum of three feet
(3') of fill. The height of the retaining wall built to retain the fill is considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence or wall.
In a required side or rear setback, if required by the California Residential Code, an open work fence or guardrail, not more than forty two inches
(42") in height, may be erected on top of a retaining wall. However, the maximum height of the fence and/or wall including a required openwork fence
or guardrail is limited to six feet six inches (6'6").
In a required front setback, a six inch (6") wall or fence may be erected on top of a wall which retains a maximum of three feet (3'). No open work
fence, above the maximum forty two inch (42") total height, is allowed in the front setback.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to fences required by State law to surround and enclose public utility installations or to
chainlink fences enclosing school grounds and public playgrounds.
D. Adjustments: A wall or fence up to eight feet (8') in height may be allowed in residential zones subject to the approval of an adjustment, pursuant to
chapter 24 of this title. A variance is required for a wall or fence in a residential zone which exceeds eight feet (8') in height.
E. Figures And Diagrams:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 417/581
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-2-5: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS FOR BUILDINGS ON THROUGH LOTS:
On through lots one hundred fifty feet (150') or less in depth, the height of a building on the lot may be measured from the elevation of the sidewalk of the
street on which the building fronts. On through lots more than one hundred fifty feet (150') in depth, the height regulations shall apply to a depth of not
more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from that street which permits the greater height. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-2-6: CORNER AND ALLEY CLEARANCE:
For the purpose of safe visibility, all corner lots, and reversed corner lots must maintain a triangular area, described as follows: one (1) angle must be
formed by the front and side property lines, and the sides of this angle must be fifteen feet (15') in length, measured along the front and side property lines;
the third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two (2) other lines at their endpoints.
Lots located at the intersection of a public street and an alley must maintain a triangular area, described as follows: one (1) angle must be formed by the
property lines abutting the street and the alley, and the sides of this angle must be five feet (5') in length. The third side of this triangle must be a straight
line connecting the two (2) other lines at their endpoints. Along alleys that are more than fifteen feet (15') wide, this triangle must be located only on the lot
to the right of the alley as seen from a vehicle exiting the alley to enter the adjacent street.
Within the area comprising these triangles, no trees, fences, shrubs, retaining walls, buildings and structures, or other physical obstructions may exceed
thirty inches (30") in height from street grade, unless it is a tree which is trimmed to provide a minimum of twelve feet (12') of visibility from street grade
under the canopy created by the branches.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 418/581
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-2-7: ENCROACHMENTS:
Encroachments are subject to the following provisions in the indicated zones:
A. All Zones: "Architectural landscape features" as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title may encroach into setbacks as specified in section 15-2-14 of this
chapter. In all zones, every required yard must be open and unobstructed from the ground up, except the following intrusions may project two feet (2')
into required yards, provided the required yard cannot be reduced to less than three feet (3') in width:
1. Bay and greenhouse windows, on the first floor in any setback and on the second floor only in the front yard setback, provided that said window is
not wider than eight feet (8') measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part;
2. Cornices, corbels, columns, belt courses, sills, eaves or other similar architectural building features as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title. Eaves
may project six inches (6") into any nonconforming side or rear yard which is three feet (3') in width;
3. Fireplace structures not wider than eight feet (8') measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part;
4. Planting boxes or masonry planters not exceeding forty two inches (42") in height; and
5. Uncovered porches, platforms and landings which do not extend above the floor level of the first floor. Ramps, stairs, and safety guardrails leading to
said porches, platforms and landings may encroach further into a required setback but must maintain at least a three foot (3') distance to a property
line.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 419/581
B. Residential Zones: In Residential Zoning Districts:
1. A porte-cochere (open carport) may be placed over a driveway in the front twenty feet (20') of one side yard setback, outside of the front yard
setback, or attached to the front twenty feet (20') of one dwelling unit closest to the front lot line, provided the structure is not more than one story in
height; is unenclosed on three (3) sides; and is entirely open except for the necessary supporting columns and architectural features.
2. Mechanical equipment, such as pool heaters, water heaters, air conditioners, and solar energy system appurtenances not wider than eight feet (8')
measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part, and adequately soundproofed, may project two feet (2') into required side and rear
yards, provided the required yard cannot be reduced to less than three feet (3').
3. Detached arbors, pergolas, or trellises that partially cover a walkway and do not exceed eight feet (8') in overall height, six feet (6') in width, and five
feet (5') in length may have a zero setback in the front and street-side yards. However, the structures must comply with the requirements of sections
15-2-6, "Corner And Alley Clearance", and 15-2-11, "Driveway Visibility", of this chapter.
4. Uncovered porches, platforms and landings which do not exceed twelve inches (12") in height above finished grade may have a zero setback in nonstreet
fronting side and rear yards.
C. Nonresidential Zones: In nonresidential zoning districts, mechanical equipment and accessory structures that do not contain occupied space, as defined
by the California Building Code adopted by this Code, or that do not contain net floor area, as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title, may be located
within a required interior side or rear setback area.
1. Mechanical equipment includes emergency generators; air conditioning and heating units; transformers; solar energy system appurtenances; and
other equipment that is accessory to the principal permitted use. Mechanical equipment does not include electrical substations.
2. Accessory structures include trash and recycling enclosures; ground-mounted and covered parking solar energy systems; and structures that
exclusively house building operating equipment that is accessory to the principal permitted use.
3. Mechanical equipment and non-occupied accessory structures within a required setback are subject to the following requirements:
a. The mechanical equipment or accessory structure may not be higher than eighteen feet (18').
b. The mechanical equipment or accessory structure may not be longer than sixty feet (60') parallel to the line of the property to which it is situated or
longer than thirty five percent (35%) of the length of such property line to which it is situated, whichever is less.
c. The mechanical equipment or accessory structure may not be located within a required interior side or rear setback area if the interior side or rear
property line abuts a Residentially zoned property or abuts a public street.
d. Operation of the mechanical equipment must not exceed the noise standards for commercial and industrial property as identified in this Code.
e. The mechanical equipment or accessory structure must be set back from any interior side or rear property line to meet all access, safety, and
screening requirements as specified in title 13 of this Code and this title, including, but not limited to, adequate ingress and egress for public safety
employees.
D. Urban Mixed Use North (MU-N), Urban Mixed Use South (MU-S), Corporate Office (CO) And Light Industrial (M-1) Zones: In addition to the
encroachments permitted in nonresidential zoning districts generally, patios, decks, and similar outdoor areas used as gathering spaces; and outdoor
dining areas, may be located within setback areas as follows:
1. Stairs, pedestrian ramps, and related safety guardrails must maintain at least a three foot (3') distance to a lot line.
2. Patios, decks, and similar outdoor areas used as gathering spaces, and outdoor dining areas must be enclosed by walls, fences, and/or hedges.
These may be up to forty two inches (42") in height and maintain at least a five foot (5') distance to a property line. Walls, fences, and/or hedges may
exceed forty two inches (42") in height, provided that the portion exceeding forty two inches (42") in height is of a transparent or translucent material,
subject to the review and approval of the Director. These areas may be covered by a nonsolid trellis or pergola; or by a retractable awning, large
umbrella or other similar nonpermanent cover which provides protection from rain, subject to the approval by the Director. (Ord. 1588, 9-3-2019)
15-2-8: SCREENING:
Equipment must be screened in the following manner:
A. Electrical Lines; Cables: All electrical, telephone, cable television and similar service wires and cables which provide direct service to the property being
developed, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, must be installed underground. Risers on poles and buildings are permitted and must be
provided by the developer or owner onto the pole which provides service to said property. Utility service poles may be placed on the rear of the
property to be developed only for the purpose of terminating underground facilities. The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the
requirements of this section and must make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities.
B. Equipment; Appurtenances: Equipment and appurtenances such as, but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes
and meter cabinets, sprinkler manifolds and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground, provided that they are located in
a fully enclosed structure or are screened from public view to the satisfaction of the Director. Screening must sufficiently obstruct view of said
equipment from public rights-of-way surrounding the equipment location. Screening material may include masonry, metal, wood, vinyl or similar durable
material. Screening may be up to thirty percent (30%) open on the vertical surface, for example, perforated, lattice, louvered, and stacked. Chain link
fencing may not be used for screening equipment. All vent pipes and similar devices which are attached to a building must be painted to match the
building.
C. Rooftop Installation: Mechanical equipment installed on rooftops must be screened from public view to the satisfaction of the Director. Screening must
sufficiently obstruct the view of said equipment from public rights-of-way surrounding the equipment location. Screening material may include masonry,
metal, wood, vinyl or similar durable material. Screening material and colors must be compatible with the building on which the equipment is located.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 420/581
Screening may be up to thirty percent (30%) open on the vertical surface, for example, perforated, lattice, louvered, and stacked. Chain link fencing
may not be used for screening equipment.
D. Storage Areas: All outdoor storage areas, including those for cartons, containers and trash, must be screened from public view to the satisfaction of the
Director. Screening must sufficiently obstruct view of said equipment from public rights-of-way surrounding the storage area location. Screening
material may include masonry, metal, wood, vinyl or similar durable material. Chain link fencing may not be used for screening of storage areas.
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-2-9: PUBLIC FACILITIES:
The provisions of this title shall not be construed to limit or interfere with the installation, maintenance and operation of public utility pipelines and electric or
telephone transmission lines or railroads when installed in compliance with title 11, chapter 3 of this Code and when located in accordance with the
applicable rules and regulations of the Public Utility Commission of the State within rights-of-way, easements, franchises, or ownership of the public
utilities; nor shall they, except as provided in title 11, chapter 3 of this Code, restrict the right of a public utility to increase the capacity of facilities
necessary to and used directly for the delivery of or distribution of service. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-2-10: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Temporary buildings are prohibited except for the following:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 421/581
A. Temporary Real Estate Offices: One (1) temporary real estate office or construction trailer/mobile home may be located on any new subdivision or
development site in any zone. The Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall be responsible for reviewing and approving said
offices or trailer/mobile home, subject to any terms, conditions or special limitations deemed necessary.
B. Temporary Construction Buildings: Temporary structures, such as mobile homes or trailers for the housing of tools and equipment or containing
supervisory offices in connection with a valid building or other permit issued by the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services,
may be established and maintained as long as the permit is valid, and shall be removed within sixty (60) days after completion, or sixty (60) days after
cessation of work.
C. Other Temporary Structures: Other temporary structures are permitted only in nonresidential zones, pursuant to section 13-1-2 (appendix chapter 31,
division II) of this Code. Temporary structures installed or constructed for a period of three (3) months or more must be screened from the public view
when required by, and in a manner subject to the approval of, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996;
amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-2-11: DRIVEWAY VISIBILITY:
A. Triangle Area Required: To provide visibility for pedestrians and drivers, a visibility triangle must be formed along each side of the driveway located on
the subject property. Within this area fences, walls, and landscaping must not be allowed to exceed thirty inches (30") in height from street grade,
unless it is a tree which is trimmed to provide a minimum of twelve feet (12') of visibility from street grade under the canopy created by the branches.
B. Location And Description: The triangular area must be located adjacent to, but outside the driveway area, and must be described as follows: one (1)
angle must be formed by the intersection of the driveway and the property line abutting the street, the sides of which must be ten feet (10') in length.
The third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two (2) other lines at their endpoints, see section 15-2-6, figure 1 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-2-12: CARNIVALS1:
A. Time Limit; Permit Required: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, carnivals sponsored by local nonprofit organizations shall be permitted on
any property within the City zoned for uses other than residential, as an incidental or accessory use; provided, that such use does not exceed seven (7)
calendar days, including erection and dismantling, in any one (1) calendar year; that the applicant applies for and receives a permit from the City
Council to operate such carnival, and complies with all of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of said permits.
B. Operation Restrictions: The City Council shall not approve any such permit unless it finds that the operation will be conducted in the manner required by
the permit and will not adversely affect the public peace, health, and safety of persons or property in the vicinity of the property on which the proposed
carnival is to be located. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-2-13: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS FOR AIRPORTS OR HELIPORT LANDING FIELDS:
A. Exception: The provisions of this section shall apply to all conditional use permits issued for helicopter landing facilities, with the following exception:
Emergency, medical, police, fire and other public and private use of helicopter landing facilities with substantial public health and safety benefits shall
be permitted within the City.
B. Evidence Required: Conditional use permits for helicopter landing facilities may be issued after satisfactory evidence has been presented to the
Planning Commission demonstrating that:
1. The use of the helicopter landing facility shall not significantly increase community exposure to adverse health, safety, noise or nuisance impacts;
2. The use of the helicopter landing facility shall be accessory and incidental to the primary use of property;
3. The use of the helicopter landing facility for regularly scheduled commercial flight operations such as, but not limited to, bank operations and
commuter passenger service operations, shall be prohibited;
4. The helicopter landing facility shall not be established within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of an existing permitted facility; and
5. The helicopter landing facility shall not be established in the area west of Sepulveda Boulevard and north of El Segundo Boulevard in the City. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993)
C. Conditions: Conditional use permits issued for helicopter landing facilities shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Flight operations of all helistops shall take place only during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through
Friday, except that operation may be permitted until nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., if necessary to accommodate a business emergency. If an operation is
conducted between seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, for a business emergency, the permittee shall
notify the Community, Economic and Development Services Department on the next business day of the circumstances justifying that operation.
Flight operations will not be allowed on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving or Christmas Day.
2. The intermittent use of helicopters for maintenance, construction, moving of equipment and other spot usage on Saturdays and Sundays and outside
of specified operating hours may be allowed subject to prior reasonable notification and approval by the City.
3. Each operator of a helicopter landing facility shall provide to City and keep current:
a. The name and phone number of a contact person available twenty four (24) hours per day;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 422/581
b. A list of helicopters using the facility, together with their corresponding identification numbers; and
c. The noise and performance specifications of said helicopter.
4. A "Fly Neighborly Program" shall be filed with the City prior to the commencement of operations and approved by the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services and the City's Noise Abatement Officer. The program shall emphasize noise abatement and community
awareness through actions in at least the following areas:
a. Pilot awareness and sensitivity to community concerns;
b. Pilot training and flight operation planning; and
c. Public information.
5. All helicopters using the landing facility shall have large size identification ("N") numbers, a minimum of twelve inches (12") in size on the bottom of
the craft, except for helicopters which use the landing facility less than five percent (5%) of total operations of the facility per month.
6. All helicopters using the landing facility shall be equipped with a Mode A/3 transponder with Mode C altitude reporting capabilities.
7. Helicopter landing facility owners and operators shall enter into an indemnification agreement with the City and shall provide adequate proof of
liability insurance to the approval and satisfaction of the City Attorney.
8. All CUPs for helicopter landing facilities may be reviewed by the Planning Commission every two (2) years. A monitoring report shall be prepared by
the applicant and submitted to the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services upon request of the City. Such report shall
consist of data on the types of helicopters using a facility, hours of operation, performance standards, number of monthly flights, and all other
relevant data as determined by the City.
9. Any other conditions reasonably related to the operation of the helicopter landing facility. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-2-14: LANDSCAPING:
A. Requirement; Purpose: The goal of this section is to ensure that adequate landscape areas and permanent water efficient irrigation systems are
provided for all nonresidential development. The area extending between a building(s) and property lines must contain both softscape and hardscape
landscape materials, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking and loading. All softscape area provided for each project site in
nonresidential zoning districts must be natural plant material, preferably native to the area and not include artificial turf or synthetic grass except as
otherwise provided in this title. Lots in residential zoning districts are allowed to contain artificial turf or synthetic grass provided that the Director of
Planning and Building Safety will review the use of artificial turf or synthetic grass to require that the type and quality of material used is not harmful to
the environment (such as containing lead based or other hazardous materials); to require a pervious surface to address percolation, drainage, runoff,
and stormwater detention requirements; and to require that the artificial turf or synthetic grass is incorporated into a comprehensive landscaping design
and site planning. All nonresidential landscape projects must comply with chapter 15A of this title relating to water conservation in landscaping. (Ord.
1515, 12-15-2015)
B. Components: To achieve these purposes, the landscape criteria is divided into the following components: (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
1. Vehicular Use Areas: All surface vehicular use areas (VUA) shall provide landscape areas including shade trees and permanent irrigation systems,
to cover five percent (5%) of the VUA. Landscaping shall be distributed uniformly throughout the VUA, and shall be in addition to the required
property perimeter and building perimeter landscaping. There shall be one (1) tree for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of VUA. These trees
shall be evenly distributed throughout the automobile parking area to provide shade and provided around the perimeter of truck loading/waiting areas
to provide screening. Individual tree and planter areas shall not be less than three feet (3') in width, excluding curbs.
2. Building Perimeter: In those instances where setbacks are provided, all buildings, including parking structures, shall have landscape areas and
permanent irrigation systems around their perimeter. A minimum horizontal depth of five feet (5') of landscape materials, excluding curbs, shall be
provided around the buildings, except additions to buildings in the rear one-third (1/3) of a lot, which do not abut residential property, where
landscaping would not be visible from the public right-of-way need not provide building perimeter landscaping in the rear. A combination of soft and
hard landscape materials may be installed, provided the use of such materials form a cohesive, attractive and functional design. (Ord. 1257, 6-18-
1996)
3. Property Perimeter: All required setback areas must be landscaped as required by chapter 15A of this title. In addition, the landscaping must
incorporate the theme utilized for the public rights-of-way and one (1) shade tree must be provided for every twenty five feet (25') of street frontage.
The following encroachments are permitted into the landscaped setback areas:
a. Parking spaces may encroach into a required street-facing setback up to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the required setback area, provided
a minimum landscaped setback of five feet (5') is maintained. Parking spaces may encroach into a required interior side and rear setback up to the
interior side or rear property line, provided that the interior side and rear property line does not abut a public or private street.
b. "Architectural landscape features", as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title, may encroach into the landscaped setback area up to a maximum of
eighty percent (80%) of the required setback area, provided a minimum landscaped setback of five feet (5') is maintained. The features may cover
a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the setback, and be a maximum of twenty feet (20') in height. Encroachments which
exceed any of these standards, or which contain an open roof covering or side walls with greater than twenty percent (20%) component solid
portions, requires the approval of an adjustment, as provided in chapter 24 of this title.
A combination of soft and hard landscape materials may be installed, provided the use of such materials will form a cohesive, attractive and
functional design. Such design is to be integrated with and, if appropriate, physically connected to that provided for the building and VUA areas.
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
4. Minimum Sizes For Plant Material:
a. The minimum tree container size for all trees on a site must be provided as follows:
(1) At least twenty percent (20%) of the trees must be thirty six inch (36") box size or larger.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 423/581
(2) At least thirty percent (30%) of the trees must be twenty four inch (24") box size or larger.
(3) The remaining fifty percent (50%) must be fifteen (15) gallon size or larger.
(4) The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve smaller tree container sizes than required based on site conditions, however no tree
may be smaller than a fifteen (15) gallon size.
b. Shrubs must be planted from a minimum five (5) gallon size container. One (1) gallon size containers may be allowed for shrubs that are not
commonly available in five (5) gallon size containers, subject to approval by the Director of Planning and Building Safety. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-2-15: VIDEO ARCADES2:
A. Administrative Use Permit; Criteria: When reviewing an application for an administrative use permit for a video arcade, the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services shall evaluate the potential impacts of the proposed establishment using the following performance criteria: (Ord.
1272, 6-17-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
1. Distance from existing residential uses;
2. The amount of existing or proposed off street parking facilities, and its distance from the proposed use;
3. The provision of a sufficient number of bicycle racks;
4. Location of and distance to churches, schools, hospitals, public playgrounds and bars;
5. The combination of uses proposed;
6. Noise, odor, dust and/or vibration that may be generated by the proposed use;
7. The ability for the operator to prevent problems related to potential noise, litter, loitering, crowd control, security, and parking;
8. Use by persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall be in conformance with City curfew regulations, title 7, chapter 5 of this Code;
9. Hours of operation;
10. Precautions taken by the owner or operator of the proposed establishment to assure the compatibility of the use with surrounding uses;
11. The number of similar establishments or uses within close proximity to the proposed establishment;
12. Will the establishment contribute to a concentration of similar outlets in the area;
13. That no proprietor, owner, or manager may permit the video games to be located closer than twelve inches (12") from any wall assembly separating
the arcade from any adjacent building or portion of a building; and
14. Where games are located along one (1) side of an aisle, the aisle width shall be a minimum of sixty six inches (66") and the aisle shall be
unobstructed at all times. When games are located on both sides of an aisle, the aisle width shall not be less than ninety inches (90") in width and
shall be unobstructed.
B. Conditional Use Permit; Criteria: When reviewing a conditional use permit for a video arcade, in addition to the performance criteria for an administrative
use permit, the Planning Commission shall evaluate the potential impacts of the proposed establishments using the following performance criteria:
1. The provisions for adult supervision. No proprietor, owner or manager may permit any video game to be played unless there is at least one (1) adult
(over 18 years of age) attendant or supervisor overseeing the use of the video games.
2. Bicycle racks shall be provided within twenty five feet (25') of any video arcade and must provide a total of at least two (2) bicycle stalls for every four
(4) games located within the arcade. Bicycle racks shall not be located in any required landscaped areas, entrances, exits, walkways to buildings,
driveways, within any legally required parking space, public way, or in such a fashion as to obstruct any entrance or exit to any premises. (Ord. 1272,
6-17-1997)
3. An adequate lighting plan must be submitted to and approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services and Police Chief,
and each proprietor, owner, or manager shall maintain the lighting in conformity with the approved plan. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-
18-2000)
4. A security plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Police Chief.
5. The number of games proposed.
6. The establishment must provide adequate lavatory facilities accessible to customers, employees, and business invitees.
7. The relationship of the proposed business generated traffic volume and the size of streets serving the area.
8. Impact of the proposed use on the City's infrastructure and/or services.
9. At least one (1) public telephone shall be provided at each arcade.
10. Proximity to adult related retail sales (i.e., video/magazines). A physical separation or minimum distance must be maintained. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-
1997)
15-2-16: OUTDOOR DINING AREAS:
All outdoor dining facilities on private property must comply with the following:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 424/581
A. Walkway Width: Any surfaced pedestrian walkway on private property abutting an outdoor dining area must maintain a minimum width of forty eight
inches (48"), as set forth in section 3325 of title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
B. Blocking Ingress Or Egress: No placement of tables, chairs, umbrellas, etc., for outdoor dining shall be allowed in areas required for ingress and egress
by the Uniform Building Code (UBC). (Ord. 1279, 10-7-1997)
C. Overhead Elements: All overhead elements of the outdoor dining area, such as umbrellas, shall provide a minimum vertical height clearance of eight
feet (8'), as set forth in section 3206.4 of the 1997 Uniform Building Code. No horizontal part of the overhead elements may protrude beyond the
outdoor dining area.
D. Outdoor Dining Area: The outdoor dining area shall be kept clean and free of trash, etc., at all times, pursuant to title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
E. Tables And Chairs:
1. Maintenance: All tables, chairs, and any other facilities in the outdoor dining area must be maintained in good repair, subject to the approval of the
Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, pursuant to title 7, chapter 4 of this Code.
2. Closing Hours; Placement Inside: All tables, chairs, and umbrellas must be placed in a secure area or inside a building or structure when the
business is closed.
F. Alcoholic Beverages: Any sales or services of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor dining area requires prior approval and a license issued by the city
pursuant to chapter 22 of this title, and the State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC).
G. Entertainment Or Dancing: No entertainment or dancing is permitted in the outdoor dining area without prior approval from the Director of Finance and
the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, pursuant to title 4, chapter 8 of this Code.
H. Amplified Sound: No amplified sound is permitted in the outdoor dining area without prior approval of the Director of Community, Economic and
Development Services, pursuant to title 7, chapter 2 of this Code.
I. Public Property: All outdoor dining facilities on public property shall comply with all the requirements of title 9 of this Code, as well as any applicable
policies of the City. (Ord. 1279, 10-7-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; 2000 Code)
Chapter 3
ZONES AND USES
15-3-1: DESIGNATION OF ZONE NAMES:
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of lands and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings, to regulate the
area of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to regulate the density of population, the classes of use zones are by this title established, to be
known as follows:
R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone
R-2 Two-Family Residential Zone
R-3 Multi-Family Residential Zone
C-RS Downtown Commercial Zone
C-2 Neighborhood Commercial Zone
C-3 General Commercial Zone
CO Corporate Office Zone
MU-N Urban Mixed Use North Zone
MU-S Urban Mixed Use South Zone
C-4 Commercial Center Zone
M-1 Light Industrial Zone
M-2 Heavy Industrial Zone
MDR Medium Density Residential Overlay Zone
MMO Multimedia Overlay District
O-S Open Space Zone
P Automobile Parking Zone
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 425/581
P-F Public Facilities Zone
(Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018; amd. Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019)
15-3-2: SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES:
A. In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of lands and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings, to regulate
the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings and to regulate the density of population, the City has adopted the following specific plan
areas which function as the Zoning Code for specific areas: (Ord. 1387, 11-15-2005)
1. Smoky Hollow Specific Plan: There are four (4) classes of use zones intended to be used within the boundaries of the Smoky Hollow specific plan.
These zones include:
SH-W - Smoky Hollow West Zoning District
SH-E - Smoky Hollow East Zoning District
P-F - Public Facilities Zoning District
P - Automobile Parking Zoning District (Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
2. 124th Street Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the 124th Street specific plan. This zone is:
124th Street SP - 124th Street Specific Plan
3. Aviation Specific Plan: There is one use zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the aviation specific plan. This zone is:
ASP - Aviation Specific Plan Zone
4. Downtown Specific Plan: There are six (6) classes of use districts intended to be used within the boundaries of the downtown specific plan. These
districts include:
MSD - Main Street District
MSTD - Main Street Transitional District
NRSD - North Richmond Street District
RSD - Richmond Street District
GAD - Grand Avenue District
WGATD - West Grand Avenue Transitional District
5. Corporate Campus Specific Plan: There is one use zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the corporate campus specific plan. This zone
is:
CCSP - Corporate Campus Specific Plan Zone (Ord. 1387, 11-15-2005)
6. 199 North Continental Boulevard Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the 199 North Continental Boulevard
specific plan. This zone is:
NCBSP - 199 North Continental Boulevard Specific Plan (Ord. 1441, 4-20-2010)
7. 540 East Imperial Avenue Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the 540 East Imperial Avenue specific plan.
The zone is:
EIASP - East Imperial Avenue Specific Plan (Ord. 1469, 4-3-2012)
8. 222 Kansas Street Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the 222 Kansas Street specific plan:
222 KSSP - 222 Kansas Street Specific Plan (Ord. 1470, 9-4-2012)
9. 888 North Sepulveda Boulevard Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the 888 North Sepulveda Boulevard
specific plan. The zone is:
888 NSBSP - 888 North Sepulveda Boulevard Specific Plan (Ord. 1494, 4-15-2014)
10. El Segundo South Campus Specific Plan: There is one zone intended to be used within the boundaries of the El Segundo south campus specific
plan. The zone is:
ESSCSP - El Segundo South Campus Specific Plan (Ord. 1516, 1-19-2016)
B. The foregoing zones are separate zones and cannot be deemed to be more restrictive or less restrictive than any other zone, but are limited to the uses
permitted in the specified zone.
C. Amendments to the downtown specific plan cannot occur more than once every two (2) years beginning November 15, 2005. (Ord. 1387, 11-15-2005)
15-3-3: ZONING MAP:
A. Boundaries: The location and boundaries of the various zones are such as are shown and delineated on the zoning map of the City, which map is a part
of this title when adopted by ordinance passed by the City Council in the manner prescribed by law.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 426/581
B. Division: The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within the
zoning map, be subdivided into units and the parts and units may be separately employed for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official
reference to the zoning map. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-3-4: BOUNDARIES; CHANGES; UNCERTAINTY:
A. Changes By Ordinance: Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended zoning map, part of the map or unit
of a part of the zoning map, which amended maps or parts or units of parts, when so adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by law and
become a part of this title.
B. Rules Where Uncertainty Exists: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown upon a zoning map or any part or unit thereof, the
following rules shall apply:
1. Where the boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, the lines shall be construed to be the boundaries;
2. In the case of unsubdivided property and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of the boundaries, unless the same are indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map;
3. Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising the vacated street or alley shall acquire the classification of the
property to which it reverts; and
4. Areas of dedicated streets or alleys and railroad rights-of-way, other than such as are designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the
zones provided in this title, shall be deemed to be unclassified and, in the case of streets, permitted to be used only for purposes lawfully allowed
and, in the case of railroad rights-of-way, permitted to be used solely for the purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, other operative devices and
the movement of rolling stock. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 4
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) ZONE
15-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Single-Family on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is to provide for and promote the development of single-family homes within a safe and
healthy environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-4A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Only the following uses and developments may be conducted or constructed in the R-1 Zone:
A. A State authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster family home, or group home serving six (6) or fewer children.
B. A State authorized, certified or licensed residential facility, residential care facility, residential care facility for the elderly, intermediate care facility,
developmentally disabled habilitative or nursing, or congregate living health facility, serving six (6) or fewer persons.
C. Home occupations.
D. Large family daycare homes pursuant to section 15-4A-4 of this article.
E. One (1) mobile or manufactured home subject to the following:
1. The mobile or manufactured home has been certified pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, and has not been altered in violation of applicable codes; and
2. The mobile or manufactured home must be installed on a permanent foundation in compliance with all applicable building regulations and division
13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and Safety Code.
F. Parks, playgrounds, recreational areas (publicly owned and operated) but excluding ballparks, bleachers, swimming pools or other types of facilities
where racing or contests are conducted or public amusement devices are for hire.
G. Single-family dwellings; provided, that where a dwelling containing seven hundred (700) square feet or less exists on the rear portion of the lot and was
placed thereon prior to, or for which a building permit was issued prior to December 26, 1947, in conformance to the requirements of ordinance 293 of
the City, a second one-family dwelling may be erected on the front portion of the lot, whereupon the dwelling on the rear portion of the lot shall assume
the status of a nonconforming use as defined herein, but may be expanded to a maximum of seven hundred (700) square feet.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 427/581
H. Small family daycare homes.
I. The keeping of animals and pets in accordance with title 6, chapter 2 of this Code.
J. The renting of not more than two (2) rooms to not more than four (4) persons per dwelling unit.
K. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
15-4A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Accessory dwelling unit, pursuant to article E, "Accessory Dwelling Units", of this chapter.
C. Detached accessory buildings and structures, including private garages.
D. Play structures.
E. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
15-4A-4: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE FACILITIES:
All large family daycare facilities must comply with the following provisions for a large family daycare permit:
A. Application: Applications for large family daycare permits must be submitted to the Director by a property owner or an applicant with the consent of the
owner(s).
B. Notice To Adjacent Property Owners: At least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the Director will make a decision on the application, the
Department of Planning and Building Safety shall give written notice of the proposed use by mail or delivery to all owners shown on the last equalized
assessment roll as owning real property, and all residents within a five hundred foot (500') radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed facility, the
owner of the subject property and the project applicant.
C. Request For Hearing: No public hearing will be held before a decision is made on the application unless a hearing before the Planning Commission is
requested by the applicant or a property owner or resident within the five hundred foot (500') notification radius. If a hearing is requested, it shall be
provided in accordance with section 15-27-5 of this title, except, both the owners and all residents within a five hundred foot (500') radius are required
to be notified of the hearing. The applicant is required to pay an additional fee for the cost of the hearing.
D. Findings: Before a large family daycare permit may be granted, the Director or Planning Commission must make the following findings that the
proposed facility:
1. Provides one off street parking space for each employee who drives to the facility and who requires a parking space.
2. Provides drop off facilities as necessary to avoid interference with traffic and to promote the safety of children.
3. Is not located within three hundred (300) linear feet of an existing large family daycare facility; provided, however, that the Director or Planning
Commission shall disregard this requirement where the applicant can demonstrate that:
a. The existing large family daycare facility is operating at full capacity; or
b. The proposed facility meets the need for a particular service not provided by the existing large family daycare facility.
4. Complies with the noise element of the City's general plan.
5. Has been or will be licensed for such use by the State.
6. Complies with all State Fire Marshal requirements for large family daycare facilities, and with all local Building and Fire Codes which apply to singlefamily
residences.
E. Appeal: The decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission, and shall be processed as provided by chapter 25 of this title. (Ord.
1547, 2-21-2017)
15-4A-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are permitted, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 428/581
A. Mobile home parks, subject to all applicable building regulations and division 13, part 2 (commencing with section 18000) of the California Health and
Safety Code.
B. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
15-4A-6: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS WIDER THAN TWENTY FIVE FEET:
All uses on lots that are wider than twenty five feet (25') within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
2. New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
3. An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally integrated
and connected to the existing dwelling unit. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
B. Height:
1. The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof must not exceed thirty two feet (32') and two (2) stories. Buildings or structures with a flat
roof must not exceed twenty six feet (26') and two (2) stories.
2. A maximum grade differential of six feet (6') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
C. Lot Area: A minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
D. Setbacks:
1. Front And Rear Yards: The combined total of setbacks for the front and rear yards must be at least thirty feet (30') with no front yard setback less
than twenty two feet (22') and no rear yard setback less than five feet (5'). Front yard setbacks for two (2) car and three (3) car garages located in the
front half of a lot must comply with the standards contained in subsection G of this section.
a. Permitted Front Yard Setback Encroachments:
(1) Porches or verandas in a front yard setback not fully enclosed on three (3) sides (railings and/or columns permitted) may encroach into the
front setback a maximum of six feet (6');
(2) The first floor front yard setback facing exterior wall of a dwelling may encroach up to two feet (2') for a width not exceeding thirty feet (30')
when a first floor porch or veranda, not fully enclosed on three (3) sides, is also projecting into the front yard setback. The total amount of
encroachment may not exceed six feet (6') in depth combined for both the dwelling structure and a porch or veranda, for a maximum fifty
percent (50%) of the building width not to exceed thirty feet (30');
(3) Courtyards (with walls not exceeding 42 inches in height) may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet (6') and fifty percent
(50%) of the building width not to exceed twenty feet (20');
(4) Raised decks not greater than twenty four inches (24") above adjacent grade constructed in conjunction with a lattice deck cover not greater
than ten feet (10') above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet (6') in depth and fifty percent (50%) of
the building width not to exceed twenty feet (20');
(5) Lattice patio covers not greater than ten feet (10') above adjacent grade may encroach into the front yard setback a maximum of six feet (6') in
depth and fifty percent (50%) of the building width not to exceed twenty feet (20');
(6) Architectural elements such as towers or turrets not greater than eight feet (8') in diameter may encroach into the front setback a maximum of
four feet (4');
(7) Pergolas not greater than ten feet (10') in overall height (as measured from lowest grade adjacent to the pergola, to the highest point of the
pergola) that are attached to the dwelling may encroach into the front setback a maximum of six feet (6') in depth and fifty percent (50%) of the
width not to exceed twenty feet (20') in width;
(8) An arbor or trellis, not exceeding eight feet (8') in overall height (as measured from lowest grade adjacent to the arbor or trellis, to the highest
point of the arbor or trellis) and eight feet (8') in width may encroach into the front yard setback.
2. Side Yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback on each side of the lot of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but can never be less
than three feet (3') and need not be more than six feet (6').
3. Setbacks For Detached Accessory Structures:
a. Detached accessory structures, including garages, must maintain a minimum setback on each side of the lot of ten percent (10%) of the width of
the lot, but may not be less than three feet (3') and need not be more than six feet (6') on the first floor.
b. The second floor of a detached accessory structure, including garages, must maintain a minimum setback on each side of the lot of ten percent
(10%) of the width of the lot plus an additional setback of two feet (2'), but must not be less than five feet (5') and need not be more than eight feet
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 429/581
(8').
c. Detached accessory structures, including garages, that are only one story in height and are located in the rear third of the lot, must maintain a
minimum side setback of two feet (2').
d. Detached accessory structures that are two (2) stories high, and located in the rear third of the lot, must maintain a minimum side setback of two
feet (2') on the first floor and a minimum five feet (5') on the second floor.
e. Detached accessory structures must maintain a minimum setback of three feet (3') from the rear property line on the first floor and must maintain a
minimum setback of five feet (5') from the rear property line on the second floor.
f. Rooftop decks with required railings are permitted on single-story accessory structures and on top of the single-story portions of two-story
accessory structures. Rooftop decks are not permitted on top of two-story accessory structures. Rooftop decks must maintain a minimum setback
on each side of the lot of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, plus an additional setback of two feet (2') but can never be less than five feet
(5'), as measured from the property line to the required railing of the rooftop deck.
4. Side Yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots must have the following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: One angle must be
formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle must be fifteen feet (15') in length, measured along the rear and street
side property lines. The third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two (2) other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area is in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsection D2 of this section.
5. Rear Yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback of five feet (5') on the first and second floors.
6. Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection D, the west side yard of 618 W. Oak Avenue, more particularly described as the north
142.5 feet of the south 285 feet of the east 50.265 feet of Lot 14, Block 9, Tract No. 1685, commencing 63 feet south of the front lot line and
continuing south a distance of 30 feet, must be three inches (3") in width so long as that certain structure located along that thirty foot (30') distance
which existed on January 11, 1973, remains in existence. Upon the removal or destruction of said building, this property is no longer exempt from
this subsection D.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection D, the south side yard of 724 Penn Street, more particularly described as the south 55 feet of the
north 110 feet of Lot 8, Block 92, El Segundo Sheet No. 4, commencing 84 feet east of the front lot line and continuing east a distance of 20 feet,
must be three feet (3') in width so long as that certain structure located along that twenty foot (20') distance which existed on January 11, 1973,
remains in existence. Upon the removal or destruction of said building, this property is no longer exempt from this subsection D.
E. Lot Width: Every lot created after the effective date hereof must maintain a width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the required front yard setback line.
However, any lot or parcel of land of record on May 14, 1954, having a street frontage not exceeding two hundred feet (200'), may be subdivided into
two (2) or more parcels having a width of not less than the average width of the narrowest twenty percent (20%) of the lots fronting on its block. The
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 430/581
"block" is defined as the area on both sides of the street between the nearest intersecting streets. Each parcel must have an area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
F. Floor Area Ratio:
1. The maximum total building area on the lot shall not exceed an overall floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.60. There is no minimum building size.
2. The maximum FAR for the second floor of the primary structure shall not exceed 0.25.
3. In calculating the overall FAR, floor area is measured to the interior of a building's perimeter walls and shall include all floors of the primary dwelling
(i.e., main structure), attached and detached accessory dwelling units, habitable attic space, accessory buildings, and balconies, decks, verandas
and porches.
4. Areas where the vertical measurement between the floor and ceiling directly above is fourteen feet (14') or more shall be counted on both the first
and second stories for FAR calculations (areas such as rotundas, spaces with vaulted ceilings, and other similar areas with volume).
5. Stairs and elevators are counted once and are applied to the first floor.
6. For purposes of calculating floor area, the following are not included:
a. Basements as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title;
b. Up to five hundred (500) square feet of interior floor area of an attached or detached garage;
c. Detached accessory structures measuring not more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet;
d. Up to five hundred (500) square feet cumulative of first floor decks, verandas and porches, covered or uncovered, attached or detached, and at
least thirty inches (30") in height (as measured from adjacent grade to the walking surface), provided that the deck, veranda or porch is at least
fifty percent (50%) open on the sides.
e. Second floor balconies and decks that are not covered.
f. Up to twelve (12) square feet of second floor decks and balconies that are covered by roof, lattice or trellis.
g. The area of decks, balconies, verandas or porches covered by eave projections up to eighteen inches (18").
7. In cases of uncertainty or ambiguity, the director will determine whether an area is counted toward FAR.
G. Placement Of Buildings And Structures:
1. A minimum distance of three feet (3') must be maintained between buildings;
2. A detached single-story accessory structure in the rear third of the lot may be located as described in the requirements for setbacks in subsection D
of this section, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. Where the lot abuts an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory structure
must be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
b. On the rear third of a reversed corner lot a single-story detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building may
be erected closer than five feet (5') to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to
the detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
3. A garage that is attached to a dwelling that is located in the front half of the lot facing the front property line must be set back a minimum of twenty
four feet (24') from the front property line unless the building has a porch, veranda, courtyard or deck at least eight feet (8') in width by four feet (4') in
depth, then a minimum front setback of twenty two feet (22') is permitted.
4. An attached three (3) car garage located in the front half of the lot that faces the front property line where one of the stalls is not tandem, must have
at least two (2) individual car door openings. The following garage designs are encouraged:
a. Three (3) car garages constructed as attached or detached structures at the rear of a lot.
b. Tandem for parking provided in excess of a two (2) car garage.
c. Attached three (3) car garages located on the front of a dwelling face toward the side property lines.
5. Accessory outdoor showers attached to a building wall are permitted, but must not encroach in a required setback and must not be roofed. They may
be enclosed with walls on three (3) sides and a shower door on one side.
H. Detached Accessory Buildings, Not Including Detached Accessory Dwelling Units As Defined In Section 15-1-6 Of This Title:
1. Any detached accessory building or combination of accessory buildings, except the garage, may not be larger in gross floor area than six hundred
(600) square feet;
2. Detached accessory buildings are limited to two (2) stories, and may include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided that
access to the attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are
limited to the minimum required by the California Building Code and California Electrical Code;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 431/581
3. Unless permitted as an accessory dwelling unit, detached accessory buildings may not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower
and may not be used for sleeping purposes or as an "R" occupancy, as defined by the California Building Code, except that they may contain a sink
and a toilet;
4. Detached accessory buildings may not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit; and
5. Before the City issues a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except a garage, the Director will require that a covenant running with
the land be recorded stating that the accessory structure may not be used as a dwelling unit or used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-
2017)
15-4A-6-1: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOTS TWENTY FIVE FEET WIDE OR LESS:
All uses on lots twenty five feet (25') wide or less within the R-1 Zone must comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
2. New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
3. An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage or an accessory dwelling unit, must share a common wall and be internally integrated
and connected to the existing dwelling unit. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
B. Height:
1. The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof must not exceed thirty two feet (32') and two (2) stories. Buildings or structures with a flat
roof must not exceed twenty six feet (26') and two (2) stories.
2. A maximum grade differential of six feet (6') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
C. Lot Area: A minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
D. Setbacks:
1. Front And Rear Yard: The combined total of setbacks for the front and rear yard must be at least thirty feet (30'), with no front yard setback less than
twenty two feet (22') and no rear yard setback less than five feet (5').
2. Side Yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback on each side of the lot of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but can never be less
than three feet (3') and need not be more than five feet (5').
3. Detached Accessory Structures And Garages: Detached accessory structures and attached garages are allowed along the property line on one
interior side lot line, provided that the detached accessory structure or attached garage is located in the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot.
4. Side Yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots must have the following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: One angle must be
formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle must be fifteen feet (15') in length, measured along the rear and street
side property lines. The third side of this triangle must be a straight line connecting the two (2) other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area is in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsection D2 of this section.
5. Rear Yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback of five feet (5'). Detached accessory structures are allowed zero (0) setback on the rear
property line.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 432/581
E. Lot Width: Every lot created after the effective date hereof must maintain a width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the required front yard setback line.
However, any lot or parcel of land of record on May 14, 1954, having a street frontage not exceeding two hundred feet (200'), may be subdivided into
two (2) or more parcels having a width of not less than the average width of the narrowest twenty percent (20%) of the lots fronting on its block. The
"block" is defined as the area on both sides of the street between the nearest intersecting streets. Each parcel must have an area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
F. Building Area: No minimum requirement.
G. Placement Of Buildings And Structures:
1. The distance between buildings is regulated by the California Building Code;
2. A detached accessory structure in the rear third of the lot may be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the following
conditions exists:
a. Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure must be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
b. On the rear third of a reversed corner lot a detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building must be erected
closer than five feet (5') to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
H. Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings, shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the lot area. This coverage may
be increased to forty seven percent (47%) if the height of all the structures is limited to eighteen feet (18'). If a building exceeds eighteen feet (18') in
height, the lot coverage shall not exceed forty percent (40%) under any circumstances.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 433/581
I. Building Wall Modulation: Architectural building features, in conformance with the definition of "architectural building feature" in section 15-1-6 of this title,
must be included to modulate the one-story exterior building walls subject to the approval of the director, and for two-story structures as specified in
subsection D, "Setbacks", of this section.
J. Detached Accessory Buildings, Not Including Detached Accessory Dwelling Units As Defined In Section 15-1-6 Of This Title:
1. Any detached accessory building or combination of accessory buildings, except the garage, may not be larger in gross floor area than six hundred
(600) square feet;
2. Detached accessory buildings are limited to one floor, but may include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided access to the
attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are limited to the
minimum required by the California building code and California electrical code;
3. Detached accessory buildings may not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and may not be used for sleeping purposes or as
an R occupancy, as defined by the California building code, except that they may contain a sink and a toilet;
4. Detached accessory buildings may not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit; and
5. Before the city issues a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except a garage, the director must require that a covenant running with
the land be recorded stating that the accessory structure may not be used as a dwelling unit or used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-
2017)
15-4A-7: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front and street side setback areas. Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 434/581
incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking.
A. A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the front yard setback area must be maintained with permanent landscaping that contains a combination of
lawn, trees, vines, bushes and ground covers, and does not include hardscape materials for lots less than fifty feet (50') in width.
B. A minimum of thirty five percent (35%) of the front yard setback area must be maintained with permanent landscaping that contains a combination of
lawn, trees, vines, bushes and ground covers, and does not include hardscape materials for lots that are fifty feet (50') or greater in width. (Ord. 1547,
2-21-2017)
15-4A-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking must be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title but in no case can a driveway or curb cut be less than ten feet (10') in width.
Where the driveway access and curb cut is to a two (2) car or larger garage which exits directly onto the front street, the driveway and curb cut may not be
less than sixteen feet (16') in width. Driveway entrances and exit locations including curb cuts must be provided in conformance with subsection 15-15-5O
of this title. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
15-4A-9: SIGNS:
Signs in the R-1 zone must comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
15-4A-10: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where an R-1 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the alley, except when eighty percent (80%) or more of the properties on the
block have existing vehicular access from the street. For the purposes of this section, the "block" is defined as the properties on the same side of the street
between the nearest intersecting streets. (Ord. 1547, 2-21-2017)
ARTICLE B. TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) ZONE
15-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Two-Family on the General
Plan land use map and in the text. This zone is to provide for and promote the development of single-family and two-family homes within a safe and
healthy environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-4B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Zone:
A. Any use permitted in the R-1 Zone.
B. A two-family dwelling, duplex, or two (2) one-family dwellings.
C. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017)
15-4B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. An accessory dwelling unit, pursuant to chapter 4, article E of this title.
C. Detached accessory buildings and structures, including private garages.
D. Playhouses.
E. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017)
15-4B-4: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE FACILITIES:
Large family daycare facilities shall be allowed subject to obtaining a large family daycare permit, as provided by section 15-4A-4 of this chapter. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 435/581
15-4B-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Any use permitted as a conditionally permitted use in the R-1 Zone.
B. Assembly halls.
C. Private schools.
D. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-4B-6: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the R-2 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
2. Any use permitted in the R-1 Zone, when developed in the R-2 Zone, shall be constructed in accordance with R-2 site developments standards and
parking requirements.
3. New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
4. An addition to, or extension of a dwelling unit, except a garage, must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the existing
dwelling unit. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
B. Height:
1. The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed thirty two feet (32') and two (2) stories. Buildings or structures with a flat
roof must not exceed twenty six feet (26') and two (2) stories.
2. A maximum grade differential of six feet (6') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
C. Lot Area: A minimum of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. Lots less than four thousand (4,000) square feet in area shall be occupied by only one
dwelling unit, provided all other requirements of this title are met. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front And Rear Yard: The combined total of setbacks for the front and rear yard must be at least thirty feet (30'), with no front yard setback less than
twenty feet (20') and no rear yard setback less than five feet (5').
a. Encroachments: The following structures may encroach in the required front yard setback:
(1) Porches or verandas not fully enclosed on three (3) sides (railings and/or columns permitted);
(2) Raised decks not greater than two feet (2') above grade constructed in conjunction with a lattice cover not greater than ten feet (10') above
grade;
(3) Lattice patio covers not greater than ten feet (10') above grade;
These structures may encroach up to six feet (6') into the required setback for fifty percent (50%) of the building width, not to exceed twenty feet
(20'). (Ord. 1554, 8-15-2017)
2. Side Yard: Structures shall maintain a minimum setback on each side of the lot of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but shall never be less
than three feet (3') and need not be more than five feet (5'). Any detached accessory structures, and attached garages on twenty five foot (25') wide
lots only, located on the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot, are allowed zero (0) setback on one interior side lot line. (Ord. 1288, 10-20-1998)
3. Side Yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots shall have the following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle shall be
formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle shall be fifteen feet (15') in length, measured along the rear and street
side property lines. The third side of this triangle shall be a straight line connecting the two (2) other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area shall be in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsection D2 of this section.
4. Rear Yard: Structures shall maintain a minimum setback of five feet (5'). Detached accessory structures are allowed zero (0) setback on the rear
property line. A dwelling unit above a garage where the vehicular entrance is from an alley shall maintain a minimum one foot (1') setback.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 436/581
E. Lot Width: Every lot created after the effective date hereof shall maintain a width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the rear line of the required front yard.
However, any lot or parcel of land of record on May 14, 1954, having a street frontage not exceeding two hundred feet (200'), may be subdivided into
two (2) or more parcels having a width of not less than the average width of the narrowest twenty percent (20%) of the lots fronting on its block. The
"block" is defined as the area on both sides of the street between the nearest intersecting streets. Each parcel must have an area of not less than
seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
F. Building Area: No minimum requirement.
G. Placement Of Buildings And Structures:
1. The distance between buildings shall be governed by the Building Code.
2. A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be located on the rear and one interior side lot line, unless one of the
following conditions exists:
a. Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
b. On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be erected
closer than five feet (5') to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
H. Building Wall Modulation:
1. Lots Greater Than Four Thousand Square Feet In Area: No plane of a building wall facing a property line shall exceed twenty four feet (24') in height
or length without at least a two foot (2') offset for a minimum length of six feet (6') in the wall plane. When expanding or adding onto the height or
length of an existing building wall, only the expansion or addition shall not exceed twenty four feet (24') without wall modulation. Below is an example
of wall modulation for walls up to thirty feet (30').
Total Wall
Length Or Height
Maximum Length Of
Unbroken Wall Plane
Minimum Length Of
2 Foot Offset
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 437/581
24 feet 24 feet 0 feet
25 feet 24 feet 1 foot
26 feet 24 feet 2 feet
27 feet 24 feet 3 feet
28 feet 24 feet 4 feet
29 feet 24 feet 5 feet
30 feet 24 feet 6 feet
(Ord. 1286, 3-17-1986)
2. Lots Four Thousand Square Feet Or Less In Area: Architectural building features must be included to modulate the building walls subject to the
approval of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1986; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
I. Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings, shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 438/581
J. Detached Accessory Buildings:
1. Any detached accessory building or combination of accessory buildings, except the garage, shall not be larger in gross floor area than six hundred
(600) square feet.
2. Detached accessory buildings shall be limited to one (1) floor, but may include an attic, which may be used for storage purposes only, provided
access to the attic is not from permanently fixed stairs (pull down type stairs are permitted), no plumbing is permitted, and electrical fixtures are
limited to the minimum required by the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and National Electrical Code (NEC).
3. Detached accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and shall not be used for sleeping purposes or as
an "R" occupancy, as defined by the Uniform Building Code (UBC), except that they may contain a sink and a toilet.
4. Detached accessory buildings shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
5. Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except a garage, the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services shall require the recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the accessory structure shall not be used as a dwelling unit
or used in violation of this section. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-4B-7: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front yard and street side setback areas. Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must
incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape, except for those portions devoted to vehicular parking. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-4B-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-4B-9: SIGNS:
Signs in the R-2 Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-4B-10: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where an R-2 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the alley, except when eighty percent (80%) or more of the properties on the
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 439/581
block have existing vehicular access from the street. For the purposes of this section, the "block" is defined as the area on both sides of the street between
the nearest intersecting streets. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with subsection 15-15-5O of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
ARTICLE C. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) ZONE
15-4C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Multi-Family on the General
Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is to provide for the development of multi-family complexes with amenities for children and
adults and promote a safe and healthy environment for existing and future residents. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-4C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Zone:
A. Any use permitted in the R-2 Zone.
B. Condominiums and stock cooperatives converted from multiple-family dwellings subject to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act1.
C. Daycare centers.
D. Large family daycare homes pursuant to section 15-4A-4 of this chapter.
E. Lodging houses.
F. Multiple-family dwellings.
G. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-4C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Detached accessory buildings and structures, including private garages.
C. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; amd. Ord.
1286, 3-17-1998; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-4C-4: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Any use permitted as a conditionally permitted use in the R-2 Zone.
B. Assembly halls.
C. Public parking area, developed and maintained as required by this chapter when the side line of the lot or parcel on which it is located forms a common
boundary with a lot or parcel zoned for commercial or industrial purposes.
D. Senior citizen housing in accordance with California Government Code sections 65913, 65914 and 65915.
E. Senior housing facilities, including, but not limited to, rest homes, convalescent homes, or nursing homes.
F. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-4C-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. General Provisions:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 440/581
1. As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
2. Any use permitted in the R-1 or R-2 Zones, when developed in the R-3 Zone, shall be constructed in accordance with R-3 site developments
standards and parking requirements.
3. New dwelling units must be internally integrated and connected.
4. An addition to, or extension of, a dwelling unit, except a garage, must share a common wall and be internally integrated and connected to the
existing dwelling unit.
B. Lot Area: A minimum of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
C. Height:
1. The height of all buildings or structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed thirty two feet (32') and two (2) stories. Buildings or structures with a flat
roof must not exceed twenty six feet (26') and two (2) stories.
2. A maximum grade differential of six feet (6') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
(Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Structures must maintain a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15'). Entry gates for vehicular access must maintain a minimum setback of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 1553, 8-15-2017)
2. Side Yard Facing A Side Street: Ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, but shall never be less than three feet (3') and need not be more than five
feet (5'), except if parking garages or covered parking spaces face a street, then the setback shall be twenty feet (20').
3. Side Yard Facing An Adjacent Lot: Ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot on each side of the lot, but shall never be less than three feet (3') and
need not be more than five feet (5'). Detached accessory structures, located in the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot, are allowed zero (0) setback on one
interior side lot line. (Ord. 1288, 10-20-1998)
4. Side Yard, Reversed Corner: Reversed corner lots shall have the following side yard with a triangular area described as follows: one angle shall be
formed by the rear and street side property lines, and the sides of this angle shall be fifteen feet (15') in length, measured along the rear and street
side property lines. The third side of this triangle shall be a straight line connecting the two (2) other lines at their endpoints. This triangular side yard
setback area shall be in addition to the other side yard setback requirements described in subsections D2 and D3 of this section.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 441/581
5. Rear Yard: Ten feet (10') minimum shall be provided.
6. Rear Yard: Detached accessory structures are allowed zero (0) setback on the rear property line and on one (1) interior lot side line in the rear onethird
(1/3) of the lot.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 442/581
E. Lot Width: Every lot created after the effective date hereof shall maintain a width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the rear line of the required front yard.
However, any lot or parcel of land of record on May 14, 1954, having a street frontage not exceeding two hundred feet (200'), may be subdivided into
two (2) or more parcels having a width of not less than the average width of the narrowest twenty percent (20%) of the lots fronting on its block. The
"block" is defined as the area on both sides of the street between the nearest intersecting streets. Each parcel must have an area of not less than
seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
F. Building Area: The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be as follows:
1. On property of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or less in size, one unit for every one thousand six hundred thirteen (1,613) square feet of lot
area is allowed. A fraction of a lot greater than one thousand seventy five (1,075) square feet will allow an additional unit.
2. On property greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size, one (1) unit for every two thousand four hundred twenty (2,420) square feet of
lot area is allowed. A fraction of a lot greater than one thousand six hundred thirteen (1,613) square feet will allow an additional unit.
G. Placement Of Buildings And Structures:
1. The distance between buildings shall be governed by the Uniform Building Code.
2. A detached accessory structure in the rear one-third (1/3) of the lot may be located on the rear and one (1) interior side lot line, unless one (1) of the
following conditions exists:
a. Where the lot rears upon an alley and the vehicular entrance to the detached accessory structure is from the alley, such detached accessory
structure shall be set back a distance measured from the opposite side of the alley that will provide a turning radius as follows:
90 degrees - 25 feet
75 degrees - 21 feet
60 degrees - 18 feet
45 degrees - 15 feet
b. On the rear third of a reversed corner lot, a detached accessory structure may be built to the interior lot side line, but no building shall be erected
closer than five feet (5') to the property line of any abutting lot to the rear. However, if an alley intervenes and the vehicular entrance to the
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 443/581
detached accessory building is directly from the street side, a detached accessory building may be built to the rear lot line.
H. Lot Coverage: All buildings, including detached accessory buildings, shall not cover more than fifty three percent (53%) of the area of the lot.
(Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
I. Open Space And Recreation Requirements: The following minimum open space and recreational facilities must be provided:
Number Of Units
Private Open
Space Per Unit
Common Open
Space Per Unit
Recreational
Facilities Per Unit
4 or fewer 50 square feet 150 square feet
5 - 9 50 square feet 200 square feet
10 - 20 50 square feet 250 square feet
21 and above 50 square feet 250 square feet 50 square feet
All required open space and recreational facilities are in addition to the required front and street side setbacks. Interior side and rear setbacks may
be considered as required open spaces and recreation facilities. All required common open space must: 1) be physically or visually accessible to the
residents, 2) be a minimum of five feet (5') in both length and width, and 3) include a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of softscape landscaping.
1. Adjustments: The Director may approve adjustments from the minimum open space dimensions and landscaping percentage standards as provided
in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1553, 8-15-2017)
J. Building Wall Modulation: No plane of a building wall facing a property line shall exceed twenty four feet (24') in height or length without at least a two
foot (2') offset for a minimum length of six feet (6') in the wall plane. When expanding or adding onto the height or length of an existing building wall,
only the expansion or addition shall not exceed twenty four feet (24') without wall modulation. Below is an example of wall modulation for walls up to
thirty feet (30'):
Total Wall Maximum Length Of Minimum Length
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 444/581
Length Or Height Unbroken Wall Plane Of 2 Foot Offset
24 feet 24 feet 0 feet
25 feet 24 feet 1 foot
26 feet 24 feet 2 feet
27 feet 24 feet 3 feet
28 feet 24 feet 4 feet
29 feet 24 feet 5 feet
30 feet 24 feet 6 feet
K. Condominium Conversions: Condominiums and stock cooperatives converted from multiple-family dwellings shall meet all the requirements for
condominiums in effect at the time they were originally constructed. If there were no condominium standards in effect at the time of construction, the
conversion shall comply with the condominium standards of ordinance 898, adopted January 20, 1976.
L. Detached Accessory Buildings:
1. Detached accessory buildings shall not contain a kitchen or kitchen facilities, a bathtub or shower and shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
2. Detached accessory buildings shall not be rented or used as a separate dwelling unit or as an "R" occupancy, as defined by the Uniform Building
Code (UBC), except that they may contain a sink and a toilet. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
3. Prior to issuance of a building permit for a detached accessory structure, except a garage, the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services shall require the recording of a covenant to run with the land, which states that the accessory structure shall not be used as a dwelling unit
or used in violation of this subsection L. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-4C-6: LANDSCAPING:
A. Landscaping and irrigation must be provided within the front yard and street side setback areas. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
B. Those setback areas fronting upon a public street must incorporate a combination of softscape and hardscape in the landscape, except for those
portions devoted to vehicular parking. In addition, those portions of the property which abut a different zoning classification must be landscaped with
trees and shrubs to provide an effective buffer from adjoining property. (Ord. 1553, 8-15-2017)
15-4C-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-4C-8: SIGNS:
Signs in the R-3 Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-4C-9: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Where an R-3 lot abuts an alley, vehicular access to the lot must be from the alley. Curb cuts and driveways must be installed in conformance with
subsection 15-15-5O of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 445/581
ARTICLE D. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 1469, 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE E. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
15-4E-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
This article is adopted pursuant to Government Code section 65852.2, as amended by Assembly Bill 2299 (effective January 1, 2017), for the purpose of
implementing the City's regulation of accessory dwelling units.
Pursuant to Government Code section 65852.2(a), this article designates areas within the City where accessory dwellings are permitted. Because
accessory dwelling units tend to increase the volume of vehicle traffic within the City, on-street parking, noise, and other adverse impacts, this article
restricts the location of accessory dwelling units within single-family residential zones. Increased traffic not only impacts existing public infrastructure, such
as streets and intersections, but degrades air quality, increases noise, and can introduce pollutants into the City's storm drains. Further, the increased
density of housing within the City's jurisdiction impacts public health and safety, and the public welfare by increasing the demand for public services. (Ord.
1550, 7-5-2017)
15-4E-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Definition Of "Existing": For purposes of this article and defining an allowable space or structure that can be converted to an accessory dwelling unit, the
term "existing" means dwellings or structures that:
1. Lawfully existed on the parcel as of January 1, 2017, or were the subject of a building permit duly issued before January 1, 2017; and
2. Can be made safely habitable under local building codes at the determination of the building official.
B. Locations: Accessory dwelling units are permitted by right throughout the R-1 Zone and in the R-2 Zone on lots that are less than four thousand (4,000)
square feet. Accessory dwelling units may be: 1) contained within the existing space of a single-family residence and/or attached to a single-family
residence, 2) within the existing space of an existing accessory structure, such as a pool house, studio or similar structure with four (4) walls and a roof
(but not including garages), or 3) detached from the single-family residence, subject to the requirements and development standards in this Code and
State law.
C. Real Property: The real property proposed for the accessory dwelling unit may not consist of more than one (1) lot.
D. Existing Single-Family Dwelling: The lot must contain an existing single-family dwelling. An accessory dwelling unit may only be constructed in
conjunction with a single-family dwelling.
E. Separate Sale Prohibited: Accessory dwelling units may not be sold separately from a primary dwelling.
F. Owner Occupancy Required: The primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit must be the primary residence of the property owner of the lot. If
none of the units on the lot are occupied by the owner as the owner's primary residence, the accessory dwelling unit will automatically be deemed a
nonhabitable space which may not be used as a dwelling and may not be rented.
G. Covenant Required: Before the City issues a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the property owner must record with the County Recorder a
covenant running with the land stating that the accessory dwelling unit cannot be used in violation of this chapter. The covenant must be approved by
the Director of Planning and Building Safety and approved as to form by the City Attorney.
H. Release Of Covenant: In the event a covenant was previously recorded for a permitted accessory structure restricting the structure as non-habitable
pursuant to subsection 15-4A-6H of this chapter, before the City issues a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the property owner must record
a release of such covenant with the County Recorder, in a form approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety and the City Attorney.
I. Garage Conversions Prohibited: Garages and carports required under this title do not constitute "an existing accessory structure", as used in this article,
and any conversion of such a garage or carport to an accessory dwelling unit is expressly prohibited. (Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017)
15-4E-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Accessory dwelling units must meet the development standards applicable to accessory structures in the R-1 and R-2 Zones and the following standards:
A. Height: Same as structures in the R-1 and R-2 Zones.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 446/581
B. Setbacks:
1. Attached To And/Or Within A Primary Dwelling: Same as primary dwellings in the R-1 and R-2 Zones.
2. Detached From A Primary Dwelling: Same as detached accessory structures in the R-1 and R-2 Zones.
3. Exception: No setback shall apply to a non-required portion of an existing garage or carport that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit.
C. Building Area:
1. Attached to a primary dwelling and/or within the primary dwelling: Maximum of forty nine percent (49%) of the total floor area of the combined
dwellings, or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, whichever is less.
2. Detached: Maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
3. The total area of the primary dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit may not exceed the maximum permitted floor area of the lot.
D. Density: One (1) accessory dwelling unit per lot. In all cases, accessory dwelling units are only permitted on lots with a single primary residence.
Properties developed with more than one (1) unit are not permitted to also have an accessory dwelling unit.
E. Architectural Design: Each unit, whether attached or detached, must be architecturally compatible with the primary dwelling.
F. Parking: No parking spaces are required for accessory dwelling units within one-half (1/2) mile of a transit stop.
G. Separate Entrance: If the accessory dwelling unit is attached to or within the primary dwelling, it must have independent exterior access from the
primary dwelling. Such independent exterior access may not be an entrance facing the front yard. An independent and separate entrance to the
accessory dwelling unit must be located on the side or at the rear of the primary dwelling.
H. Compliance: The accessory dwelling unit must comply with applicable Building, Health and Fire Codes except where explicitly exempted by
Government Code section 65852.2. Fire sprinklers for accessory dwelling units are required only when they are required for the primary dwelling on the
lot. (Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017)
15-4E-4: APPLICATION PROCESS; FEES:
A. Pursuant to Government Code section 65852.2, any application for a building permit to create an accessory dwelling unit that conforms to this article
and is otherwise complete shall be ministerially approved within one hundred twenty (120) days of application.
B. The applicant must pay any applicable fees, including but not limited to development impact fees imposed pursuant to chapter 27A of this title, in an
amount set by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1550, 7-5-2017)
Chapter 5
COMMERCIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (C-RS) ZONE
15-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Downtown Commercial on
the General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is comprised of commercial retail-service areas and certain lands where such
development is desirable and appears likely to occur. Regulations are designed to stabilize and protect the commercial retail-service character of the
downtown area, and to create a favorable environment for pedestrian circulation and access. Principal uses are, therefore, restricted to commercial retailservice
use, and certain essential and complementary uses as permitted under the conditional use permit. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the C-RS Zone:
A. Billiard-pool rooms and bowling alleys.
B. Daycare centers.
C. Financial institutions.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 447/581
D. General offices.
E. Government buildings (including offices, police and fire stations, parking and related buildings).
F. Medical-dental offices.
G. Restaurants, delicatessens, and cafes (excluding dancing and entertainment).
H. Retail uses providing sales (excluding off site alcohol sales) and services.
I. Schools.
J. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1552, 8-15-2017)
15-5A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Cafes.
C. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
D. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
E. Residential uses, provided that said residential use shall be permitted only on the floor above street level, provided the street level is used for
commercial purposes. One (1) dwelling unit shall be permitted for each lot legally created prior to November 2, 1993. One (1) dwelling unit shall be
permitted for each four thousand three hundred fifty six (4,356) square feet of lot area for any lot created after November 2, 1993. Parking for the
residential use shall conform with the requirements for multiple-family dwelling units, except that parking shall not be required to be provided in a
covered structure. Tandem parking in a configuration that allows all of the commercial spaces direct ingress and egress to the site shall be allowed.
F. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006)
15-5A-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. The off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
B. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and delicatessens.
C. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1552, 8-15-2017)
15-5A-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Assembly halls.
B. On site sale and consumption of alcohol at bars.
C. Outdoor dining areas for restaurants, except cafes, that are larger than two hundred (200) square feet.
D. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard.
E. Other similar uses as approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1552, 8-15-2017)
15-5A-6: PROHIBITED USES:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 448/581
Drive-through restaurants located west of Sepulveda Boulevard. (Ord. 1276, 8-19-1997)
15-5A-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the C-RS Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building, except: (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
a. Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title; and (Ord. 1279, 10-7-1997)
b. Outdoor recreational activities.
2. Required on site parking shall not be allowed between the use and/or building and the front lot line upon which said use or building faces.
3. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
4. Other provisions as required by chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures shall not exceed the height of forty five feet (45').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: None required, unless both the C-RS Zone and a residential zone occupy the same block face. In such a case, the setback shall be the
same as the residential zone.
2. Side Yard: None required, unless the following condition exists: If the side yard abuts property with a different zone classification, the side yard
setback shall be the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
3. Rear Yard: None required, unless the following conditions exist:
a. If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, a setback of either zero feet
(0') or a minimum of twenty feet (20') shall be provided; and (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
b. If the rear yard abuts property with a different zone classification, the rear yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) rear yard setbacks, but
not less than ten feet (10').
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 449/581
(Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
E. Lot Frontage: No minimum requirements.
F. Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings, excluding residential floor area, shall not exceed the total net square footage of the property
multiplied by 1.0 or an FAR of one to one (1:1).
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 450/581
G. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the location requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry wall
shall be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential or industrial zones.
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's Transportation
Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5A-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-5A-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5A-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the C-RS Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
ARTICLE B. NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-2) ZONE
15-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Neighborhood Commercial
on the General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to promote, preserve, enhance and service the neighborhood
commercial needs of adjacent residential areas. Regulations are designed and intended to cater to both pedestrian and vehicular access. Principal uses
are, therefore, restricted to neighborhood serving general commercial uses. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the C-2 Zone:
A. Animal hospitals.
B. Daycare centers.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 451/581
C. Fitness centers.
D. General and medical-dental offices.
E. Personal services.
F. Public uses, including, but not limited to, fire and police stations, post offices and libraries.
G. Recreational facilities (public and private).
H. Restaurants and cafes.
I. Retail sales.
J. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1552, 8-15-2017)
15-5B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Cafes.
C. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
D. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
E. Residential uses, provided that said residential use shall be permitted only on the floor above street level, provided the street level is used for
commercial purposes. One (1) dwelling unit shall be permitted for each lot legally created prior to November 2, 1993. One (1) dwelling unit shall be
permitted for each four thousand three hundred fifty six (4,356) square feet of lot area for any lot created after November 2, 1993. Parking for the
residential use shall conform with the requirements for multiple-family dwelling units, except that parking shall not be required to be provided in a
covered structure. Tandem parking in a configuration that allows all of the commercial spaces direct ingress and egress to the site shall be allowed.
F. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006)
15-5B-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. The off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
B. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and delicatessens.
C. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1552, 8-15-2017)
15-5B-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Bed and breakfast inns.
B. Car rental agencies.
C. On site sale and consumption of alcohol at bars.
D. Outdoor dining areas for restaurants, except cafes, that are larger than two hundred (200) square feet.
E. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 452/581
F. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1552, 8-15-2017)
15-5B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
Drive-through restaurants located west of Sepulveda Boulevard. (Ord. 1276, 8-19-1997)
15-5B-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the C-2 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provision:
1. All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building, except: (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
a. Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title; and
b. Outdoor recreational activities.
2. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
3. Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title. (Ord. 1279, 10-7-1997)
B. Lot Area: A minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of twenty eight feet (28').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Fifteen feet (15') minimum, unless both the C-2 Zone and a residential zone occupy the same block face. In such a case, the front yard
setbacks shall be the same as those required by the residential zone.
2. Side Yard: None required, unless the following conditions exist: If the side yard abuts property with a different zone classification, the side yard
setback shall be the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not less than ten feet (10').
3. Rear Yard: Ten feet (10') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, no less than fifteen feet (15')
shall be provided; and
b. If the rear yard abuts property with a different zone classification, the rear yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) rear yard setbacks, but
not less than ten feet (10').
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 453/581
E. Lot Frontage: No minimum requirements.
F. Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings, excluding residential floor area, shall not exceed the net square footage of the property, multiplied
by 0.5 or an FAR of 0.5:1.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 454/581
G. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the location requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry wall
shall be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential or industrial zones.
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's Transportation
Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5B-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-5B-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5B-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the C-2 Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
ARTICLE C. GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-3) ZONE
15-5C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated General Commercial on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to provide for the development of commercial establishments which serve
a broad cross section of the City and surrounding area. Regulations are designed to promote and control their growth in a favorable environment to all
abutting and surrounding land uses. Principal uses, therefore, include a broad spectrum of retail and service commercial uses. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the C-3 Zone:
A. Animal hospitals.
B. Daycare centers.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 455/581
C. Fitness centers.
D. General offices not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet.
E. Hotels and motels.
F. Medical-dental offices and facilities.
G. Public uses, including, but not limited to, fire and police stations, post offices and libraries.
H. Recreational facilities (public and commercial).
I. Restaurants and cafes.
J. Retail uses (excluding off site alcohol sales).
K. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Cafes.
C. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
D. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
E. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006)
15-5C-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. The off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
B. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and delicatessens.
C. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5C-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Car rental agencies.
B. Drive-through restaurants, except properties located west of Sepulveda Boulevard where drive-through restaurants are prohibited.
C. Freight forwarding.
D. Helicopter landing facilities subject to the provisions of section 15-2-13 of this title.
E. On site sale and consumption of alcohol at bars.
F. Outdoor dining areas for restaurants, except cafes, that are larger than two hundred (200) square feet.
G. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 456/581
H. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5C-6: PROHIBITED USES:
Drive-through restaurants located west of Sepulveda Boulevard. (Ord. 1276, 8-19-1997)
15-5C-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the C-3 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building except:
a. Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title; (Ord. 1279, 10-7-1997)
b. Outdoor retail activities customarily conducted outdoors, including, but not limited to, lumberyards and nurseries; and
c. Outdoor recreational activities.
2. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
3. Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. Height:
1. East of Sepulveda Boulevard: No building or structure shall exceed two hundred feet (200').
2. West of Sepulveda Boulevard: No building or structure shall exceed forty five feet (45').
3. If the subject property abuts residentially zoned property, no building or structure shall exceed forty feet (40').
4. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
5. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25') minimum.
2. Side Yard: Fifteen feet (15') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, no less than twenty five feet (25') shall be provided; and
b. If the side yard abuts property with a different classification, the side yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not
less than ten feet (10').
3. Rear Yard: Fifteen feet (15') minimum unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, no less than twenty five feet
(25') shall be provided; and
b. If the rear yard abuts property with a different classification, the rear yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not
less than ten feet (10').
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 457/581
E. Lot Frontage: Each lot shall be a minimum frontage on a street of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
F. Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 1.0 or an FAR of one to
one (1:1). Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard only, with approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR)
plan.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 458/581
(Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
G. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the location requirement of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry wall shall
be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential, industrial or the urban mixed use zones.
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's Transportation
Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5C-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-5C-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5C-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the C-3 Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
ARTICLE D. CORPORATE OFFICE (CO) ZONE
15-5D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Corporate Office on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to provide for the development of office projects. Regulations are designed
to promote and control their growth in a favorable environment to all abutting and surrounding land uses. Principal uses are, therefore, restricted to a
mixture of office and food serving uses with limited retail uses. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5D-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the CO Zone:
A. Daycare centers.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 459/581
B. Fitness centers.
C. General offices.
D. Medical-dental offices.
E. Office worker-oriented services, provided they are not located along Pacific Coast Highway or El Segundo Boulevard, such as:
1. Dry cleaners that have cleaning operations on site and are not more than three thousand (3,000) gross square feet (not including laundromats);
2. Shipping, postal, printing and business service centers that are not more than three thousand (3,000) gross square feet;
3. Self-service parcel delivery service; and,
4. Other service uses determined by the Director to be oriented towards, and clearly related to, office workers in the surrounding area.
F. Public uses, including, but not limited to, fire and police stations, post offices and libraries.
G. Recreational facilities (public and private).
H. Research and development uses, located east of Pacific Coast Highway only.
I. Restaurants and cafes.
J. Such uses as the Director deems to be similar and not more intensive, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1569, 6-25-2018)
15-5D-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any of the permitted uses allowed in section 15-5D-2 of this article is a permitted accessory use.
B. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
C. Bike-share docking station.
D. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
E. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
F. Such uses as the Director deems to be similar and not more intensive, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1569, 6-25-2018)
15-5D-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. The off-site sale of alcohol at limited support service retail establishments as an accessory use.
B. The on-site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and delicatessens.
C. Such uses as the Director deems to be similar and not more intensive, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1569, 6-25-2018)
15-5D-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A. Drive-through restaurants, except properties located west of Pacific Coast Highway where drive-through restaurants are prohibited.
B. Helicopter landing facilities subject to the provisions of section 15-2-13 of this title.
C. Hotels and motels, except properties located west of Pacific Coast Highway and east of Aviation Boulevard where hotels and motels are prohibited.
D. Museums.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 460/581
E. On site sale and consumption of alcohol at bars.
F. Outdoor dining areas for restaurants, except cafes, that are larger than two hundred (200) square feet.
G. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any Residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Pacific Coast Highway.
H. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1569, 6-25-2018)
15-5D-6: PROHIBITED USES:
A. Drive-through restaurants located west of Sepulveda Boulevard.
B. Hotels and motels, located west of Sepulveda and east of Aviation Boulevards. (Ord. 1312, 9-7-1999)
15-5D-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the CO Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. All uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building, except:
a. Outdoor restaurants and cafes incidental to the permitted use, provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title.
b. Recreational facilities customarily conducted in the open.
2. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
3. Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
C. Height:
1. East of Pacific Coast Highway: No building or structure shall exceed two hundred feet (200').
2. West of Pacific Coast Highway: No building or structure shall exceed forty five feet (45').
3. If the subject property abuts Residentially zoned property, no building or structure shall exceed forty feet (40').
4. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
5. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Twenty feet (20') minimum.
2. Side Yard: Ten feet (10') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, a minimum of twenty feet (20') shall be provided;
b. If the side yard abuts property with a different classification, the side yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not
less than ten feet (10'); and,
c. If the side yard abuts property zoned for residential uses, a minimum of one hundred feet (100') shall be provided, including a twenty five foot (25')
landscape buffer.
3. Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'), unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, a minimum of twenty feet
(20') shall be provided;
b. If the rear yard abuts property with a different classification, the rear yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) rear yard setbacks, but not
less than ten feet (10'); and
c. If the rear yard abuts property zoned for residential uses, a minimum of one hundred feet (100') shall be provided, including a twenty five foot (25')
landscape buffer.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 461/581
4. Future Street Right-Of-Way Lines: If any future street right-of-way line has been established by plan adopted by the City Council, such line shall be
considered to be the property line for purposes of determining setbacks.
5. Easements: Setbacks from legal easements, other than street right-of-way easements, shall not be required. In addition to the appropriate review
and approval by the City, no construction of any structure or improvement is allowed within a legal easement without written authorization from the
legal holder of the easement. Such authorization shall be in a form acceptable to the Director.
E. Lot Frontage: Each lot shall have a minimum frontage on a street of one hundred feet (100').
F. Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 0.8 or an FAR of 0.8:1.
Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of Pacific Coast Highway only, with approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR) plan.
(Ord. 1588, 9-3-2019)
G. Walls And Fences: Wall and fences shall comply with the location requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry wall shall
be provided along property lines for those yards abutting Residential or Industrial Zones.
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's transportation
demand management program, chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5D-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-5D-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-5D-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the CO Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
ARTICLE E. URBAN MIXED USE NORTH (MU-N) ZONE
15-5E-1: PURPOSE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 462/581
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Urban Mixed Use North on
the General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. The Urban Mixed Use North (MU-N) Zone is established to provide area(s) where a mixture
of compatible commercial, office, research and development, retail and hotel uses can locate and develop in a mutually beneficial manner. It is the intent of
the MU-N Zone to have several types of uses occupy a single building, or if a project includes multiple buildings, then each building should contain a
different type of use. It is anticipated, although not required, that each type of use will be from two (2) or more of the following categories: retail, service,
hotel, office, research and development, theaters or recreational facilities. It is further intended to ensure that adequate open space and development
regulations will create a favorable environment for abutting uses as well as ensuring the compatibility and harmonious existence of development within
MU-N Zoned property. Businesses located within this zone are encouraged to provide street level uses which allow for, and facilitate, pedestrian activity for
area workers and visitors. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5E-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the MU-N Zone:
A. Data centers.
B. Daycare centers.
C. Financial institutions.
D. Fitness centers.
E. General offices.
F. Hotels and motels.
G. Medical-dental offices or facilities.
H. Motion picture/television production facilities (excluding outdoor facilities).
I. Research and development.
J. Restaurants and cafes.
K. Retail (excluding off site alcohol sales) and wholesale sales and service.
L. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5E-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Cafes.
C. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
D. Employee recreational facilities and play areas.
E. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
F. Parking structures and surface parking lots.
G. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006)
15-5E-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. Light industrial uses.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 463/581
B. The off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
C. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and delicatessens.
D. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5E-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Assembly halls.
B. Catering services and flight kitchens.
C. Drive-through restaurants.
D. Helicopter landing facilities subject to the provisions of section 15-2-13 of this title.
E. Hospitals.
F. Motion picture/television production facilities (outdoor facilities only).
G. On site sale and consumption of alcohol at bars.
H. Outdoor dining areas for restaurants, except cafes, that are larger than two hundred (200) square feet.
I. Parking facilities, including park and ride lots.
J. Recreational facilities (public and commercial).
K. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any Residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard.
L. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5E-6: PROHIBITED USES:
A. All uses that are involved with the transfer and storage of waste material.
B. Freight forwarding, freight sort, freight transfer, freight terminals, freight yards, sort and distribution facilities, sort, distribution or express operations
facilities, warehouse and distribution facilities, and other similar uses; provided, however, that any such uses for which a conditional use permit was
initially issued prior to July 1, 1999, shall not be affected.
C. Residential uses. (Ord. 1313, 8-26-1999)
15-5E-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the MU-N Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provision:
1. All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except:
a. Electrical distribution stations.
b. Outdoor restaurants and cafes incidental to the permitted use, provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title.
c. Recreational facilities customarily conducted in the open.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 464/581
d. Special uses, to the degree the conditional use permit granting such special uses expressly permits operation in other than a fully enclosed
building.
2. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
3. Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of one hundred seventy five feet (175').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height.
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Twenty feet (20') minimum. Off street parking may encroach upon the setback area, but may not diminish the required amount of
landscaping.
2. Side Yard: Ten feet (10') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, a minimum of twenty feet (20') shall be provided; and
b. If the side yard abuts property with a different classification, the side yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not
less than ten feet (10').
3. Rear Yard: Five feet (5') minimum, unless the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, or public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through
the rear yard. In these cases, a minimum of twenty feet (20') shall be provided.
4. Future Street Right-Of-Way Lines: If any future street right-of-way line has been established by plan adopted by the City Council, such line shall be
considered to be the property line for purposes of determining setbacks.
5. Easements: Setbacks from legal easements, other than street right-of-way easements, shall not be required. In addition to the appropriate review
and approval by the City, no construction of any structure or improvement is allowed within a legal easement without written authorization from the
legal holder of the easement. Such authorization shall be in a form acceptable to the Director.
E. Lot Frontage: Each lot in the MU-N Zone shall have a minimum frontage on a street of one hundred feet (100').
F. Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 1.3 or an FAR 1.3:1.
Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of Pacific Coast Highway only, with approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR) plan.
(Ord. 1588, 9-3-2019)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 465/581
G. Walls And Fences: Fences in the MU-N Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry wall
shall be provided along property lines for those yards abutting Residential or Industrial Zones.
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's transportation
demand management program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5E-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-5E-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces in the MU-N Zone shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5E-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the MU-N Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
ARTICLE F. URBAN MIXED USE SOUTH (MU-S) ZONE
15-5F-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Urban Mixed Use South on
the General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. The Urban Mixed Use South (MU-S) Zone is established to provide area(s) where a mixture
of compatible commercial, offices, research and development, retail and hotel uses can locate and develop in a mutually beneficial manner. It is the intent
of the MU-S Zone to have several types of uses occupy a single building, or if a project includes multiple buildings, then each building should contain a
different type of use. It is anticipated, although not required, that each type of use will be from two (2) or more of the following categories: retail, service,
hotel, office, research and development, theaters or recreational facilities. It is further intended to ensure that adequate open space and development
regulations will create a favorable environment for abutting uses as well as ensuring the compatibility and harmonious existence of development within
MU-S Zoned property. Businesses located within this zone are encouraged to provide street level uses which allow for, and facilitate, pedestrian activity for
area workers and visitors. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5F-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the MU-S Zone:
A. Data centers.
B. Daycare centers.
C. Financial institutions.
D. Fitness centers.
E. General offices.
F. Hotels and motels.
G. Medical-dental offices or facilities.
H. Motion picture/television production facilities (excluding outdoor facilities).
I. Research and development.
J. Restaurants and cafes.
K. Retail (excluding off site alcohol sales) and wholesale sales and service.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 466/581
L. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5F-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Cafes.
C. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
D. Employee recreational facilities and play areas.
E. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
F. Parking structures and surface parking lots.
G. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006)
15-5F-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. Light industrial uses.
B. The off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
C. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and delicatessens.
D. Other similar uses approved by the Director, provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5F-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Assembly halls.
B. Catering services and flight kitchens.
C. Drive-through restaurants.
D. Freight forwarding.
E. Helicopter landing facilities subject to the provisions of section 15-2-13 of this title.
F. Hospitals.
G. Massage establishments that meet the requirements of title 4, chapter 10 of this Code, in addition to all other requirements imposed by law.
H. Motion picture/television production facilities (outdoor facilities only).
I. On site sale and consumption of alcohol at bars.
J. Outdoor dining areas for restaurants, except cafes, that are larger than two hundred (200) square feet.
K. Parking facilities, including park and ride lots.
L. Recreational facilities (public and commercial).
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 467/581
M. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard.
N. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-5F-6: ADULT BUSINESS PERMIT:
Adult oriented businesses shall be allowed subject to obtaining an adult business permit, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5F-7: PROHIBITED USES:
A. All uses that are involved with the transfer and storage of waste material.
B. Residential uses. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5F-8: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the MU-S Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except:
a. Electrical distribution stations; (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
b. Outdoor restaurants and cafes incidental to the permitted use, provided they comply with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title; (Ord. 1279,
10-7-1997)
c. Recreational facilities customarily conducted in the open; and
d. Special uses, to the degree the conditional use permit granting such special uses expressly permits operation in other than a fully enclosed
building.
2. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
3. Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of one hundred seventy five feet (175').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setback:
1. Front Yard: Twenty feet (20') minimum; except that along Rosecrans Avenue, a minimum setback of thirty feet (30') must be provided. Off street
parking may encroach upon the setback area, but may not diminish the required amount of landscaping.
2. Side Yard: Twenty feet (20') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the side yard abuts property with a different zoning classification, the side yard setback shall be the average of the two (2) required side yard
setbacks, but not less than ten feet (10').
b. If the side yard abuts Rosecrans Avenue or Park Place, a minimum setback of thirty feet (30') must be provided.
3. Rear Yard: Five feet (5') minimum, unless the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, or public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through
the rear yard. In these cases, a minimum of thirty feet (30') shall be provided. (Ord. 1520, 8-16-2016)
E. Lot Frontage: Each lot in the MU-S Zone shall have a minimum frontage on a street of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
F. Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings shall not exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 1.3 or an FAR of 1.3:1.
Additional FAR may be granted for properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard only, with approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR) plan.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 468/581
(Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
G. Walls And Fences: Fences in the MU-S Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry wall
shall be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential or industrial zones.
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's Transportation
Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5F-9: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-5F-10: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces in the MU-S Zone shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-5F-11: SIGNS:
Signs in the MU-S Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
ARTICLE G. COMMERCIAL CENTER (C-4) ZONE
15-5G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies affecting property designated as commercial center on the General Plan
land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to provide for developing commercial establishments serving the City and surrounding
area. Regulations are designed to promote and control growth of commercial center projects such as retail and service uses. (Ord. 1382, 3-15-2005)
15-5G-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the C-4 Zone:
A. Animal hospitals and veterinary services.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 469/581
B. Day spas.
C. Daycare centers.
D. Farmers' market.
E. Financial institutions.
F. Fitness centers (indoors only).
G. General offices.
H. Indoor sale of automobiles, motorcycles, and motor scooters along with the sale of accessories and parts as an accessory use. No outdoor display or
storage shall be allowed and no on site repair or maintenance shall be allowed.
I. Medical and dental offices, including health and/or skin care services that are limited to noninvasive and/or minimally invasive cosmetic medical
procedures that may be rendered by licensed healthcare professionals.
J. Multi-media offices.
K. Personal services.
L. Public assembly/assembly halls, including theaters and museums.
M. Recreational facilities.
N. Restaurants and cafes.
O. Retail sales uses (excluding off site alcohol sales).
P. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1556, 10-3-2017)
15-5G-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Cafes.
C. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
D. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
E. Parking structures and surface parking lots.
F. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1382, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord.
1395, 5-16-2006)
15-5G-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. Off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
B. Permitted uses conducted in a trailer, shipping container or similar structure.
C. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants and delicatessens.
D. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1556, 10-3-2017)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 470/581
15-5G-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Massage establishments that meet the requirements of title 4, chapter 10 of this Code and any other requirements imposed by law.
B. Micro-brewery with a tasting room and/or dining.
C. On site sale and consumption of alcohol at bars and wine tasting rooms.
D. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 1579, 2-5-2019)
15-5G-6: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the C-4 Zone must comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. All uses must be conducted within a fully enclosed building except:
a. Outdoor restaurants, cafes or seating areas, complying with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title;
b. Outdoor wholesale or retail activities customarily conducted outdoors, including, without limitation, lumberyards, nurseries, and periodic outdoor
sales;
c. Outdoor recreational activities; and
d. Temporary uses conducted for a period not to exceed one year in a temporary trailer, shipping container, or similar structure.
2. Before the City approves any development project, the project must meet all requirements of the transportation demand management (TDM) and trip
reduction criteria as set forth in chapter 16 of this title.
3. Other provisions as set forth in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 1556, 10-3-2017)
C. Height:
1. No building or structure may exceed sixty five feet (65').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks: The setback requirements shall not be applicable to environmental treatment facilities that are determined by a regulatory agency to be
necessary to mitigate the presence of hazardous substances that are present in the soils on the parcel of property on which a treatment facility is
located. However, the environmental treatment facility must otherwise comply with the City's traffic safety and Building Code requirements.
1. Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25') minimum.
2. Side Yard: Zero feet (0') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, at least twenty five feet (25') must be provided; and
b. If the side yard abuts property with a different classification, the side yard setback is the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not less
than ten feet (10').
3. Rear Yard: Fifteen feet (15') minimum unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, at least twenty five feet (25')
must be provided;
b. If the rear yard adjoins a railroad right-of-way, at least ten feet (10') must be provided; and
c. If the rear yard abuts property with a different classification, the rear yard setback is the average of the two (2) side yard setbacks, but not less
than ten feet (10').
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 471/581
(Ord. 1417, 3-4-2008)
E. Lot Frontage:
1. Each lot must provide a minimum frontage on a public street of one hundred feet (100'); or
2. Flag lots are permitted with a minimum stem width of twenty feet (20') at a public street. If the flag lot does not provide physical access to a public
street, a permanent access easement must be provided from the lot across any contiguous lot or lots which conform with the minimum lot frontage
requirement to a public street. The easement, and any proposed modification to the easement, requires City review and approval.
F. Building Area: The total net floor area of all buildings may not exceed the total net square footage of the property multiplied by 0.275 or an FAR 0.275:1.
However, additional FAR may be granted by the City pursuant to a development agreement.
G. Transfer Of Development Rights: The transfer of development density from one or more donor parcels to any other receiving parcel or parcels is
permitted within the C-4 Zone; provided, that the requirements of this section are met.
1. Location Of Transfer Parcels: The donor and receiving parcels must each be located entirely within the C-4 Zone.
2. Maximum Net Floor Area (NFA) For A Receiving Parcel: The NFA on any receiving parcel increased in density pursuant to this section cannot
exceed an FAR of 0.6.
3. Reduced NFA For A Donor Parcel: The permitted NFA on any donor parcel decreased in density pursuant to this section must be reduced by the
amount of NFA transferred to one or more receiving parcels.
4. Building Standards For Parcels: All buildings must comply with the building standards of the C-4 Zone.
5. Transfer Of Development Rights: A transfer of development rights may be initiated by a person submitting a written application for a transfer to the
Planning and Building Safety Department that identifies the donor parcel(s), receiving parcel(s), the amount of NFA proposed to be transferred, and
the proposed uses of the donor and receiving parcels.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 472/581
6. Review By Director Of Planning And Building Safety: The Director of Planning and Building Safety must approve, conditionally approve or deny a
transfer plan at a public hearing. The Director of Planning and Building Safety must use the following criteria in making a determination:
a. The transfer meets the objectives of this title and the purposes of the C-4 Zone;
b. The proposed transfer will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the
vicinity;
c. The proposed transfer complies with each of the applicable provisions of this chapter;
d. The proposed transfer recognizes and compensates for potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed transfer, such as aesthetics,
noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards; and
e. The proposed transfer plan is consistent with the General Plan.
7. Notice And Hearing: Upon filing of an application for a transfer plan by a property owner or an applicant with the consent of the owner, the Director of
Planning and Building Safety must give public notice, as provided in chapter 27 of this title, of the intention to consider at a public hearing the
granting of a transfer plan.
8. Appeal To Planning Commission: The applicant or any person affected by the Director of Planning and Building Safety's decision respecting a
transfer plan can appeal that decision to the Planning Commission pursuant to chapter 25 of this title.
9. Appeal To City Council: The applicant or any person affected by the Planning Commission's decision respecting a transfer plan can appeal the
Planning Commission's decision to the City Council pursuant to chapter 25 of this title.
10. Final Approval: A transfer plan approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, Planning Commission and/or City Council becomes final
upon the completion of all applicable conditions of approval and the following:
a. Legal Assurances: A covenant or other suitable, legally binding agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney must be recorded against the
affected donor and receiving parcels confirming the transfer of NFA between/among parcels and setting forth any conditions of approval imposed
by the City. The covenant must be executed by all parties that have a legal or equitable interest in the affected donor and receiving parcels. The
covenant must confirm that from the date of recording of the covenant, the affected parcels will be burdened by the covenant in perpetuity and the
covenant will run with the land and the FAR for the donor parcel and receiving parcel will be set in the covenant pursuant to the FAR allowed at the
time of approval of the transfer; and
11. Removal/Modification: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve the removal or modification of a covenant if the transfer has not
been entirely utilized by a receiving parcel or a different parcel has been identified as a donor parcel. The legal and equitable owners of the affected
parcels must execute a removal or modification covenant in a form approved by the City Attorney.
H. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences must comply with the location requirement of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry wall must
be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential zones. A six foot (6') high wall or fence must be provided along property lines for
those yards abutting industrial zones.
I. Access: All development projects must provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's Transportation
Demand Management Program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects must provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site, if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multibuilding development project, then
safe and convenient pedestrian access must be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1382, 3-15-2005)
15-5G-7: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-5G-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1382, 3-15-2005)
15-5G-9: SIGNS:
Signs in the C-4 Zone must comply with requirements of chapter 18 of this title except as specified below:
A. A maximum of three (3) ground or monument signs not to exceed forty five feet (45') in height each are permitted along the Sepulveda Boulevard street
frontage, north of the Union Pacific Railroad.
B. A maximum of two (2) ground or monument signs not to exceed twenty five feet (25') in height each are permitted along the Sepulveda Boulevard street
frontage south of the Union Pacific Railroad.
C. A maximum of two (2) ground or monument signs (not including wayfinding signs), not to exceed twenty five feet (25') in height each are permitted
along the Park Place street frontage.
D. A maximum of one ground or monument sign (not including wayfinding signs), not to exceed twenty five feet (25') in height is permitted along the Allied
Way street frontage.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 473/581
E. A maximum of one ground or monument sign, not to exceed sixty five feet (65') in height is permitted along the Allied Way street frontage.
F. A maximum of two (2) ground or monument signs (not including wayfinding signs), not to exceed twenty feet (20') each are permitted along the
Rosecrans Avenue street frontage.
G. A maximum of one roof sign up to four hundred fifty (450) square feet in that portion of the C-4 Zone located south of the Union Pacific Railroad and
north of Village Drive which shall not count toward the maximum fifteen percent (15%) permitted for storefront signage as specified in subsection 15-
18-4A1b of this title.
H. Parcels that are comprised of a minimum of 7.5 acres and that have at least eighty percent (80%) of the floor area devoted to retail and restaurant uses
may have up to two (2) light emitting diode signs ("LED sign") that do not exceed thirty feet (30') in height and sixty feet (60') in width so long as: 1) the
signs only advertise businesses and products (but only in conjunction with the name of the business that sells the product) that are located on the
parcel or display movie projections and abstract videos that are not related to advertising any product, or entertainment, retail or service use and 2) the
sign is oriented such that it is intended to be viewed by individuals located on the parcel and not by individuals located in a public right-of-way. Pursuant
to a development agreement that covers multiple parcels of property, and so long as the requirements of this provision are otherwise met, the names of
businesses and products (but only in conjunction with the name of the business that sells the product) that are located on parcels that are subject to the
development agreement may be advertised on an LED sign located on another parcel that is subject to the same development agreement. (Ord. 1556,
10-3-2017)
15-5G-10: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
A. Approval Required: Site plan review approval shall be required for all new development within the C-4 Zone and expansion of existing structures where
a building permit is required. A site plan will not be required for modifications to structures where no square footage is added.
B. Provisions: All regular provisions of this title shall apply to all properties within the C-4 Zone, including, but not limited to, conditional use permit,
variance, time limit, public notice and hearing provisions. The provisions herein add to or supplement the above referenced provisions.
C. Approval Of Site Plan: Approval of a site plan is required before or concurrent with a tentative tract or parcel map for all proposed projects within the
specific plan area. Where no tentative tract or parcel map is required, approval of a site plan must occur before building permits are issued.
D. Approval Authority:
1. The approval authority for a site plan for projects under fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall be the Director of Planning and Building Safety.
2. The approval authority for projects over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in floor area shall be the Planning Commission.
3. The decision of the Director of Planning and Building Safety, and the Planning Commission shall be subject to appeal as provided for in chapter 25
of this title.
E. Requirements For Site Plan: A site plan shall show the location of all structures, landscape and hardscape areas, parking areas, walks, internal
circulation, access, adjacent streets, sign type and placement, and fence-wall type and placement.
F. Factors To Consider: The approval authority shall consider the following factors when reviewing a site plan:
1. The dimensions, shape and orientation of the parcel;
2. The placement of buildings and structures on the parcel;
3. The height, setbacks, bulk and building materials;
4. The building materials and design;
5. The distance between buildings or structures;
6. The location, number and layout of off-street parking and loading spaces;
7. The internal vehicular patterns and pedestrian safety features;
8. The location, distribution, amount and type of landscaping materials;
9. The placement, photometrics, height and direction of illumination of light standards;
10. The location, number, size and height of signs;
11. The location, height and materials of walls, fences or hedges;
12. The location and method of screening refuse and storage areas, roof equipment, pipes, vents, utility equipment and all equipment not contained in
the main buildings of the development;
13. Compliance with all applicable development standards including, but not limited to, height, setbacks, FAR, trip generation, and off-street parking
requirements.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 474/581
G. Findings For Approval: In order to approve or conditionally approve the site plan, the approval authority shall make the following findings:
1. The proposed development, including the uses and the physical design of the development, is consistent with the intent and general purpose of the
General Plan;
2. The proposed development, including the uses and the physical design of the development, is consistent with the intent and general purpose of the
provisions of this Code and any applicable development agreement; and
3. The proposed development, including the uses and the physical design of the development, will not adversely affect the orderly and harmonious
development of the area and the general welfare of the City.
If such findings cannot be made, the site plan shall be denied.
H. Time Limitation: Site plan approval, in accordance with this policy, shall be valid for a period of one year plus extensions pursuant to this Code. If
construction of a project does not commence within that period and proceed with due diligence thereafter, the approval of the site plan shall terminate
and an additional submittal, review and approval will be required.
I. Revisions:
1. Where the Director was the approval authority and there was no appeal, the Director may approve any revisions.
2. Where the final approval authority was other than the Director, the Director may still approve revisions that are minor in nature or reasonable
extensions other than those applied as a condition of approval. Significant changes, additions or omissions shall be submitted for review and
approval by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1556, 10-3-2017)
Chapter 6
INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A. LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-1) ZONE
15-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated Light Industrial on the
General Plan land use map and in the General Plan text. This zone is intended to provide for the location and grouping of light industrial activities,
research, and technological processes, and related offices and auxiliary uses performing support services for existing and permitted establishments,
companies or business firms within the zone. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-1 Zone:
A. Animal hospitals.
B. Daycare centers.
C. Dog daycare (indoor).
D. Emergency shelters.
E. Fitness centers.
F. General offices.
G. General storage, warehousing and ministorage.
H. High and medium bay labs.
I. Light manufacturing uses and related offices.
J. Public facilities, including, but not limited to, fire and police facilities, post offices, and libraries.
K. Public utilities, including, but not limited to, power substations and telephone exchanges.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 475/581
L. Recreation facilities (public and private).
M. Research and development.
N. Restaurants and cafes.
O. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
15-6A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any permitted use, or any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Cafes.
C. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
D. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
E. Outdoor dining areas pursuant to the standards contained in subsection 15-2-7D of this title.
F. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1570, 8-
7-2018)
15-6A-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. The off site sale of alcohol at limited support service retail establishments as an accessory use.
B. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants and delicatessens.
C. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1239, 11-
21-1995; amd. Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006)
15-6A-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Any use permitted in the MU, CO, C-3, C-2 and C-RS Zones, except residential uses and sexually oriented businesses.
B. Animal boarding.
C. Dog daycare (outdoor).
D. Drive-through restaurants.
E. Freight forwarding, transfer, trucking yards or terminals.
F. Helicopter landing facilities subject to the provisions of section 15-2-13 of this title.
G. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard.
H. Other similar uses approved by the Director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1570, 8-7-2018)
15-6A-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses that are involved with the transfer and storage of waste. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 476/581
15-6A-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the M-1 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. No operations and uses conducted on the premises shall be in violation of this Code, State laws, or environmental regulations by reason of noise,
odor, dust, mud, smoke, light, vibrations or other similar causes.
2. All uses in the M-1 Zone shall be conducted completely within a fully enclosed building except:
a. Recreational facilities customarily undertaken in the open;
b. Special uses, provided such use expressly permits operation in other than a fully enclosed building as provided through an administrative
determination; and (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
c. Outdoor restaurant seating, provided it complies with the provisions of section 15-2-16 of this title. (Ord. 1279, 10-7-1997)
3. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
4. Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of two hundred feet (200').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Twenty five foot (25') minimum. Encroachments are allowed pursuant to section 15-2-7 and subsection 15-2-14B of this title. (Ord. 1570,
8-7-2018)
2. Side Yard: Fifteen feet (15') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, then no less than twenty five feet (25') shall be provided; or
b. If the side yard abuts properties with a different zone classification, then the setback required by the zone with the largest setback requirement
shall apply.
3. Rear Yard: Ten feet (10') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, or public right-of-way, and if the primary access is through the rear yard, then no less than twenty
five feet (25') shall be provided; or
b. If the rear yard abuts properties with a different zone classification, then the setback required for the zone with the largest setback requirement
shall apply.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 477/581
E. Lot Frontage: A minimum frontage of one hundred feet (100') shall be provided on a dedicated street. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
F. Building Area: The total net "floor area" of all buildings, as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title, on any parcel or lot shall not exceed the total square
footage of the parcel or lot area multiplied by 0.6, thereby giving a floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.6:1. However, additional FAR may be granted by the City
upon the preparation and approval of a specific plan, consistent with section 65450 et seq., of the California Government Code, or, for properties east
of Sepulveda Boulevard only, with the approval of a transfer of development rights (TDR) plan. The total net floor area of high and medium bay labs
may be multiplied by a factor of 0.5 to determine the allowed net floor area, if an agreement is recorded which ensures that the use and the number of
employees is consistent with the definition of "high and medium bay labs" in section 15-1-6 of this title.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 478/581
(Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
G. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences in the M-1 Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry
wall shall be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential, mixed use or commercial zones.
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the City's transportation
demand management program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site if within adjoining public rights-of-way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-6A-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-6A-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces in the M-1 Zone shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
An area equivalent to twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the building that is devoted to accessory use(s) may be parked at the rate of the
building's primary use. In cases of uncertainty or ambiguity, the Director will determine whether an area is accessory. (Ord. 1570, 8-7-2018)
15-6A-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the M-1 Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-6A-11: EMERGENCY SHELTERS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Emergency Shelters: Emergency shelters are subject to the following development standards:
1. Not more than one emergency shelter is permitted within a radius of three hundred feet (300') from another emergency shelter.
2. No emergency shelter will be permitted within three hundred feet (300') of residentially zoned property, El Segundo public or private schools, El
Segundo parks and open space, or childcare facilities.
3. The emergency shelter facility may provide one or more of the following specific facilities and services including, without limitation:
a. Childcare facilities;
b. Commercial kitchen facilities designed and operated in compliance with Health and Safety Code section 113700 et seq.;
c. Dining area;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 479/581
d. Laundry;
e. Recreation room; and
f. Support services (e.g., training, counseling).
4. Not more than twelve (12) persons can be served on a nightly basis.
5. Maximum length of stay of a person in an emergency shelter is limited to one hundred eighty (180) days in any twelve (12) month period.
6. The facility must provide a minimum of fifty (50) gross square feet of personal living space per person served, not including space for common areas.
7. Emergency shelters may operate twenty four (24) hours a day to provide sleeping facilities and other facilities and services. Admittance and intake
processing of emergency shelter clients is limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. daily. Delivery hours are limited to seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. daily. Refuse collection is limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. daily.
8. Each emergency shelter must have an on site management office, with at least one employee present at all times the emergency shelter is in
operation. A minimum of two (2) employees must be on duty when more than ten (10) beds are occupied.
9. Each emergency shelter must have on site security employees, with at least one security employee present at all times the emergency shelter is in
operation.
10. Staging drop off, intake, and pick up of emergency shelter clients must take place inside a building, at a rear or side entrance not adjacent to a
public right-of-way, or in an interior courtyard. Any exterior waiting areas must be physically and visually separated from public view of a right-of-way
with a minimum six foot (6') tall decorative masonry wall and/or a six foot (6') tall hedge or similar mature landscaping as approved by the Director.
Floor plans for the emergency shelter must be submitted with the building plans that show the size and location of any proposed interior and/or
exterior waiting or resident intake areas.
11. Outdoor recreation activities may be conducted at the facility subject to the same physical and visual separation requirements as exterior waiting
areas as set forth in this section.
12. Off street parking must be provided as set forth in this Code, except that the number of off street parking spaces provided must be one parking
space per three (3) beds, plus one parking space per employee on duty with a minimum of three (3) employee parking spaces. Notwithstanding this
requirement, the required number of off street parking spaces cannot exceed the spaces required for similar uses of the same size in the M-1 Zone.
13. Exterior lighting must be provided at all building entrances and outdoor activity areas, and must be activated between sunset and sunrise of each
day. All exterior lighting must comply with this Code.
14. Facilities must provide a storage area for refuse and recyclables and must be fully screened from public view of any public right-of-way and be
enclosed by a solid wall or fence, in accordance with this Code. The refuse and recyclable storage area must be large enough to accommodate the
number of bins that are required to provide the facility with sufficient service so as to avoid the overflow of material outside of the bins provided.
15. Emergency shelter application requests and building plans for emergency shelters must be submitted to the Director, and if the application and
building plans meet all applicable standards in this Code, including design, development, and any other State or local requirement, the emergency
shelter application may be approved by the Director. Emergency shelter applications must be approved before a building permit may be issued. (Ord.
1497, 10-21-2014)
ARTICLE B. HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (M-2) ZONE
15-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated heavy industrial on the
general plan land use map and in the general plan text. This zone is intended to provide areas suitable for the development of heavy manufacturing,
assembling, or processing activities having unusual or potentially deleterious operational characteristics, that would be detrimental if allowed to operate in
other zones within the city. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-2 zone:
A. Construction yards.
B. Extraction of raw materials and refining.
C. Factories.
D. Generating stations.
E. Heavy manufacturing uses.
F. Other similar uses approved by the director of community, economic and development services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 480/581
15-6B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
C. General office and laboratory uses.
D. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
E. Other similar uses approved by the director of community, economic and development services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-6B-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
A. The off site sale of alcohol at limited support service retail establishments as an accessory use.
B. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, and delicatessens.
C. Other similar uses approved by the director of community, economic and development services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1239, 11-
21-1995; amd. Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006)
15-6B-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Any use permitted in the M-1, MU, CO, C-3, C-2 and C-RS zones, except residential uses and sexually oriented businesses.
B. Drive-through restaurants.
C. Freight forwarding.
D. Helicopter landing facilities subject to the provisions of section 15-2-13 of this title.
E. Outdoor dining, exempting outdoor dining at restaurants and drive-through restaurants where outdoor dining comprises twenty percent (20%) or less of
the total dining area of the restaurant or drive-through restaurant, but not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
F. Service stations, if a five hundred foot (500') minimum distance from any residential zoned property is provided. This distance criteria does not apply to
properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard.
G. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1260, 9-
17-1996; amd. Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-6B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses that are involved with the transfer and storage of waste. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-6B-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the M-2 Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions:
1. Operations and uses conducted on the premises, which are or may be in violation of this Code, State laws, or environmental regulations by reason
of noise, odor, dust, mud, light, smoke, vibrations or other similar causes, shall conform to all City, State and Federal regulations which are designed
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this City and the employees of the proposed use.
2. Prior to approval of any development project, all criteria of the transportation demand management (TDM) and trip reduction criteria, as provided for
in chapter 16 of this title shall be met.
3. Other provisions as required in chapter 2 of this title.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 481/581
B. Lot Area: A minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of two hundred feet (200').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25') minimum.
2. Side Yard: Fifteen feet (15') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the side yard adjoins a dedicated street, then no less than twenty five feet (25') shall be provided; or
b. If the side yard abuts properties with a different zone classification, then the setback required by the zone with the largest setback requirements
shall apply.
3. Rear Yard: Ten feet (10') minimum, unless one of the following conditions exists:
a. If the rear yard adjoins an alley, dedicated street, or public right-of-way, or if the primary access is through the rear yard, then no less than twenty
five feet (25') shall be provided; or
b. If the rear yard abuts property with a different zone classification, then the setback required by the zone with the largest setback requirement shall
apply.
E. Lot Frontage: A minimum frontage of one hundred feet (100') shall be provided on a dedicated street.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 482/581
F. Building Area: The total net "floor area" of all buildings, as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title, on any parcel or lot shall not exceed the total square
footage of the parcel or lot area multiplied by 0.6, thereby giving a floor area ratio of 0.6:1.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
G. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences in the M-2 zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 2 of this title. A minimum six foot (6') high masonry
wall shall be provided along property lines for those yards abutting residential, or commercial zones. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
H. Access: All development projects shall provide adequate access and facilities for various modes of transit, as required by the city's transportation
demand management program in chapter 16 of this title. In addition, all development projects shall provide pedestrian access between buildings and
transit facilities located on site and/or off site if within adjoining public rights of way. If the building is part of a multi-building development project, then
safe and convenient pedestrian access shall be provided between buildings.
I. Recreational Facilities: All developments greater than five hundred (500) acres shall be required to maintain employee recreational facilities subject to
the approval of the director of community, economic and development services and the director of recreation and parks. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-6B-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided as required by section 15-2-14 and chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-6B-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-6B-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the M-2 zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 7
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (MDR) OVERLAY ZONE
15-7A-1: PURPOSE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 483/581
A. The purpose of the Medium Density Residential (MDR) Overlay Zone is to provide for an area within the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan area that is
appropriate for and capable of sustaining residential uses.
B. Moreover, it is the intent in identifying the long-term potential for residential use in the area designated to establish that residential use is explicitly
excluded from the remainder of the Smoky Hollow specific plan area, except for single caretaker dwelling units provided for elsewhere in the plan.
C. The MDR Zone shall be considered a "floating zone" in that once a need is identified, this zone can be activated. This floating zone for the Smoky
Hollow Specific Plan area attempts to recognize that future residential market forces are anticipated in certain portions of the specific plan area and
sensible land use planning dictates their exact locations given adjacent land uses and proximity to arterial streets.
D. In effect, this zone is not a true "floating zone" in that it does not add more regulations over the existing Smoky Hollow East base zone. Rather, it is a
"holding zone" which can be activated and used in place of the base zone. (Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019)
15-7A-2: ACTIVATION:
The following processes activate the MDR Zone:
A. A General Plan amendment to change the designation for proposed activated property from Smoky Hollow Specific Plan to Multi-Family Residential;
B. A Specific Plan amendment to remove the proposed activated property from the Smoky Hollow Specific Plan; and
C. A Zone Change application to change the zone of the proposed activated property from Smoky Hollow East with MDR Overlay to Multi-Family
Residential (R-3) without MDR Overlay. (Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019)
15-7A-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The development standards that apply to the underlying base zone shall apply unless and until the MDR is activated. If the MDR is properly activated,
Multi-Family Residential (R-3) zoning standards shall apply to the activated property along with the following additional standards:
A. The setback along Grand Avenue shall be thirty feet (30') minimum for properties east of Kansas Street, whether it is for a front or side yard.
B. Vehicular access to MDR activated properties may not be taken directly from Grand Avenue. (Ord. 1580, 2-5-2019)
ARTICLE B. MULTIMEDIA OVERLAY (MMO) DISTRICT
15-7B-1: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this district is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations, which are designated for the Multimedia
Overlay (MMO) District. The MMO District is established to provide creators of multimedia (film, television, music video, multimedia, digital artists, web
authors, etc.) and their support elements the opportunity to obtain the space, equipment and personnel necessary to conceive, produce and deliver
their work in one location. It is the intent of the MMO District to allow for the coexistence of uses permitted in the underlying zone along with the
possibility of multimedia uses.
B. It is anticipated, although not required, that each type of use will be from two (2) or more of the following categories: office, sound stages and support
offices, post production, craft shops, services, rentals, theaters and performance, commissary, or archive. It is further intended to ensure that adequate
open space and development regulations will create a favorable environment for abutting uses as well as ensuring the compatibility and harmonious
existence of development within MMO District property. Businesses located within this district are encouraged to provide street level uses which allow
for, and facilitate, pedestrian activity for area workers and visitors and opportunities for easy interface. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-
2018)
15-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses would be permitted in the proposed MMO District:
A. Commissary.
B. Craft shops and rentals.
C. Movie and entertainment facilities.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 484/581
D. Multimedia archive facilities.
E. Multimedia related office and postproduction facilities.
F. Picture equipment sales.
G. Special effects studios.
H. Studio/sound stage(s) and other support facilities.
I. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord.
1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY LAND USES:
The following uses would be permitted as accessory uses in the proposed MMO District:
A. Drive-through or walk-up services, including financial operations, but excluding drive-through restaurants.
B. Employee recreational facilities and play area.
C. Open storage of commodities sold or utilized on the premises.
D. Parking structures and surface parking lots.
E. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-4: USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT:
The following uses would be permitted subject to the approval of an administrative use permit in the proposed MMO District:
A. Employee daycare facilities.
B. The off site sale of alcohol at retail establishments.
C. The on site sale and consumption of alcohol at restaurants, drive-through restaurants, delicatessens, and commissaries.
D. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000; Ord. 1395, 5-16-2006; Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-5: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Assembly halls.
B. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010; amd. Ord.
1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses prohibited in the underlying zone(s). (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. All uses within the MMO District shall comply with the site development standards of the underlying zone(s); provided, however, that a maximum of one
million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) square feet of development shall be allowed in the entire MMO District area.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 485/581
B. The total net "floor area" of all buildings, as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title on any parcel or lot in the underlying O-S, P, and P-F Zones shall not
exceed the total square footage of the parcel or lot area multiplied by 1.3, thereby giving a floor area ratio of 1.3:1. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord.
1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-8: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping in the MMO District will be provided as required in the underlying zone(s). (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces in the proposed MMO District will be provided as required in the underlying zone(s) and as required by chapter 15 of
this title. (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-7B-10: SIGNS:
Signs in the MMO District will be in compliance with the requirements of the underlying zone(s). (Ord. 1307, 4-20-1999; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
Chapter 8
OPEN SPACE (O-S) ZONE
15-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated open space and parks on
the general plan land use map and in the general plan text. The open space (O-S) zone is intended both to provide adequate recreational opportunities
and to preserve open space for the anticipated needs of both present and future residents and employees in the city. This is to be achieved by preserving
and protecting natural resources; providing visual relief from intense urban development; developing new recreational opportunities and preventing
incompatible development of areas that should be preserved or regulated for scenic, recreation, conservation, transportation, or public health and safety
purposes. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the O-S zone:
A. Public outdoor recreation, including, without limitation, ballparks and bleachers, swimming pools, parks and other areas of active or passive recreational
usage; trails and other suitable corridors including off road bicycle paths.
B. The preservation and conservation of natural resources, including, without limitation, areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life and
areas required to provide visual relief from intense urban development and growth.
C. The managed production of mineral deposits.
D. The regulation of areas for public health and safety, including, without limitation, areas which require special management or regulation because of
hazardous or special conditions.
E. Other similar uses approved by the director, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1497, 10-21-2014)
15-8-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted in the O-S zone when developed and used in conjunction with one or more permitted uses in the zone:
A. Comfort stations.
B. Concession stands.
C. Maintenance buildings.
D. Parking areas.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 486/581
E. Other similar uses approved by the director of community, economic and development services as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-8-4: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit consistent with chapter 23 of this title:
A. Buildings or structures allowed in conjunction with permitted uses which exceed the height limitations of subsection 15-8-5C of this chapter.
B. Intermodal transit facilities entirely within five hundred feet (500') of a Metro Green Line station, a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from residential
property, and with a parking time limit of twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
C. Landscape nurseries (no wholesale or retail sales on premises).
D. Private recreation.
E. Recreational or multipurpose recreational building in conjunction with park or playground facilities.
F. Utility facilities.
G. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1260, 9-
17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-8-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses within the O-S Zone shall comply with the development standards contained in this section.
A. General Provisions: As provided by chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: No minimum requirements. (Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996)
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed a height of thirty two feet (32'). Buildings and structures with a flat roof shall not exceed
twenty six feet (26').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots, measuring from the grade plane to the lowest finished grade immediately
adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included in measuring the
maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be not less than the average front yard setback requirements of abutting properties that have the same
street frontage.
2. Side Yard: The side yard shall not be less than the average side yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the side yard of the
subject property.
3. Rear Yard: The rear yard shall not be less than the average rear yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the rear yard of the
subject property.
E. Lot Frontage: No minimum requirements.
F. Building Area: No maximum floor area ratio requirements.
G. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall be located in compliance with the requirements of chapter 2 of this title.
H. Lot Coverage: Buildings shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot area. (Ord. 1257, 6-18-1996)
15-8-6: LANDSCAPING:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 487/581
Five percent (5%) of the at grade total vehicular use area must be landscaped. Landscaping must conform to chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-
2015)
15-8-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-8-8: SIGNS:
Signs in the O-S Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 9
AUTOMOBILE PARKING (P) ZONE
15-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated parking on the general plan
land use map and in the general plan text. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the P Zone:
A. Open air parking lots.
B. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-9-3: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses shall be allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
A. Parking structures.
B. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-9-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Car sales shall be prohibited in the P Zone. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-9-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the P Zone shall comply with the development standards of this section.
A. General Provisions: As required by chapter 2 of this title.
B. Lot Area: A minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be provided. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. Height:
1. Buildings and structures with a pitched roof shall not exceed a height of thirty two feet (32'). Buildings and structures with a flat roof shall not exceed
twenty six feet (26').
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots, measuring from the grade plane to the lowest finished grade immediately
adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is included in measuring the
maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 488/581
D. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: The front yard setback shall be not less than the average front yard setback requirements of abutting properties that have the same
street frontage.
2. Side Yard: The side yard shall not be less than the average side yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the side yard of the
subject property.
3. Rear Yard: The rear yard shall not be less than the average rear yard setback requirements for those properties which abut the rear yard of the
subject property. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-9-6: LANDSCAPING:
Five percent (5%) of the at grade total vehicular use area must be landscaped. Landscaping must conform to chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-
2015)
15-9-7: SIGNS:
Signs in the P Zone shall be in compliance with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 10
PUBLIC FACILITIES (P-F) ZONE
15-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide consistency with and implement policies related to those locations which are designated public facility and Federal
government on the general plan land use map and in the general plan text. The Public Facilities (P-F) Zone is established to provide adequate space for
community facilities of a public or quasi-public nature in locations best suited to serve the needs of the community, to protect that land from intrusion by
other uses, and to set forth those development standards necessary to ensure that such uses will be compatible with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 1212,
11-16-1993)
15-10-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the P-F Zone:
A. Flood control facilities, including, but not limited to, spreading grounds, settling basins and drainage facilities.
B. Municipal, County, State or Federal governmental buildings such as City Hall, library, court facilities or fire stations.
C. Public or quasi-public educational facilities such as schools and administrative offices.
D. Public parking lots or structures.
E. Public recreational facilities.
F. Public utilities.
G. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000)
15-10-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
A. Any use customarily incidental to a permitted use.
B. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000)
15-10-4: USES SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The following uses are allowed subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by chapter 23 of this title:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 489/581
A. Assembly halls.
B. Charitable institutions.
C. Private recreation.
D. Publicly owned facilities such as warehouses and storage yards.
E. Other similar uses approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, as provided by chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-10-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All uses in the P-F Zone shall comply with the development standards of this section.
A. Lot Area: No minimum requirement. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
B. Height:
1. The permissible height limit shall be the average height of all zones which abut the property.
2. A maximum grade differential of eight feet (8') is permitted on sloping lots. The vertical height which exceeds the maximum grade differential limit is
included in measuring the maximum building height. On sloped lots, a segmented grade plane may be applied to different portions of a building.
3. See section 15-2-3 of this title for exceptions to building height. (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
C. Setbacks:
1. Front Yard: The minimum front setback shall be the average front yard setback for the zones which abut the property.
2. Side Yard: The minimum setback shall be the average side yard setback for the zones which abut the property.
3. Rear Yard: The minimum setback shall be the average rear yard setback for the zones which abut the property.
D. Walls And Fences: Walls and fences shall comply with the requirements of section 15-2-4 of this title.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 490/581
E. Lot Coverage: The permissible lot coverage shall be the average lot coverage of all zones which abut the property. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-10-6: LANDSCAPING:
Five percent (5%) of the at grade total vehicular use area shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall conform to chapter 15A of this title. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-
1996)
15-10-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-10-8: SIGNS:
Signs in the P-F Zone shall comply with the requirements of chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 11
SMOKY HOLLOW SPECIFIC PLAN
(Rep. by Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
Chapter 12
COASTAL ZONE DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
15-12-1: PURPOSE:
Coastal development procedures are established to ensure that all public and private development in the Coastal Zone of El Segundo is consistent with
the City's certified Local Coastal Plan. The area affected by these regulations is located west of Vista Del Mar. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-12-2: PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIRED:
A. In addition to any other permits or approvals required by the City, a coastal development permit (CDP) shall be required and obtained from the City prior
to commencement of any development in the Coastal Zone of the City, except:
1. Developments on tide lands, submerged lands, or public trust lands over which the Coastal Commission has original permit jurisdiction.
2. Developments determined to be exempt from the coastal development permit requirements pursuant to State law or regulations. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-
1993)
B. An application shall be filed with the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services and a fee paid to the City to cover the cost of
examining and processing the application. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. All such permits shall be processed in the time, form, and manner required by the California Public Resources Code, particularly sections 65920-65960
of said code and shall be processed as expeditiously as possible. Concurrent processing may be scheduled for any other required discretionary
permits. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-12-3: EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT:
A. No fee, public hearing, notice, or development permit shall be required for the types of development classified as exempt from coastal development
permit (CDP) requirements by State law or regulations.
B. Whenever a permit is issued in the Coastal Zone by any department of the City and it is determined that the subject of the permit does not require a
CDP because it is exempt, a memorandum to that effect shall be appended to the City's file copy of the permit. The file copy of the permit and the
memorandum shall contain the applicant's name, the location of the project, and a brief description of the project. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-12-4: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be required for a CDP prior to the issuance of such permit: (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 491/581
A. Jurisdiction: Upon receipt of an application for a CDP and prior to permit approval, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance
with the regulations specified in this Chapter, except for minor developments pursuant to Section 15-12-7 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
B. Conformance Required: A CDP shall be granted only upon findings that the proposed development conforms to the certified Local Coastal Plan and
Coastal Act public access and recreational policies.
C. Date Of Final Local Action: The date when the Planning Commission adopts a resolution and findings approving or disapproving an application for a
CDP.
D. Notice Of Final Local Action: Within seven (7) calendar days of the date of the final local action on a CDP, a notice shall be sent to the applicant, to the
Coastal Commission, and to any persons who specifically request such notice by submitting a self-addressed, stamped envelope. Such notice shall be
accompanied by a copy of the Planning Commission resolution stating conditions of approval and written findings and the procedures for appeal of the
action to the Coastal Commission.
E. Appeals To Coastal Commission: All actions on CDPs may be appealed to the extent permitted by law to the Coastal Commission by an applicant, any
aggrieved person, or by any two (2) members of the Coastal Commission according to the procedures of the Coastal Commission.
F. Appeal Period: The final local action must be appealed, if at all, within twenty (20) calendar days of the receipt by the executive director of the notice of
final local approval as provided in subsection 15-12-5A4 of this Chapter. The appeal period for projects approved by operation of law shall begin to run
only upon the receipt of the local government notice that it has to take final action by operation of law pursuant to Government Code sections 65950 to
65957.1.
G. Effective Date Of CDP: A CDP shall become final only after expiration of the ten (10) working-day appeal period to the Coastal Commission or after the
twenty first calendar day following final local action, whichever is later. The final decision of the local government on a CDP shall become effective
within the time period stated above unless any of the following occur:
1. An appeal is filed according to Coastal Commission regulations;
2. The notice of local government action does not meet Coastal Commission regulations;
3. The notice is not received in the Commission's office in time to allow distribution and review within the appeal period; or
4. Local notice is not given in accordance with subsection 15-12-5A4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-12-5: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Notice of public hearing to consider a development within the local Coastal Zone shall be given by:
A. First class mailing of a written notice not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date by:
1. The mailing of a notice to the owner of the property or duly authorized agent;
2. The mailing of a notice to all property owners and residents within one hundred feet (100') of the subject property;
3. The mailing of a notice to the Coastal Commission; and
4. The mailing of a notice to all persons requesting notice for the individual project or all coastal zone hearings.
B. The mailing or delivery of a notice to the El Segundo Public Library to be posted or kept in a public file. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
C. The posting of a notice on the site. The posting and maintenance of such notice shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Such notices shall be posted
in a manner prescribed by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. Failure to adequately post or maintain the notice shall be
cause for the continuance of the hearing. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-12-6: NOTICE CONTENTS:
All notices shall contain the following information:
A. A statement that the development is within the Coastal Zone.
B. The date of filing the application and the name of the applicant.
C. The number assigned to the application.
D. A description of the development and its proposed location.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 492/581
E. The date, time, and place at which the application will be heard by the local governing body or hearing officer.
F. A brief description of the general procedure of local government concerning the conduct of hearing and local actions.
G. The system for Coastal Commission appeals. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-12-7: WAIVER OF PUBLIC HEARING:
A. A Planning Commission public hearing may be waived for minor developments which meet the following criteria:
1. The minor development is consistent with the City's certified local coastal program, including the land use resource protection policies and the
zoning standards.
2. The minor development requires no discretionary approvals other than a coastal development permit.
3. The minor development has no adverse effect either individually or cumulatively on coastal resources or public access to the shoreline or along the
coast.
B. Additionally, the public hearing may be waived only if all of the following occur:
1. Notice that a public hearing shall be held upon written request by any person is provided to all persons who would otherwise be required to be
notified of a public hearing, as provided by Section 15-12-5 of this Chapter, as well as any other persons known to be interested in receiving notice.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
2. No request for a public hearing is received by the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services within fifteen (15) working days
from the date of sending the notice pursuant to subsection B1 above.
3. The notice provided in subsection B1 includes a statement that failure by a person to request in writing a public hearing may result in the loss of that
person's ability to appeal to the Coastal Commission any action taken by the City on a coastal development permit application.
C. The Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall be authorized to grant approval of a CDP for minor developments. The
Director's determination shall be placed as a receive and file item on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998;
amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-12-8: ZONE CHANGES:
No zone change on any site in the El Segundo Coastal Zone shall become effective until certified by the Coastal Commission. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-12-9: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter within the El Segundo Coastal Zone shall also in appropriate cases constitute a violation of division 20,
section 30000 et seq., of the California Public Resources Code and shall be subject to the remedies, fines and penalties provided in division 20, chapter 9,
section 30800 et seq., of the California Public Resources Code. This provision shall not preclude any enforcement under the provisions of this Title. Any
violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall also constitute a violation of this City Code. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 13
ADULT USE ZONING REGULATIONS
15-13-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to provide for the reasonable and uniform regulation of adult-oriented businesses in the City. It is recognized
that adult-oriented businesses have a serious deleterious effect upon adjacent areas, as well as the areas in which they are located. It is therefore the
purpose of this Chapter to establish criteria and standards for the establishment and conduct of adult-oriented businesses which will protect the public
health, safety, and welfare, preserve locally recognized values of community appearance, minimize the potential for nuisances related to the operation of
adult-oriented businesses, and maintain local property values.
A. The special regulation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary to ensure that their adverse secondary effects will not contribute to an increase in the
crime rates or the blighting or downgrading of the areas in which they are located or surrounding areas. The need for the special regulation is based on
the recognition that adult-oriented businesses have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are
concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity with sensitive uses such as residential zones and uses, parks, schools,
churches, or daycare centers, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas.
B. It is the purpose and intent of these special regulations to prevent the concentration or location of adult-oriented businesses in a manner that would
create such adverse secondary effects. Thus, in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry, especially including
minors, the special regulation of the time, place, and manner of the location and operation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 493/581
C. The need to regulate the proximity of adult-oriented businesses to sensitive land uses such as residential, religious, educational, recreational, and other
adult-oriented businesses is documented in studies which were the basis of the time, place, and manner of the restrictions contained in this Chapter.
D. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually-oriented materials, that are protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and the relevant provisions of the
California State Constitution. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-2: ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS DEFINED:
A. An "adult-oriented business" is any business where employees or patrons expose "specified anatomical areas" or engage in or simulate "specified
sexual activities", or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment or goods characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult-oriented businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with
appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients. Adult-oriented businesses also do not include athletic or exercise facilities where
"specified anatomical areas" may be exposed within a single-sex locker room or similar facility used for changing clothing. An adult-oriented business
also does not include a bona fide "theater", as defined herein. An adult-oriented business also does not include bona fide "motion picture/television
production facilities", as defined in Section 15-1-6 of this Title.
B. In determining whether a use is an adult-oriented business, only conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct shall
be considered. "Substantial" conduct includes any use which has a significant portion of its floor area, stock-in-trade, entertainment/performance, or
revenue derived from material characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas". Isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this Section as characterizing an adult-oriented
business shall not be considered except where such activities, taken together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct.
C. Adult-oriented businesses include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Adult Arcade: An "adult arcade" shall mean any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projections, or other image-producing devices are maintained to
show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the
depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
2. Adult Bookstore: "Adult bookstore" is an establishment which has, as a significant portion of its stock-in-trade, floor area, or revenue derived from
and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
a. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations
which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities".
b. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities".
c. Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate, "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities", or goods which are designed to be
placed on or in "specified anatomical areas", or to be used in conjunction with "specified sexual activities".
3. Adult Cabaret: An "adult cabaret" is a bar, nightclub, or similar establishment which features dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers who expose
"specified anatomical areas".
4. Adult Motel: An "adult motel" means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:
a. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; and/or
b. Offers a room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; and/or
c. Allows a tenant or occupant of a room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
5. Adult Motion Picture Theater: An "adult motion picture theater" shall mean a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depictions or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
6. Adult Tanning Salon: An "adult tanning salon" or "parlor" shall mean a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services and patrons
and/or owners, agents and/or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas.
7. Adult Theater: An "adult theater" is any place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium, or structure, partially or entirely used for live
performances or presentations, which place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium, or structure is used for presenting matter
characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for
observation by patrons therein. Such place shall also include an adult theater wherein persons are regularly featured appearing in a state of nudity or
giving live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas". An "adult theater" shall not mean a bona fide "theater", as hereinafter defined.
8. Nude Model Studio: A "nude model studio" means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical
areas" is provided to be conversed with or be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons,
for any form of consideration, except photography conducted at bona fide "motion picture or television production facilities" as defined in Section 15-
1-6 of this Title. "Nude model studio" shall not include any classroom of any school licensed under State law to provide art education, while such
classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such State license.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 494/581
9. Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall: A "sex supermarket/sex mini-mall" shall mean the establishment or operation of more than one type of "adultoriented
business or use" as defined in this Development Code within the same building.
10. Sexual Encounter Center: "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration:
a. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity
or is semi-nude or is exhibiting specified anatomical areas; or
b. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is seminude
or is exhibiting specified anatomical areas.
11. Sexual Novelty Store: A "sexual novelty store" is an establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, of its floor area, or its
revenue derived from, goods which are replicas of, or which simulate, "specified anatomical areas", or "specified sexual activities", or goods which
are designed to be placed on or in "specified anatomical areas", or to be used in conjunction with "specified sexual activities", to cause sexual
excitement.
12. Sexually Oriented Business: A "sexually oriented business" is any business, where employees or patrons expose "specified anatomical areas" or
engage in or simulate "specified sexual activities", or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment or goods characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
13. Theater: A "theater" shall mean a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment that is primarily devoted to the production of artistic dance, literary,
dramatic, or comedic performances on stage. If any such performance depicts, exposes, describes, or relates to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", the theater shall be an adult business unless one or more of the following is true:
a. Any emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" is on an
occasional or incidental basis.
b. The performance is primarily devoted to a verbal presentation and the spoken emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" is not a significant portion of the entire verbal presentation.
c. The performance is primarily devoted to a visual presentation and the emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" is not intended to appeal to sexual interests. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-3: DEFINITIONS; RELATED WORDS AND PHRASES:
In addition to the terms defined in Sections 15-13-2 and 15-13-4 of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:
A. Appeal: Wherever the reference to an "appeal" being filed or available to be filed is made in this Chapter, such right of appeal shall also include the right
to appeal administrative determinations made by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services/designee or the City
Manager/designee pursuant to this Chapter and Chapter 25 of this Title, to the Planning Commission and City Council. Wherever the term "appeal" is
used in this Chapter, including any time limit to act on an appeal, such term shall also mean a complete appeal being filed which includes all identified
information and payment of any appeal fee. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. Nudity Or State Of Nudity: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.
C. Private Viewing Area: An area or areas in an adult-oriented business designed to accommodate no more than five (5) or less patrons or customers for
purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie, or other presentation. No private viewing areas shall be
established, maintained, or authorized which does not provide an unobstructed view of the private viewing areas from a manager's station or from any
other point outside the private viewing area, and there shall be no doors, curtains, stalls, or other enclosures creating a private viewing area.
D. Semi-Nude: A state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the
female breast. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
E. Specified Criminal Act: Also means "specified criminal acts" and include sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or assault; rape; or crimes
connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity; violations involving the distribution, display, or
sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering. "Specified criminal acts" shall exclude those acts which are authorized or required to be
kept confidential pursuant to California Welfare and Institutions Code sections 601 to 900. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
15-13-4: DEFINITIONS; SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS AND SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the meanings set forth below:
A. "Specified anatomical areas" shall include any of the following human anatomical areas:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areolae; or
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
B. "Specified sexual activities" include all of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 495/581
2. Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
3. Human masturbation, actual or simulated.
4. The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another, or by an individual upon himself or herself, for the purpose of the sexual
gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking, or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation,
the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast.
5. Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal.
6. Excretory functions. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FILING FEE:
A. Information Required; Fee: In order to operate an adult-oriented business within this City, the applicant or proprietor of the business must obtain the
license required by Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code and any other license required by Title 4 of this Code and an adult business permit as required
herein. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1-2-1 of this Code, for an owner, operator, manager,
or employee to operate an adult-oriented business without processing an adult business permit required by this Chapter and any license required by
Title 4 of this Code. In order for the application to be deemed or determined complete, the applicant shall pay the filing fee as set by resolution of the
City Council for an adult business permit. All applicants for such a permit, in addition to any application or documents required to be filed pursuant to
the provisions of this Code, shall file a written, signed, and verified application on a form provided by the Director of Community, Economic and
Development Services evidencing the following: (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
1. The name and permanent address of the applicant.
2. The name and business address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall provide the name of the corporation and the
state of incorporation. The corporate name shall be exactly as set forth in its articles of incorporation and the applicant shall show the name and
address of each of the officers, directors, and controlling stockholders owning no less than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application shall show the name and address of each of the partners, including limited partners.
3. Location and address of the proposed adult-oriented business.
4. Legal description of the subject property.
5. A detailed description of the manner of providing proposed entertainment, including type of entertainment and the number of persons engaged in the
entertainment.
6. Proposed hours of operation.
7. A floor plan showing where the specific entertainment uses are proposed to be conducted within the building.
8. A site plan showing the location of the building, parking, landscaping, exterior lighting, and signage for the proposed use.
9. The name or names of the person or persons having responsibility for the management or supervision of the applicant's business and of any
entertainment.
10. Statement of the nature and character of the applicant's business, if any, to be carried on in conjunction with such entertainment.
B. Certain Information Confidential: Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a "public record" under California Government
Code section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing
and/or permit scheme established herein which is personal, private, confidential, or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm.
Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant's residence address and telephone number, the applicant's date of birth and/or age, the
applicant's driver's license and/or social security number, and/or personal financial data. The City Council in adopting the application and licensing
and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with California Government Code section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure
of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this Chapter by ensuring that the applicant's privacy,
confidentially, or security interests are protected. The City Clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made
available to any member of the public, the information set forth above. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-6: TIMELINE FOR LAND USE REVIEW AND DECISIONS:
The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the completed adult business permit application within forty five (45) days of its acceptance as
complete by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, unless extended upon the written consent of the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services and the applicant. This forty five (45) day review period shall be used by the City staff, the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services, the Planning Commission, and governmental agencies to complete the following necessary steps in the approval
process:
A. Within two (2) working days of receipt of the completed application, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall determine
whether the proposed use is subject to an exemption from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA Exemption Review)1.
B. Within the balance of the processing period, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall prepare an initial study and
necessary proposed environmental determination required by the California Environmental Quality Act.
C. Prepare public notice of the consideration of the proposed environmental determination and the notice of public hearing on the permit application,
pursuant to Section 15-27-5 of this Title.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 496/581
D. Submit applicant fingerprints using the priority processing procedure to the State Department of Justice for criminal history background check so that
results may be obtained prior to the public hearing on the proposed permit application. The results are guaranteed by the State to be issued within
seventeen (17) days of submittal.
E. Within thirty (30) days of the City's receipt of the completed application, the following agencies and departments should have completed their
inspections and reviews of the proposed use and information contained in the application, and should have issued a report to the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services:
1. County Health Department;
2. City Fire Department;
3. Department of Community, Economic and Development Services for zoning compliance;
4. City building safety staff; and
5. The Police Department for criminal history purposes and site security issues for the individuals involved.
In the event that any of the aforementioned agencies or departments does not complete its inspection and/or review within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the completed application by the City, that agency or department shall be deemed to have waived that agency's or department's right to inspect or
review the proposed use and approval and that agency's or department's approval shall not be necessary to grant the applicant an adult business
permit; and
F. Within forty five (45) days of receipt of the completed application by the City, the Planning Commission shall conduct a noticed hearing on the
application for an adult business permit and shall approve the application if the application meets the requirements of Section 15-13-8 of this Chapter
and shall deny the application if any of the findings set forth in Section 15-13-8 of this Chapter cannot be made. The Planning Commission shall issue
its decision within fifteen (15) days of opening the public hearing. However, in no event shall the Planning Commission fail to approve or deny the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of the completed application, unless consent to a later deadline is given by the applicant and the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services. If the Planning Commission fails to approve or deny the application within sixty (60) days, or any
extension thereof, of the receipt of the completed application, the application shall be deemed approved by the Planning Commission entitling the
applicant to engage in the proposed use, subject to the remaining provisions of this Chapter (including the filing of an appeal by an interested party
under Section 15-13-7 of this Chapter) and all other applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-13-7: FINDINGS REQUIRING APPLICATION APPROVAL:
A. Findings Enumerated: The Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall approve the application for an adult business permit unless it is
unable to make one or more of the following findings:
1. That all applicable filing fees have been paid.
2. That the applicant is not overdue in payment to the City of any taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed in relation to an existing
or former adult-oriented business.
3. That the building, structure, equipment, and location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business license is required complies with the
requirements and standards of the health, building, zoning, fire, and safety laws of the State, the El Segundo Fire Department, and the City.
4. That the conduct of the adult-oriented business as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, will comply with all applicable laws; including, but not
limited to, the City's building, zoning, fire, and health and safety regulations.
5. That the City currently has no evidence demonstrating that the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of
material facts in the adult business permit application or any other document required by the City in conjunction therewith.
6. That the use is permitted in the zone, district, or area in which it is proposed to be located and is in conformity with the applicable development
standards of that zone, district, or area, including the provision of required parking.
7. That the use is in conformity with the locational criteria set forth in Section 15-13-13 of this Chapter.
8. That the design of the site and the proposed improvements are in compliance with all applicable design provisions of Section 15-13-13 of this
Chapter.
9. That the proposed conduct of the adult-oriented business is in compliance with all applicable performance standards of Section 15-13-13 of this
Chapter.
10. That the applicant, his or her employees, agents, partners, directors, officers, controlling stock holders, or managers has not knowingly made any
false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with any City or
County agency or department.
11. That on the date that the business for which a permit is required herein commences, or thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the
premises to act as manager at all times during which the adult-oriented business is open.
12. That the applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
13. That an applicant, including partners of the applicant if the applicant is a partnership, or officers, directors, and controlling shareholders if applicant
is a corporation, has not been convicted of a "specific criminal act" for which:
a. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or assault; rape; or
crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material
harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 497/581
b. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense; for the "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or assault; rape; or crimes
connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material
harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering.
c. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors for the "specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse or
assault; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display,
or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; pandering; or conviction of any such offense occurring within twenty four (24) months prior to
application.
d. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.
e. An applicant who has been convicted of any of the above described "specified criminal acts" may qualify to own, operate, or manage an adultoriented
business only when the required time period has elapsed. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
B. Confidential Information: In acting on the application for an adult business permit, the Planning Commission or City Council on appeal shall not consider
information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to California Welfare and Institutions Code sections 601 to 900. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-
1996; amd. 2000 Code)
C. Denial Of Application: In the event the Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, denies an adult business permit application, the business, if
operating, shall cease its operations as an adult-oriented business and no further activities regulated by this Chapter or Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code
shall be conducted on the premises unless and until an adult use planning permit and a license required by Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code is obtained.
(Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-8: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
A. Denial Of Application: If the application for an adult business permit is denied by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall have ten (10) days from
the date of the hearing in which to appeal the decision to the City Council. If appealed, notice of the public hearing before the City Council shall be
mailed and published in the City's official newspaper and the hearing shall be held at the earliest possible date authorized by law, but in no event later
than thirty five (35) days from the date of the Planning Commission's action to approve or deny the application or from the date the application was
deemed approved. The City Council shall act on the appeal within forty five (45) days from the date the application was approved, deemed approved,
or denied by the Planning Commission. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed approved and the applicant shall be entitled to engage in the
proposed use subject to the remaining provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances.
B. Approval Of Application: If the application for an adult business permit is approved or deemed approved by the Planning Commission's actions or failure
to act, such action or inaction may be appealed by the applicant or any aggrieved party by filing a letter of appeal, with the required appeal fee, with the
City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the application's approval or deemed approval. The procedures set forth in subsection A of this Section
shall apply to an appeal by any aggrieved party as well as to an appeal by the applicant. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-9: RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO REVIEW PERMIT; CHANGED CONDITIONS:
A. Right To Review And Modify: Any adult business permit granted or approved hereunder shall be granted or approved with the City and its City Council,
Planning Commission, and Director of Community, Economic and Development Services retaining and reserving the right and jurisdiction to review and
modify the adult business permit, including the conditions of approval, based on changed circumstances. "Changed circumstances" include, but are not
limited to, the modification of the business, the change in scope, emphasis, size, or nature of the business, and the expansion, alteration, or change of
use. The reservation of the right to review any permit granted or approval hereunder by the City, City Council, Planning Commission, and Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services is in addition to, and not in lieu of, the right of the City, City Council, Planning Commission, and
Director of Community, Economic and Development Services to review and revoke or modify any permit granted or approved hereunder for any
violations of the conditions imposed on such permit.
B. Requested Information Not Available: In the event the information requested pursuant to Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code is not available prior to the
granting of the permit, the City shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this Code, issue the permit. Should information later
obtained pursuant to Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code materially vary from that contained in the application, such variance shall be cause to revoke the
permit. Any permit issued prior to the City receiving the information required by Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code shall state clearly on its face that the
license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Section 4-1-26 of this Code. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. 2000 Code)
15-13-10: APPLICABILITY AND NONCONFORMING PERIOD:
A. Necessary Standards: All design and performance standards set forth in this Chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare and shall be applicable and govern all existing and proposed adult-oriented businesses immediately upon adoption and
passage of this Chapter.
B. Time Limit For Conformance: In the event that there is any adult-oriented business lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of this Chapter and is not
in compliance with the design and performance standards of this Chapter, any such adult-oriented business shall conform to all design and
performance standards within six (6) months of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-11: CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 21 of this Title, the following provisions shall apply to adult-oriented businesses:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 498/581
A. Any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use on June 13, 1996, shall be subject to an amortization period expiring June 13, 1999, and any
adult-oriented business which becomes a nonconforming use after June 13, 1996, shall be subject to an amortization period of three (3) years
commencing on the date the use becomes nonconforming.
B. The owner of any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use may apply for extension of the amortization period, pursuant to Section 5-13-12
of this Chapter. Such application shall be made prior to the expiration of the amortization period unless the reviewing authority determines that good
cause is shown for late filing of the application.
C. Upon the conclusion of the amortization period, any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use shall cease all business operations and all
signs, advertising, and displays relating to said business shall be removed within thirty (30) days.
D. Any nonconforming building may be continued and maintained, except as provided in this Chapter, provided there are no structural alterations, except
as provided in this Chapter.
E. Any nonconforming use may be continued, except as provided in this Chapter; provided, that the use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or
altered, except as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-12: EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING USE AMORTIZATION PERIOD:
An application for extension of the amortization period for an adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use shall be made as provided below:
A. Application For Extension: The owner of the property on which an adult-oriented business is located or the owner of the adult-oriented business who
desires to extend the amortization period must apply for approval of an extension not later than six (6) months prior to expiration of the amortization
period, unless the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application.
Such application shall be made in writing on a form as prescribed by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services and shall be
accompanied by the required fee as established by resolution of the City Council. The party requesting the extension of the amortization period shall
bear the burden of proof in establishing that the amortization period established by this Section is unreasonable and that the requested extension is a
reasonable amortization period for the owner to receive a fair rate of return on the investment in the business. The party applying for the extension shall
furthermore be required in order to meet its burden of proof to submit the documentation set forth in this Section.
B. Notification Of Decision; Contents Of Application: Not later than thirty (30) days after submittal of an application to extend the amortization period, the
Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall notify the applicant, in writing, if the application is not complete. A complete
application shall include:
1. The applicant's signature;
2. A written request for an extension of the amortization period which shall include information relevant to the factors listed in subsection D of this
Section and shall identify the term of the requested extension;
3. The required fees;
4. A mailing list, two (2) sets of stamped envelopes, and two (2) sets of gummed labels with the names, addresses, and tax assessor parcel numbers
of all owners of real property, as shown on the latest assessment rolls, within a radius of five hundred feet (500') from the external boundaries of the
property on which the adult-oriented business is located; and
5. A tax assessor's parcel map identifying the properties to be notified within the five hundred foot (500') radius.
If the application is not complete, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall specify in writing those parts which are
incomplete and shall identify the manner by which the application can be made complete. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant
within thirty (30) calendar days after it is submitted, the application shall be deemed complete. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
C. Public Hearing: The Planning Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the request for an extension.
D. Criteria And Findings: In determining whether to grant an extension of the amortization period for an adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming
use, and in determining the appropriate length of such an extension, the reviewing authority shall consider the amount of investment in the business,
the opportunities for relocation to a legally permissible site, the costs of relocation, the effects of the business on the surrounding area, and the
following additional factors:
1. The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements;
2. The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or functional nonconfidential equivalents;
3. The remaining useful life of the business improvements;
4. The remaining lease term;
5. The ability of the business and/or landowner to change the use to a conforming use; and
6. The date upon which the property owner and/or business operator received notice of the nonconforming status of the adult-oriented business and
the amortization requirements.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 499/581
E. Consider Evidence: The Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall receive and consider evidence presented by the applicant and any other
persons, and shall make findings that the amortization period it establishes is reasonable in view of the evidence and the criteria set forth above. (Ord.
1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-13: LOCATION, DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Location Restrictions: An adult-oriented business shall not be established or located within five hundred feet (500') of:
1. Any County or City zone or land use district which contains the words "residence", "residential", "ranches", or "rural living", within its title;
2. Any residential use;
3. A State authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster family home, or group home;
4. A State authorized, certified or licensed residential facility, residential care facility, residential care facility for the elderly, intermediate care facility
developmentally disabled habilitative or nursing, or congregate living health facility;
5. Any church, chapel, or similar place of worship, or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action;
6. Any funeral parlor, mortuary, cemetery, or similar facility, or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action;
7. Any school, nursery school, daycare center, small or large family daycare facility, park, or public or private playground, or property zoned, planned,
or otherwise designated for such use by City action;
8. Any other recreational facility where minors congregate, or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for such use by City action, or
9. Any hospital or similar health care facility.
B. Existing Business: An adult-oriented business shall not be established or located within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing adult-oriented
business. If two (2) or more existing adult-oriented businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than one thousand feet (1,000'), then in
determining which of the businesses is or are nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous
uninterrupted operation of the businesses.
C. Measurement Of Distances: For the purposes of this Section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures,
from the nearest point of the building, or structure in which the adult-oriented business is or will be located to the nearest property line of any land use,
land use district, or zone described in subsection A of this Section, or to the nearest point of the building or structure in which an existing adult-oriented
business described in subsection B of this Section, is located.
D. Sign Restrictions: No advertising sign or structure, advertisement, display, or other promotional material depicting "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities" or displaying instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with "specific sexual activities", shall be
shown or exhibited so as to be visible from any exterior area.
E. Windows And Openings Covered: All building openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing the interior from
any exterior area.
F. Loudspeakers: No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult-oriented
business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area.
G. Compliance With Site Development Standards: The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable site development
standards, including parking, of the zone, district, or area in which the adult-oriented business is located, the building codes, fire codes, and the health
and safety codes of the City. An adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable City permit and inspection procedures. In addition, adultoriented
businesses shall comply with the following performance standards:
1. Separate Entrance: Each adult-oriented business shall have a business entrance separate from any other nonadult business located in the same
building.
2. Public Shielded: No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation by the public of any material depicting,
describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any location beyond the walls of the
building or portion thereof in which the adult-oriented business is conducted.
3. Posted: The building entrance to the adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded
from entering the premises.
4. Manager's Station: Each adult-oriented business shall be provided with a manager's station for the purpose of supervising activities within the
business. A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the adult-oriented business is open to the public.
5. Visibility From Station: Any viewing room shall be visible from the manager's station of the adult-oriented business, and visibility of the entire viewing
room from the manager's station shall be neither obscured nor obstructed by any curtain, door, wall, or other structure.
6. Outside Appearance: All exterior areas of adult-oriented businesses, including buildings, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a
clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds, and debris in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
7. Compliance Standards: The maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes, and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed, and
provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the El Segundo Fire Department and the Community, Economic and Development
Services Department. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 500/581
8. Hours: No adult-oriented business shall operate between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day. The
Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, shall establish the actual permitted hours of operation for each permit approved or granted. No
owner, operator, manager, or employee of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
the provisions of this Chapter, shall allow such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a
performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. of any particular day or in violation of the actual permitted hours of operation established in the conditions of approval for the permit.
9. Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided for the adult-oriented business as specified for the zone, district, or area in which the business is
located in accordance with the parking provisions of Chapter 15 of this Title, and as follows:
Adult Theater, Adult Cabaret, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Or Adult Motion Picture Arcade: One parking space shall be provided for every two (2)
seats in the viewing room, or one parking space shall be provided for every two (2) occupants per the allowable occupant load as established by the
Building Official and/or the Fire Marshal, whichever standard is greater. In addition, one parking space shall be provided for each employee on the
maximum shift.
10. Size Of Areas: Any person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business, other than an adult motel and regardless of whether
or not an adult-oriented business license has been issued to said business under this Chapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or
viewing booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises
in which patrons shall not be permitted. A manager's station(s) shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
b. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station shall be made without the prior written approval of the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
c. It is the duty of the permit holder to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron
is present inside the premises.
d. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designed, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one
of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
e. It shall be the duty of the permit holder and any employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection G10d of
this Section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designed as an area in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to this Chapter.
11. Security Program: An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items: (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
a. All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting
system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This
required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall be shown on the
required site or plot plan and shall be subject to review for compliance through the design review process by the Director of Community, Economic
and Development Services and the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
b. All interior portions of the adult-oriented business, except those areas devoted to motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of operation
with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles of light.
c. For adult-oriented businesses which exceed an occupant load of one hundred twenty five (125) persons, the provision of on-site security
personnel shall be required during all business hours pursuant to a plan to be reviewed and approved for adequacy by the Chief of Police. Security
personnel shall be licensed in accordance with the California Business and Professions Code, to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police.
12. Adult Motion Picture Theater Or Adult Motion Picture Arcade:
a. A manager's station shall be located near the main entrance and the station shall be provided with an unobstructed view of all motion picture
private viewing areas.
b. No adult motion picture theater or arcade shall be maintained or operated unless the complete interior of the adult motion picture theater or arcade
is visible upon entrance to such adult motion picture theater or arcade. No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths
shall be maintained.
c. No person shall operate an adult motion picture theater or arcade in which the number of image producing devices exceeds the maximum
occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image producing device is located.
13. Adult Hotel/Motel:
a. Evidence that a room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented or sub-rented and vacated two (2) or more times in
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours on a recurring basis, creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an "adult
hotel/motel" as that term is defined in this Chapter.
b. A person is in violation of the provisions of this Chapter if such person rents or sub-rents a room at a location without an adult-oriented business
license and an adult business permit to a person or persons and within ten (10) hours thereafter rents or sub-rents the same room to another
person(s), or sub-rents the same room to the prior renter.
H. Distance From Patrons: All persons on the premises of the establishment who are engaged in "specified sexual activities" or are exposing "specified
anatomical areas" must be located upon a stage that is at least eighteen inches (18") above the immediate floor level and is at least six feet (6') from
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 501/581
the nearest patron.
I. No Tipping Policy: Patrons of establishments are prohibited from directly or indirectly giving or soliciting tips (money or anything else of value) to
performers, owners, employees, or agents of an establishment, and said performers, owners, employees and agents are prohibited from directly or
indirectly accepting from patrons of an establishment tips (money or anything else of value). This subsection shall not apply to waiters and waitresses
serving food and/or beverage to patrons as long as such waiters and waitresses are not exposing "specified anatomical areas". (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
15-13-14: SEXUAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
For purposes of this Section, "couch dancing" or "straddle dancing" shall be defined as an activity involving at least two (2) persons where at least one of
the persons is a patron who is sitting or resting on an object or the floor and at least one of the persons is dancing or moving such that said person's
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, regardless of whether such body area is covered or uncovered, is intentionally positioned for any period of
time within three feet (3') of, and at a level between, the chin and forehead of, the person(s) who is/are sitting or resting on an object or the floor. For
purposes of this Section, "employee" shall include independent contractors of the adult-oriented business.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this Chapter,
knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering, or allowing any employee:
1. To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;
2. To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business;
3. To intentionally touch any patron at an adult-oriented business while engaged in the display or exposure of a "specified anatomical area" or engaged
in or simulating a "specified sexual activity"; or
4. To voluntarily be within six feet (6') of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area" or engaged in or
simulating a "specified sexual activity".
B. No employee of an adult-oriented business shall:
1. Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;
2. Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;
3. Engage in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area" or engage in or simulate a "specified sexual activity" while intentionally
touching a patron at the adult-oriented business; or
4. Engage in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area" or engage in or simulate a "specified sexual activity" closer than six feet (6')
from any patron.
C. No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this Chapter, shall intentionally touch an
employee who is displaying or exposing any "specified anatomical area" or engaging in or simulating a "specified sexual activity" at the adult-oriented
business.
D. No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this Chapter, shall engage in a couch dance or
straddle dance with an employee at the business who is displaying or exposing any "specified anatomical area" or engaging in or simulating a
"specified sexual activity".
E. No employee of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this Chapter, shall engage in
a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service involving "specified sexual activity" or the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day. (Ord. 1260, 9-
17-1996)
15-13-15: ESTABLISHMENT OF ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS:
The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall include any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of operation of any such business as a new business.
B. The conversion of any existing business, (whether or not an adult-oriented business), to any adult-oriented business.
C. The addition of any adult-oriented business to any existing adult-oriented businesses if the addition results in enlargement of the place of business. For
the purposes of this subsection, enlargement shall mean an increase in the size of the building within which the business is conducted by either
construction or use of an adjacent building or any portion thereof, whether located on the same or an adjacent lot or parcel of land.
D. The relocation of any adult-oriented business.
E. The expansion or enlargement of the premises by ten percent (10%) or more of the existing floor area. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 502/581
15-13-16: PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If a court of laws determines that any portion of this Chapter is unlawful and unenforceable, such shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the enforceability
of any other portion of this Chapter. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996)
Chapter 13A
ASSEMBLY HALLS
15-13A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
ASSEMBLY HALL: A building, or portion of a building, used for large scale public or private gatherings of people. For example, and without limitation,
assembly halls include private educational facilities; religious institutions; clubs; lodges; theaters; and similar kinds of facilities whether available for public
or private use. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-13A-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Any ancillary uses affiliated with an assembly hall must be specifically identified and permitted by a validly issued conditional use permit pursuant to this
chapter or be separately permitted in accordance with the requirements for that zone. For example, and without limitation, a daycare center or private
school associated with an assembly hall must be identified as an authorized use in the conditional use permit. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-13A-3: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Off street parking must be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in this title including, without limitation, landscaping requirements.
B. Where an assembly hall is established in a residential zone, the required front yard may not be used for parking vehicles. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
15-13A-4: COMPATIBILITY WITH SURROUNDING USES:
A. All buildings, structures, and landscaping must be developed and maintained in a manner compatible with development on surrounding properties.
B. For assembly halls located within or adjacent to a residential zone, the planning commission may condition hours of operation to ensure compatibility
with adjacent residential uses. (Ord. 1447, 10-5-2010)
Chapter 13B
CANNABIS-RELATED USES AND ACTIVITIES
15-13B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The definition of "cannabis" and related terms for the purpose of this chapter are contained in section 15-1-6, "Definitions", of this title. (Ord. 1577, 11-20-
2018)
15-13B-2: PROHIBITED USES AND ACTIVITIES:
The establishment or operation of any commercial cannabis activity, cannabis-related activity, cannabis storage facility, or cannabis establishment,
including any business licensed by the State or other government entity pursuant to division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as it may be
amended from time to time, is prohibited in all zoning districts and specific plan areas of the City. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other
entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, can be approved or issued for the establishment or operation of any such business or
activity. (Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
15-13B-3: CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS FOR PERSONAL USE:
A. Outdoor Cultivation: The outdoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited in the City of El Segundo regardless of purpose.
B. Indoor Cultivation: Not more than six (6) plants may be cultivated, planted, harvested, dried, processed or possessed at one time by persons twenty one
(21) years of age or older when conducted within a single private residence and in a manner consistent with Health and Safety Code section 11362.2
and any other applicable regulations. (Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 503/581
15-13B-4: INTERPRETATION:
The intent of this chapter is to prohibit all cannabis-related uses and activities, including the personal cultivation of cannabis, whether medical or
recreational in nature, to the maximum extent allowed under State law. Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted as allowing behavior otherwise
prohibited by State law and nothing in this chapter should be interpreted as prohibiting conduct that the City is expressly preempted from prohibiting under
State law. (Ord. 1577, 11-20-2018)
Chapter 14
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
15-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the identification, protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of historic buildings and structures within the City that reflect special elements of the City's historical heritage for the following
reasons:
A. To safeguard the City's heritage as embodied and reflected in cultural resources and historic sites;
B. To encourage public knowledge, understanding, and appreciation of the City's historic past;
C. To foster civic and neighborhood pride and a sense of identity based on the recognition and preservation of cultural resources;
D. To promote understanding and appreciation of cultural resources for the education of the people of the City;
E. To preserve diverse architectural styles and design preferences of periods of the City's history and to encourage complementary contemporary design
and construction;
F. To promote public awareness of the benefits of preservation; and
G. To take whatever steps are reasonable and necessary to safeguard the property rights of the owners whose building or structure is declared to be a
landmark. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-2: AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
A. The Planning Commission shall have the power and authority to perform all of the duties enumerated and provided in this Chapter and shall act in
accordance with its established rules and bylaws. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
B. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, or the Director's designee, shall serve as
administrative staff and as secretary to the Commission. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting, record the official actions taken, record the
vote on all official actions, certify each official act and resolution of the Commission, and maintain records of operation. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
C. The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To maintain a local register of cultural resources and historic sites.
2. To recommend removal of a designated cultural resource.
3. To review and comment upon the conduct of land use, housing, Municipal improvements, and other types of planning and programs undertaken by
any agency of the City, the County, or the State as they relate to the cultural resources and historical sites of the City.
4. To report to the City Council on the use of various Federal, State, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote
preservation of cultural resources and historical sites in the City.
5. To review applications for alteration, construction, demolition, relocation, and restoration of proposed or designated cultural resources and approve
or deny certificates of appropriateness for such actions pursuant to Section 15-14-8 of this Chapter.
6. To cooperate with local, County, State and Federal governments and private organizations in the pursuit of the objectives of historic preservation
within the City.
7. To ensure that designation of a building or structure as a designated cultural resource shall not infringe upon the rights of private owners to make
any and all reasonable uses of such designated cultural resource which are not inconsistent with the purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-
1993)
15-14-3: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 504/581
A. Whenever this Chapter calls for a public hearing, the owner of the affected building or structure and all property owners within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the subject property shall be sent written notice of the public hearing by mail not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notice
shall also be advertised once ten (10) days prior to a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation.
B. The notice shall give the date, time and place of the hearing, the location of the property, and a description of the proposed action affecting the property.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-4: DESIGNATION OF CULTURAL RESOURCES:
A. Procedures: Requests for designation of a cultural resource are voluntary and may be made by or with the written consent of the property owner, by
filing an application with the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services. The designation of a cultural resource is strictly
voluntary, not mandatory. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
1. The Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the matter within forty five (45) days of receipt of the complete application. Within seven (7)
days of the hearing, the Commission shall provide a written recommendation to the City Council as to whether the building or structure should be
made a designated cultural resource. If the recommendation of the Commission is to designate the building or structure as a designated cultural
resource, the recommendation shall include the reasons for designating the building or structure as a designated cultural resource and shall include
a determination of whether to mark it with a uniform and distinctive marker.
2. Within thirty (30) days after receiving the recommendation of the Commission, the City Council shall hold a noticed public hearing and approve or
deny the recommendation.
3. Any hearing may be continued for any reason by the consent of the City and the property owner. If the property owner does not consent, there may
be no more than one continuance for a period not to exceed thirty one (31) days if the additional time is needed to conduct further study of the
cultural resource. If an EIR or negative declaration is required, the time limits set forth in California Public Resources Code section 21151.5 shall
apply.
4. The City Council shall declare designated cultural resources by resolution, which shall contain a statement as to why the cultural resource is so
designated. Any such resolution shall include a legal description of the property involved, including lot and block number and the name of the
property owner. The resolution shall be duly recorded by the City Clerk in the County Recorder's office.
B. Criteria: A cultural resource may be declared a designated cultural resource if it meets the following criteria:
1. Must be at least fifty (50) years old; and
2. It is associated with persons or events significant in local, State, or national history; or
3. It reflects or exemplifies a particular period of national, State, or local history; or
4. It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, style, period of architecture, or method of construction.
C. Temporary Stay On Permits Pending Designation: No construction, alteration, demolition, relocation, or restoration shall be allowed and no other
entitlement permits shall be issued with regard to any proposed designated cultural resource from the time an application for designation is made until
the City Council has made a final decision to either approve or deny the request for designation.
D. Removal Of Designation: A cultural resource designation may be removed subject to the same procedures set forth above. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-5: LIST OF DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES:
The Department of Community, Economic and Development Services shall maintain a designated cultural resources list which shall include the following
information: (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
A. A legal description of each designated cultural resource, the names and addresses of all owners of designated cultural resources, and assessor's
parcel numbers of designated cultural resources. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
B. A legal description of the property included in any historic district, including the special historical, aesthetic, cultural, architectural, or engineering
interests or value of the District.
C. Sketches, photographs or drawings of structures of all designated cultural resources and other significant buildings or historical sites.
D. A statement of the condition of designated cultural resources and other significant buildings or historical sites.
E. An explanation of any known threats to any designated cultural resource and other significant buildings or historic sites. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-6: DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
A. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission, or the City Council on appeal, shall be required before the following actions affecting a
designated cultural resource may be undertaken: construction, alteration, restoration, relocation, and demolition.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 505/581
B. No building permit for any work on a designated cultural resource shall be issued until a certificate of appropriateness is issued in the manner provided
for in this Chapter.
C. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for any ordinary repair and maintenance as described in Section 15-14-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-
16-1993)
15-14-7: PROCEDURE AND CRITERIA; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
A. Procedure:
1. Application: No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out, any alteration, construction, demolition, relocation or restoration of a designated
cultural resource without first submitting an application for such work and obtaining the approval of the Commission or, on appeal thereof, of the City
Council. Application for such approval shall be made to the Community, Economic and Development Services Department on forms provided by the
City. The application shall include all required plans, materials, documents and other information from the applicant which are reasonably necessary
for proper review and action by the Commission.
2. Commission Hearing: Upon submittal of an application which is accepted as complete by the Department of Community, Economic and
Development Services, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within forty five (45) days. Notice of the hearing shall be given
as required by Section 15-14-3 of this Chapter. The Commission shall make a decision on the application within five (5) days after the completion of
the hearing. The Commission may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. The Commission's decision shall be in writing and shall
state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the property owner within five (5)
days of the date of the decision. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
3. Appeal To City Council: The decision of the Commission to approve, deny, or approve with conditions any application as set forth in this Section is
appealable to the City Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and delivered to the office of the City Clerk not later than ten (10) calendar days
from the date of mailing of the notice of the Commission's decision. At the time of filing, the applicant shall pay a fee as required by City Council
Resolution 3617. No application for appeal shall be deemed complete until the prescribed fee has been received by the City. Such appeal shall
specify the reasons for the appeal from the decision of the Commission. Upon the filing of the appeal, the Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing
within thirty (30) days and shall give notice of the hearing as required by Section 15-14-3 of this Chapter. Upon the hearing of such appeal, the City
Council may, by resolution, affirm or modify or reverse the determination of the Commission. The City Council shall render its decision within five (5)
days of the completion of the hearing.
B. Criteria; Alteration, Construction Or Restoration: A certificate of appropriateness for the alteration, construction or restoration of a designated cultural
resource shall not be issued unless the Commission or City Council, on appeal, find all of the following conditions exist:
1. The proposed alteration, construction or restoration will not adversely affect exterior architectural features of the building or structure specified in the
designation; and
2. The proposed alteration, construction or restoration will not adversely affect the special character; special historical, architectural or aesthetic
interest; nor the relationship and congruity between the subject structure or feature and its neighboring structures and surroundings, as specified in
the designation.
C. Criteria; Demolition: A certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of a designated cultural resource shall not be issued unless the Commission or
City Council, on appeal, find one or more of the following conditions exist:
1. The structure or building is a hazard to public health or safety; or
2. The site on which the designated cultural resource is located is required for a public use which will be of more benefit to the public than its use as a
cultural resource and there is no practical alternative location for the public use; or
3. Denial of the proposed application will result in unreasonable economic hardship to the owner; it is not feasible to preserve or restore the designated
cultural resource; and the property owner will be denied the reasonable beneficial use of the property if the application is denied.
D. Criteria; Relocation: A certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a designated cultural resource shall not be issued unless the Commission or
City Council, on appeal, finds that:
1. One or more of the conditions set forth in subsection C of this Section exist;
2. The relocation will not destroy the historic, cultural or architectural value of the designated cultural resource; and
3. The relocation is part of a definitive series of actions which will assure the preservation of the designated cultural resource.
E. Unreasonable Economic Hardship: A property owner may request an exemption from the provisions of this Chapter on the grounds of unreasonable
economic hardship for any alteration, construction, restoration, demolition or relocation of a designated cultural resource.
A property owner requesting an exemption on the grounds of unreasonable economic hardship shall provide the following information; including, but
not limited to:
1. Ownership and operation of the property, mortgage and financing information, market value, structural integrity, rehabilitation costs, assessed value,
real estate taxes, debt service, and potential adaptive re-use.
2. For income-producing property: a) annual gross income from the property for the previous two (2) years; b) itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two (2) years; and c) annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two (2) years.
3. For low-income owners: a statement of present household income and number of persons in the household. "Low-income" households shall be
defined as meeting the income level established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 506/581
4. The staff may require that a property owner furnish additional information which would assist the Commission in making a determination as to
whether or not the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owner(s) (i.e., pro forma financial analysis). In the event that any of the
required information is not reasonably available to the property owner and cannot be obtained by the property owner, the property owner shall file
with his affidavit a statement of the information which cannot be obtained and shall describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained.
The property owner shall have the burden of proof to establish unreasonable economic hardship.
The Commission, or City Council on appeal, may grant an exemption on the grounds of unreasonable economic hardship if it finds that the application
of the provisions of this Chapter to the proposed alteration, construction, restoration, demolition or relocation would deny the property owner
reasonable beneficial use of the property and a reasonable rate of return on the owner's investment in the property. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-8: DUTY TO KEEP IN GOOD REPAIR:
The owner, occupant, or other person who exercises control over a cultural resource shall keep in good repair all of the exterior architectural features of
such improvement, building, or structure, and all of the interior portions whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior
architectural feature. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-9: ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any designated
cultural resource that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof, nor does this Chapter prevent the construction,
alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal of any such architectural feature if the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services certifies
to the Commission that such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-
18-2000)
15-14-10: EMERGENCY WORK ON DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the Building Official from issuing a building permit if he determines that the demolition, removal or
alteration of a designated cultural resource is immediately necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-14-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or fails to obey an order issued by the Commission or comply with a condition of approval of any
certificate of appropriateness issued under this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to provisions of Section 15-28-2 of this Title.
B. Any person who constructs, alters, removes, relocates, restores or demolishes a designated cultural resource in violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be required to restore the building, object, site, or structure to its appearance or setting prior to the violation.
C. The Building Official shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 15
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES
15-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for adequate off street parking and loading standards, to ensure that parking spaces are suitably maintained and
available for the use of the occupants of the site and to mitigate associated on street parking and traffic circulation problems throughout the City. (Ord.
1444, 8-3-2010)
15-15-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. The provisions of this chapter apply in all zones of the City unless specifically provided otherwise in an adopted specific plan.
B. The provisions of this chapter apply at the time a building or structure is erected, altered, or expanded, or when the use is established, changed or
expanded.
C. Parking spaces and loading spaces established by this chapter must be improved as required by this chapter before new buildings or structures are
occupied or existing buildings or structures are expanded or modified for a new use.
D. The provisions of this chapter apply to parking facilities for authorized temporary uses or special events, except where specifically exempted by the
Director of Planning and Building Safety. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-15-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 507/581
A. Compliance: It is unlawful for any person to violate any part of this chapter including, without limitation, any discretionary or ministerial permit issued by
the City pursuant to this Code or chapter.
B. Availability: It is unlawful for required parking to be utilized in any manner inconsistent with the lawful uses of property including, without limitation,
rendering it unavailable for property occupants, patrons, or visitors of a building or use during normal hours of operation. This meaning shall not be
construed to prohibit security devices.
C. Maintenance: Parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering aisles, turnaround areas, and landscaping areas must be maintained free of debris, graffiti, and
litter; and striping, paving, walls light standards, and all other facilities must be maintained in good condition.
D. Location Of Parking: All required parking must be located on the same lot or building site as the uses for which such spaces are required, unless an off
site parking covenant is approved in compliance with this chapter.
E. Mixed Or Multiple Uses And/Or Occupancies: A site with multiple uses or mixed occupancies must provide the aggregate number of parking spaces
required by this chapter for each separate use. On site parking spaces for one use cannot be considered as providing required parking spaces for any
other use, except when authorized through an off site parking covenant in accordance with this chapter.
F. Fractional Spaces: Where the application of cumulative parking requirements results in a fractional space, then the fractions are rounded to the nearest
whole number.
G. Expansion Or Remodeling Of Building, Or Change In Use:
1. Expansion Of Building Or Use, Generally: Upon change or expansion of a building, or outdoor use area resulting in additional floor area devoted to a
use, additional outdoor use area, or an increase in the number of dwelling units on a lot, additional parking and loading spaces must be provided only
for the additional floor area, outdoor use area, or residential units without diminishing the existing parking, unless such parking exceeds the
requirements of this chapter.
2. Addition Of Floor Area To A Dwelling Unit: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the cumulative addition of one thousand (1,000)
square feet of floor area to a residential unit upon the effective date hereof must comply with the minimum parking requirements for residential units
as established in this chapter.
3. Change Of Use, Generally: When the use of a building changes to another use that is required to have the same number of parking spaces, no
additional parking spaces are required for the new use, regardless of the number of spaces provided by the previous use, if the previous use was
legally established and the number of spaces has not decreased. When a change in use requires more off street parking than the previous use,
additional parking spaces must be provided equal in number to the difference between the total number of spaces required by the new use and the
number of spaces required for the immediately previous use. When a change in use requires less off street parking than the previous use, no
additional parking spaces are required. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
H. Off Site Parking:
1. Applicability: The Director may approve off site parking locations within the City for nonresidential uses to meet the parking requirements of this
chapter. Such off site parking locations must be secured with a covenant, approved by the City Attorney, and recorded in the County Recorder's
Office before the City issues building permits. The off site parking spaces used to satisfy the parking requirements for a different site must be surplus
to the required parking spaces required for uses of the off site location. Alternatively, the Planning Commission may approve a reduction of required
parking spaces as provided in this chapter.
2. Director Review: The Director may review off site parking covenants for a maximum of twenty (20) parking spaces or twenty percent (20%) of the
required number of parking spaces, whichever is more. The parking covenant may include such conditions as the Director may lawfully impose.
3. Planning Commission Review: The Planning Commission must review all off site parking covenants for more spaces than the Director is authorized
to approve. The parking covenant may include such conditions as the Planning Commission may lawfully impose.
4. Off Site Parking Findings Of Approval: Requests for off site parking must meet the following requirements:
a. The off site parking must be located so that it will adequately serve the use for which it is intended. In making this determination, the following
factors, among other things, must be considered:
(1) Proximity of the off site parking facilities (i.e., 750 feet is a reasonable maximum walking distance for high turnover uses such as retail sales,
services and restaurants);
(2) Ease of pedestrian access to the off site parking facilities;
(3) Provisions for transportation to and from the off site parking facility (e.g., shuttle or valet services);
(4) The type of use the off site parking facilities are intended to serve. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
I. Joint Use/Shared Parking: Uses that share parking facilities on the same lot may be granted parking space reductions when they have significantly
different peak hours of operation. Joint use/shared parking reductions may be granted in compliance with this chapter (reductions in the number of
required parking spaces).
J. Parking Exceptions:
1. Director Review: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may review and approve requests for administrative adjustments from the
requirements of this chapter as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title including, without limitation, the design and layout of parking
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 508/581
facilities; the required number of parking spaces; the dimensions of parking spaces; the type of loading spaces required; aisles; driveways and curb
cuts; paving materials and colors; and striping. The types and extent of adjustments the Director of Planning and Building Safety is authorized to
review administratively or is authorized to review subject to a public hearing are specified in sections 15-15-5, 15-15-6, and 15-15-7 of this chapter.
2. Planning Commission Review: The Planning Commission must review requests for parking reductions as specified in subsection 15-15-6C of this
chapter and may review administrative adjustments referred by the Director of Planning and Building Safety.
K. Failure To Maintain Required Parking: In the event on site parking and loading area facilities required to be provided under this Code are not maintained
for licensed vehicle parking and truck loading area purposes to the extent required, the Director of Planning and Building Safety may revoke a
certificate of occupancy for structures that fail to maintain required on site parking and loading facilities. The Director of Planning and Building Safety
must provide a property owner at least ninety (90) days to comply with this Code, including any ministerial or discretionary permits as to parking if it
appears that a violation was reasonably beyond the control of the person required to comply with this chapter. Should a certificate of occupancy be
revoked, the premises affected cannot be occupied or used for any purpose until a new certificate of occupancy is issued. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-15-4: PLAN PREPARATION AND PERMIT APPROVAL:
A. A person seeking a building permit, change of occupancy, or change in design to a parking and loading area must submit a parking and loading area
plan, in a form approved by the Director of Planning and Building Safety, to the Director of Planning and Building Safety. The plans must clearly
indicate the location, size, shape and design, of all curb cuts, lighting, landscaping, and parking spaces in full compliance with Code requirements.
B. The City cannot issue a building permit until the applicant presents satisfactory evidence to the Director of Planning and Building Safety that parking
and loading facilities required by the provisions of this chapter will be provided and maintained. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-15-5: PARKING AREA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Access And Circulation:
1. Design: Parking facilities must be designed so that a car within a facility will not have to enter a street to move from one (1) location to any other
location within the same facility.
2. Exit: Parking facilities in nonresidential zones must be designed in such a manner that any vehicle on the property will be able to maneuver as
necessary so that it may exit from the property traveling in a forward direction. However, vehicles may exit onto an alley traveling in a reverse
direction.
3. Administrative Adjustments: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve administrative adjustments from the site access and
circulation standards as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
B. Driveway And Parking Area Paving And Surfacing: All permanent on site parking, loading, vehicle storage and vehicle sales areas must be paved with
approved concrete or asphaltic concrete. On site parking areas to be used for not longer than one (1) year must be surfaced and maintained with an
impervious material acceptable to the Director so as to eliminate dust and mud. All on site parking areas must be graded and drained so as to dispose
of all surface water in accordance with the applicable stormwater regulations. The Director may at his discretion, approve alternative paving material
such as decorative concrete, permeable concrete, grasscrete, brick, or similar material of equivalent durability. The Director may approve
administrative adjustments from the driveway and parking area paving standards for non-standard roadbed construction and alternative roadway
surfaces (such as drivable reinforced turf) as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
C. Parking Area Striping: All parking spaces must be clearly striped with white, double four inch (4") wide stripes, one foot (1') apart. The Director of
Planning and Building Safety may approve administrative adjustments from the parking area striping standards as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title. The alternative designs may include, without limitation, the use of colored concrete and other decorative materials.
Approved striping alternatives must clearly identify parking spaces and distinguish them from adjoining walkways and drive aisles.
FIGURE 1 - PARKING AREA STRIPING
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 509/581
D. Parking Space Location:
1. Residential Spaces:
a. Guest Spaces: No required guest parking space for any residential use may be located, in whole or in part, in any required front yard or front twothirds
(2/3) of any required side yard.
b. Required Spaces: Required parking spaces, excepting required guest parking spaces, for any residential use must be located within a required
garage or carport as required in subsection S of this section. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
2. Nonresidential Spaces:
a. Encroachment: Parking spaces may encroach into a required street-facing setback up to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the required setback
area, provided a minimum landscaped setback of five feet (5') is maintained. Parking spaces may encroach into a required interior side and rear
setback up to the interior side or rear property line, provided that the interior side and rear property line does not abut a public or private street.
b. Minimum Landscaped Setback: Parking spaces that back up directly into a driveway entrance must maintain a minimum landscaped setback of
twenty feet (20') from any street facing property line.
c. Access By Alley: Where vehicular access is provided by an alley, parking may intrude into the required rear yard; provided, however, the amount
of setback intruded upon must be replaced by increasing the other required yards on site by an equivalent amount. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
FIGURE 2 - PARKING SPACE LOCATION
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 510/581
E. Parking Lot Slope: The maximum slope for parking lots is five percent (5%). The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve administrative
adjustments from the parking lot slope standard as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title.
F. Tire Stops:
1. Dimensions: Tire stops must be a minimum of six inches (6") wide by six inches (6") in height.
2. Location: Concrete tire stops must be provided in all parking lot areas abutting a building, structure, sidewalk, planting area, street or alley. Tire stops
shall be located two feet (2') from the front of a parking space.
3. Continuous Curb: In lieu of a tire stop, a continuous concrete curb may be provided. The vehicle overhang area may be landscaped, however this
landscaped area does not count toward the required vehicle use area landscaping.
FIGURE 3 - TIRE STOP DESIGN AND LOCATION
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 511/581
4. Adjustment Approval: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve adjustments from the tire stop standards as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
G. Lighting:
1. Lights provided to illuminate any parking area or vehicle sales areas as permitted by this Code must be arranged so as to direct the light away from
any premises upon which a residential dwelling unit is located.
2. Parking area light standards located within fifty feet (50') of a property line must not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height.
3. The Director may approve administrative adjustments from the lighting standards as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1551,
8-15-2017)
H. Landscaping:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 512/581
1. All new or substantially redesigned parking areas must provide landscaping as provided in chapter 2, "General Provisions", of this title.
I. Parking Space Dimensions:
1. Minimum Parking Space Interior Dimensions:
Space Type Minimum Width Minimum Length
Commercial standard 8.5 feet 18 feet
Residential standard 9 feet 20 feet
Residential - narrow lots1 8.5 feet 20 feet
Vehicle lift 11 feet 21 feet
Compact 8.5 feet 15 feet
Parallel 8.5 feet 24 feet
Accessible See note 2 See note 2
Motorcycle 5 feet 9 feet
Bicycle 2 feet 5 feet
Notes:
1. Lots under 40 feet in width.
2. The dimensions of accessible parking spaces must comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), title III and California Code of
Regulations (CCR), California Access Code, title 24.
2. Single-Family Dwelling Minimum Garage Dimensions: Two car garages for single-family dwellings must have minimum interior dimensions of twenty
feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'), except for narrow lots as indicated above.
FIGURE 4 - SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING GARAGE
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 513/581
3. Single-Family Dwelling Maximum Garage Dimensions: Individual garages for single-family dwellings must not exceed nine hundred (900) square
feet in size or a four (4) car capacity, whichever is less. Subterranean garages and semisubterranean garages that meet the definition of a basement
are exempt from this requirement.
4. Adjustment Approval: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve adjustments to the parking space dimensions standards as
provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title.
J. Compact Spaces Permitted: Compact parking is allowed for office, industrial, hotel, and recreational uses up to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of
required parking spaces. Parking provided in excess of the required number may be compact in size. Compact spaces cannot be allowed for retail
uses. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
K. Tandem Spaces Permitted: All tandem parking spaces, where allowed, must be clearly outlined on the surface of the parking facility.
TANDEM SPACES PERMITTED
Use Percentage Of
Required Spaces
Percentage Of
Required Spaces
Maximum Depth
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 514/581
In Smoky Hollow
Single-family and two-family dwellings 100 n/a 2 spaces1
Multiple-family residential Prohibited2 n/a n/a
Retail uses and services Prohibited 30 2 spaces
Industrial uses 20 85 2 spaces
Offices 20 85 2 spaces
Restaurants Prohibited 10 2 spaces
Notes:
1. Tandem spaces for single- and two-family dwellings must be assigned to the same unit.
2. Tandem parking is permitted for multiple-family residential developments involving density bonuses, pursuant to Government Code section
65915.
The Director may approve tandem parking and/or administrative adjustments to the tandem parking standards as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title, subject to conditions. The conditions may include recording of a covenant agreement, requiring a parking attendant,
requiring valet service, and other operational conditions. The Director may also approve tandem parking in excess of the above limits for permitted
temporary uses and/or special events. (Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
L. Parking Clearance And Obstructions:
1. Vertical Clearance: The minimum vertical clearance for all parking areas must be seven feet (7').
a. Exceptions: Storage cabinets and other obstructions shall be permitted in an area above the front end of parking spaces that must be at least 4.5
feet above the ground and no more than 3.5 feet from the front end of the space.
2. Horizontal Clearance: Parking spaces located next to walls, columns, or similar obstructions must provide an additional one foot (1') of clearance on
the side of the obstruction.
a. Exceptions:
(1) Columns or similar obstructions are permitted in the one foot (1') clearance area four feet (4') of the front and rear end of a parking space.
(2) Walls, columns, or similar obstructions may project six inches (6") into the front end corners of a parking space.
3. Disabled Access: Where necessary to comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), title III and California Code of Regulations (CCR),
California Access Code, title 24, parking facilities may deviate from the parking clearance and obstructions standards.
FIGURE 5 - REQUIRED CLEARANCE AND PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 515/581
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 516/581
The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve adjustments to the parking clearance and obstructions standards as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title.
M. Vehicle Ramps:
Ramp slope 20 percent maximum
Transitions required At each end of ramps that exceed a 6 percent slope
Transition length 8 feet minimum
Transition slope At least 50 percent of the main ramp slope
FIGURE 6 - VEHICLE RAMP DESIGN
The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve administrative adjustments to the vehicle ramps standards as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title.
N. Drive Aisle Width And Parking Row Depth:
1. Drive Aisle Width And Parking Space Depth: General drive aisle width and parking space depth requirements: (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 517/581
Parking
Angle
Aisle Width -
One-Way
Aisle Width -
Two-Way
Standard
Space Depth
Compact
Space Depth Space Width
A B B C C D
0° - parallel 12' 18' 8.5' 8.5' 24'
30° 12' 18' 16.36' 14.86' 17'
45° 15' 18' 18.74' 16.62' 12.02'
60° 16' 18' 19.84' 17.24' 9.82'
90° 25' 25' 18' 15' 8.5'
(Ord. 1483, 11-5-2013)
FIGURE 7 - PARKING AISLE AND PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 518/581
2. Exceptions For Ninety Degree Parking Angle: For ninety degree (90°) parking, the parking aisle width can deviate from the above requirements
based on the following table:
EXCEPTIONS FOR 90° PARKING ANGLE
(STANDARD PARKING SPACES ONLY)1
Parking Space Minimum Width
Parking
Aisle Width
8.5 feet 25 feet
9.0 feet 24 feet
9.5 feet 23 feet
10 feet 22 feet
Note:
1. The exceptions for 90 degree parking do not apply to garages for single- and two-family dwellings.
3. Adjustment Approval: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve adjustments to the drive aisle width and parking space depth
standards as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
O. Driveway And Curb Cuts: All curb cuts and driveways must lead directly to required parking. Curb cuts not leading to parking, must be removed
whenever new buildings are constructed or additions are made to existing buildings. The location and design of all driveway entrances and exits must
comply with the standards listed below. The goal of these standards is to: 1) preserve on street parking spaces, 2) improve traffic safety, and 3)
improve on site vehicle circulation.
1. Driveway And Curb Cut Width:
Zone
Curb Cut Width1 Driveway Width
Minimum Maximum Minimum Maximum
R-1 and R-2 - lots less than 50 feet wide 10 feet 20 feet 10 feet 20 feet
R-1 and R-2 - lots at least 50 feet wide 10 feet 25 feet 10 feet 28 feet
R-3 - serving 12 or fewer parking spaces or one-way 12 feet 30 feet 12 feet 30 feet
R-3 - serving 13 or more parking spaces or two-way 18 feet 30 feet 18 feet 30 feet
Nonresidential - one-way 12 feet 30 feet 12 feet 30 feet
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 519/581
Nonresidential - two-way 18 feet 30 feet 18 feet 30 feet
Note:
1. Curb cut width excludes the width of aprons.
2. Curb Cut Locations:
Zone
Minimum Distance
Between Curb Cuts
On The Same Property
Minimum Distance
From Curb Cuts
To Street Corners
Minimum Distance
From Curb Cuts
To Property Lines
Residential 24 feet 20 feet 5 feet
Nonresidential 24 feet 50 feet 5 feet
FIGURE 8 - CURB CUT AND DRIVEWAY LOCATIONS
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 520/581
3. Adjustment Approval: The Director may approve administrative adjustments to the driveway and curb cut standards as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
P. Corner Clearance And Driveway Visibility:
1. All parking areas must meet the corner clearance and driveway visibility standards as provided in chapter 2, "General Provisions", of this title.
Q. Drive-Through Facilities:
1. Drive-through lanes may encroach into required landscaped setbacks up to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the required setback area, provided
a minimum landscaped setback of five feet (5') is maintained.
2. Drive-through lanes must be located and designed in such a manner as to not interfere with on site and off site circulation. The location and design
of the drive-through lane must be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Planning and Building Safety.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 521/581
DRIVE-THROUGH LANE DIMENSIONS
Use Minimum Length (Continuous) Minimum Width
Eating and drinking establishments 150 feet 10 feet
Banks, pharmacies, and cleaners 60 feet 10 feet
FIGURE 9 - DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 522/581
3. The director of planning and building safety may at his discretion require wider drive-through lanes.
4. The director of planning and building safety may approve adjustments to the drive-through facilities standards as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title.
R. Parking Structure Standards:
1. The following setback requirements apply to all subterranean parking facilities:
Zone Projection Above Grade Setback
Residential Completely subsurface Must meet required front setback
No rear or side setback required
No more than 3 feet above grade Must meet required setbacks
More than 3 feet above grade Must meet required setbacks and must be screened from public view
Nonresidential Completely subsurface No setbacks required1
Above grade Must meet required setbacks
Note:
1. The parking structure must be designed in such a manner as to maintain sufficient soil above for landscaping (ground cover, shrubs and trees)
to grow above grade.
2. The director of planning and building safety may approve administrative adjustments to allow parking structures that project no more than three feet
(3') above grade to encroach into the required setbacks as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title.
3. The director of planning and building safety may approve adjustments to the parking structure standards as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of
this title.
S. Special Residential Parking Provisions:
1. Covered Parking: All required parking spaces must be covered and enclosed in the following manner:
Use Minimum Parking Enclosure
Single- and two-family dwellings Fully enclosed garage
Multiple-family dwellings Covered structure enclosed on 3 sides
Guest parking spaces May be uncovered and unenclosed
2. Residential Garage Openings: All garages must meet the minimum and maximum widths listed below:
Type Of Garage
Minimum
Opening Width Maximum Opening Width
Single car 8 feet 14 feet
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 523/581
2 car 16 feet 20 feet
Multiple-family residential 16 feet Equal to the drive aisle width it serves
3. Residential Turn Radius Requirements:
a. One or two (2) car garages located behind a residence must provide a minimum turning radius of twenty five feet (25').
b. Residential garages that take access directly from an alley may measure the required turn radius to the opposite side of the alley.
FIGURE 10 - RESIDENTIAL TURN RADIUS AND ALLEY ACCESS
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 524/581
4. Adjustment Approval: The director of planning and building safety may approve adjustments to the special residential parking provisions standards
as provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title.
T. Vehicle Lifts: Vehicle lifts may be used by right to provide off street parking spaces on lots in the single-family residential (R-1) zone and the two-family
residential (R-2) zone where the vehicle lifts provide parking in excess of the minimum number of required parking spaces subject to the standards in
this section and in this chapter.
1. A conditional use permit is required for vehicle lifts providing required off street parking spaces on lots in the single-family residential (R-1) zone and
the two-family residential (R-2) zone subject to the following:
a. The vehicle lift must be located only within a fully enclosed garage.
b. A vehicle lift may only be used to store two (2) vehicles vertically where a minimum vertical height clearance from the floor to the ceiling plate of
the garage is a minimum of fourteen feet (14') clear of obstructions.
c. A vehicle lift must be designed and used as a designated parking space for use only by occupants in the same dwelling unit as the parking space
located directly below the vehicle lift.
d. A vehicle lift must be permitted only with a key locking mechanism.
e. A vehicle lift must be permitted only if it is operated with an automatic shutoff safety device and is installed in accordance to manufacturer
specifications.
2. In the two-family residential (R-2) zone, vehicle lifts for required off street parking are subject to the following additional requirements:
a. The vehicle lift must be used only on a lot less than forty five feet (45') in width.
b. A vehicle lift must only be used to meet the minimum number of required off street parking spaces in addition to a minimum of two (2) fully
accessible parking stalls located on the floor surface within a garage or garages. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-15-6: REQUIRED PARKING SPACES:
The number of on site parking spaces required for the establishment of a building or use must be provided and thereafter maintained at the ratios set forth
below. For uses not listed the required number of spaces will be determined by the director of planning and building safety based on most similar listed use
or a parking demand study. A parking demand study must include, without limitation, information specifying the number of employees, customers, visitors,
clients, shifts, deliveries, parking spaces, or other criteria established by the director of planning and building safety. The director of planning and building
safety may at the director's discretion, refer any decision regarding uses not listed to the planning commission for review. Unless stated otherwise, parking
must be based on net floor area as defined in this code. Accessible parking spaces must be provided and comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act
(ADA), title III and California Code of Regulations (CCR), California Access Code, title 24. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 525/581
A. Automobile Spaces Required:
Use Number Of Parking Spaces Required
Commercial:
Animal care:
Animal boarding, kennels 1 space for each 300 square feet of office/retail area, plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
storage and animal area including outdoor play area
Animal daycare and training (no overnight stay) 1 space for each 300 square feet of office/retail area, plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
storage and animal area, including outdoor area
Veterinary hospital 1 space for each 300 square feet
Fitness centers, gyms, health clubs 1 space for each 150 square feet
Hotels, motels, auto courts, bed and breakfast inns,
motor lodges, and tourist courts
1 space for each of the first 100 rooms, or sleeping units;
3/4 space for each of the next 100 rooms, or sleeping units; and
1/2 space for each room above 200 rooms, or sleeping units
Landscape nurseries 1 space for each 300 square feet of interior floor area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 square
feet of exterior storage and display area
Medical/dental offices and clinics 1 space for each 200 square feet
General offices (including up to 500 square feet of
accessory eating establishments)
1 space for each 300 square feet for the first 25,000 square feet
1 space for each 350 square feet for the second 25,000 square feet
1 space for each 400 square feet for the area in excess of 50,000 square feet
Retail sales
Retail services:
Business and consumer support services
Financial institutions
Personal services
Eating and drinking establishments:
Cafes:
Which equal 20 percent or less of the gross floor
area of a multi-tenant shopping center, office
development or the commercial portion of a
mixed use development
1 space for each 300 square feet
Any portion of a cafe or any cumulative floor
area of multiple cafes which exceed 20 percent
of a multi-tenant shopping center, office
development, or the commercial portion of a
mixed use development
1 space for each 75 square feet, including outdoor areas if outdoor dining area exceeds
200 square feet
Fast food and drive-through restaurants, bars, and
cocktail lounges
1 space for each 75 square foot area, including outdoor dining areas. (Parking for outdoor
dining areas is required only for the portion that exceeds 200 square feet or 20 percent of
the indoor dining area, whichever is less.)
Minimum of 3 spaces regardless of size
Food to go uses 1 space for each 300 square feet, with a minimum of 3 spaces
Full service restaurants 1 space for each 75 square feet of dining area, including outdoor dining areas (parking for
outdoor dining areas is required only for the portion that exceeds 200 square feet or 20
percent of the indoor dining area, whichever is less), and 1 space for each 250 square feet
of nondining areas. Minimum of 3 spaces regardless of size
Group care:
Daycare (adult and children) 1 for every 7 adults/children, plus 1 space for each employee and faculty member
Hospitals 11/2 spaces for each bed
Senior communities, rest homes, convalescent
homes
1 space for each 2 beds
Industrial uses:
Data centers 1 space for each 3,500 square feet
Heavy industrial:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 526/581
Extraction of raw materials and refining 1 space for each 500 square feet for the first 50,000 square feet
Factories 1 space for each 1,000 square feet for the area in excess of 50,000 square feet
Generating stations
Heavy manufacturing
Light industrial:
High and medium bay labs 1 space for each 500 square feet for the first 50,000 square feet
Light assembly and processing 1 space for each 1,000 square feet for the area in excess of 50,000 square feet
Light manufacturing
Research and development (includes office with
on site testing facilities)
Wholesaling 1 space for each 300 square feet of office and/or showroom area, plus parking as required
for storage/warehouse areas
Ministorage, personal storage 5 spaces minimum, plus 1 space per 50 storage units or 5,000 square feet
Warehousing and storage related uses:
Freight forwarding 1 space for each 1,000 square feet for the first 20,000 square feet
1 space for each 2,000 square feet for the second 20,000 square feet
1 space for each 4,000 square feet for the area in excess of 40,000 square feet
General storage
Transfer, trucking yards or terminals
Warehouses and storage buildings
Warehousing and distribution
Public assembly:
Assembly hall:
With fixed seats 1 space for every 4 seats
Without fixed seats 1 space for every 35 square feet of floor area used for assembly purposes
Recreational uses:
Batting cages 2 spaces for each cage
Billiard parlors/pool halls - primary use (more than 2
tables)
1 space for each 100 square feet
Bowling alleys 4 spaces for each lane, plus parking for other uses
Residential uses:
Accessory dwelling units Refer to chapter 4, article E of this title
Caretaker units 1 space for each unit
Live/work units 2 spaces for each unit plus 1 space per 350 square feet of commercial/work area
Lodging houses, rooming houses, and guesthouses
1 space for each guestroom
Multiple-family dwellings 2 spaces per unit, plus 1 visitor space for every 3 units (3 - 5 units = 1 visitor space, 6 - 8
units = 2 visitor spaces, etc.)
Single-family and two-family dwellings 2 spaces for each unit and 1 additional space for dwelling units exceeding 3,500 square
feet of gross floor area
Schools - educational institutions:
Preschool, elementary through junior high level 1 space for each 1 classroom, plus 1 space for each employee and faculty member
High school level 7 spaces per classroom plus auditorium or stadium parking requirements
Adult level, college, business and trade 1 space for every 50 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for every 3 fixed seats -
whichever is greater; or, as modified by a parking demand study
Vehicle related services1:
Car washes:
Automated, and/or accessory to service/gas
station
2 space minimum, plus queuing space for 3 vehicles ahead of each wash lane
Full service 10 spaces minimum or 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet, whichever is greater, plus 3
space queuing lane ahead of each wash lane
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 527/581
Self-service 1 space minimum per washing stall
Service stations 3 spaces minimum or 1 space per 300 square feet of office/retail area, whichever is greater
Vehicle maintenance/repair, accessories
installation, and body shops
2 spaces for each service stall plus 2 spaces for office
Additionally, a parking plan must be submitted for automobile service uses that include
limited automobile sales. The plan must demonstrate that the area for the display of
automobiles for sale will not encroach into required setbacks, parking spaces, driveways,
drive aisles, vehicle back up areas, landscaping, and any other required use areas as
required by this Code
Note:
1. Repair bays, washing stalls, vacuum stalls, and fuel pump spaces do not count toward required parking.
(Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
B. Bicycle Spaces Required:
Use Number Of Bicycle Spaces Required
Single-family and twofamily
dwellings
None
Multiple-family
residential
10 percent of the required vehicle parking spaces for projects with 6 or more units
Nonresidential A minimum of 4 spaces for buildings up to 15,000 square feet, plus a minimum of 5 percent of the required vehicle
spaces for the portion above 15,000 square feet. Maximum of 25 spaces
The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve administrative adjustments to reduce or eliminate the requirement for bicycle spaces as
provided in chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title.
C. Reductions In The Number Of Required Parking Spaces:
1. Reductions For Single Uses:
a. The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve an administrative adjustment to the required number of parking spaces for any use up
to a maximum of ten percent (10%) or twenty (20) parking spaces, whichever is less, based on the submittal of a parking demand study. The
Director of Planning and Building Safety may refer any such request to the Planning Commission for review.
b. The Planning Commission may approve a reduction of the required number of parking spaces in any zone for any use, up to a maximum of twenty
percent (20%), based on the submittal of a parking demand study.
c. Parking studies submitted in conjunction with requests for reductions must include, without limitation, information specifying the number of
employees, customers, visitors, clients, shifts, deliveries, parking spaces, or other criteria established by the Director of Planning and Building
Safety.
2. Reductions For Joint/Shared Uses:
a. The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve an administrative adjustment to reduce the required number of parking spaces in any
zone for uses that share parking facilities for a maximum of ten percent (10%) or twenty (20) parking spaces, whichever is less, based on the
submittal of a parking demand study. The Director of Planning and Building Safety may refer any request for an administrative adjustment from the
required number of parking spaces to the Planning Commission for review.
b. The Planning Commission may approve a reduction of the required number of parking spaces in any zone for uses that share parking facilities
with significantly different peak hours of operation for a maximum of twenty percent (20%), based on the submittal of a parking demand study.
c. Requests for shared and/or joint uses are subject to the following requirements:
(1) A parking study must be submitted by the applicant demonstrating that there will not exist substantial conflict in the peak hours of parking
demand for the uses for which joint use is proposed;
(2) The number of parking stalls which may be credited against the requirements of the structures or uses involved must not exceed the number of
stalls reasonably anticipated to be available during differing hours of operation; and
(3) A written agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, must be executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued availability of
the number of stalls designed for joint use.
3. Sites With Transportation Systems Management Plans: The number of required parking spaces in this section may be modified subject to approval
of a transportation systems management plan submitted pursuant to the procedures and requirements of chapter 16, "Developer Transportation
Demand Management (TDM)", or chapter 17, "Employer/Occupant Transportation Systems Management", of this title.
4. Reduction In Parking Due To Disabilities Upgrade: When required solely as needed to upgrade existing parking facilities to comply with the
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), title III and California Code of Regulations (CCR), California Access Code, title 24, the total number of parking
spaces may be reduced at the discretion of the Director of Planning and Building Safety. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 528/581
D. Parking In-Lieu Fees: Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the City Council may designate certain areas within the City where, in
lieu of providing the number of on-site parking spaces required by this chapter or applicable specific plan, such requirement may be satisfied by paying
a parking in-lieu fee in an amount set by City Council resolution. Designated parking in-lieu fee areas and the process for payment of parking in-lieu
fees are described in chapter 29 of this title. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-15-7: OFF STREET LOADING SPACE STANDARDS:
A. General Provisions:
1. Applicability: Every building established, erected, enlarged or expanded for commercial, manufacturing or institutional purposes must provide loading
space as set forth below. However, for any building or use enlarged or increased in capacity, additional loading spaces are required only for such
enlargement or increase. All required loading spaces are in addition to the required on site parking spaces set forth in this chapter and must be
developed and maintained in accordance with this chapter. Loading spaces may be provided either completely or partially within a building when
such building is designated to include adequate ingress and egress to the loading spaces. Unless stated otherwise, loading requirements must be
based on net floor area as defined in section 15-1-6 of this title.
2. Location: Loading spaces, with the exception of passenger loading spaces, must be located to the side or rear of buildings on site whenever possible
as determined by the Director of Planning and Building Safety. Loading spaces cannot interfere with vehicular and pedestrian circulation on site.
3. Screening: Loading spaces must be appropriately screened from view from public streets. The screening may include decorative walls, landscaped
berms, shrubs, trees and other landscaping, and any other screening methods deemed appropriate by the Director of Planning and Building Safety.
B. Types And Dimensions Of Loading Spaces:
LOADING SPACE TYPES AND SIZES
Type Width Length Height
Passenger 10 feet 20 feet 7 feet
Small truck 12 feet 25 feet 14 feet
Large truck 13 feet 50 feet 16 feet
C. Number Of Loading Spaces Required:
Use Number And Type Required
Data centers 1 small truck space
Daycare centers 1 passenger space for 1 to 25 children
2 passenger spaces for 26 to 50 children
3 passenger spaces for over 50 children
Eating and drinking establishments 1 small truck space for buildings between 3,000 and 25,000 square feet in size
1 small and 1 large truck space for buildings over 25,000 square feet
Fitness centers, gyms, health clubs 0 spaces for buildings 0 to 5,000 square feet in size
1 small truck space for buildings over 5,000 square feet in size
Hotels, motels, hospitals, and institutional uses
1 small truck space for buildings up to 25,000 square feet in size
2 small truck spaces and 2 passenger spaces for buildings 25,001 to 100,000 square feet in size,
plus 1 large truck space and 1 passenger space for each additional 100,000 square feet or
fraction thereof above 100,000 square feet
Industrial, manufacturing, warehousing and
storage related uses (except data centers and
personal/ministorage)
1 small truck space for buildings up to 25,000 square feet in size
1 small and 1 large truck space for buildings 25,000 to 100,000 square feet in size, plus 1 large
truck for each additional 100,000 square feet over 100,000 square feet in size
Mixed use, campus style projects The loading requirements shall be the combined total of each building/use
Offices (general, medical, dental and clinics) 0 spaces for buildings up to 1,000 square feet
1 small truck space for buildings 1,000 to 25,000 square feet in size
2 small truck spaces for buildings 25,001 to 100,000 square feet in size
2 small and 1 large truck space for buildings 100,001 to 250,000 square feet in size, plus 1 large
truck space for every 100,000 above 250,000 square feet up to 3 large truck spaces
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 529/581
Personal/ministorage 1 small truck space per 100 units
Retail sales and services 1 small truck space for buildings between 1,000 to 25,000 square feet in size
1 small truck and 1 large truck space for buildings between 25,001 and 50,000 square feet in size
1 small truck and 2 large truck spaces for buildings between 50,001 and 100,000 square feet, plus
1 large truck space for each 100,000 square feet over 100,000 square feet
Schools - educational institutions 2 passenger spaces for 1 to 50 students, plus 1 passenger space for each 50 students above 50
and 1 small truck space minimum
Vehicle related services 1 small truck space for buildings between 3,000 and 25,000 square feet in size
2 small truck spaces for buildings between 25,000 and 100,000 square feet in size
2 small truck spaces and 1 large truck space for each additional 100,000 square feet above
100,000 square feet in size
Uses not listed Based on most similar listed use or a parking study, as determined by the Director of Planning and
Building Safety
D. Administrative Adjustments And Adjustments:
1. The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve administrative adjustments to the types and dimensions of loading spaces as provided in
chapter 24, "Adjustments", of this title.
2. The Director of Planning and Building Safety may approve adjustments to the number of loading spaces required as provided in chapter 24,
"Adjustments", of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-15-8: PARKING OF LICENSED RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND HABITABLE VEHICLES:
A. Parking of any mobile home, camper, house trailer or other habitable vehicle outside of an authorized mobile home park or licensed recreational vehicle
parking facility is prohibited except that such vehicles may be parked on any public property or right-of-way subject to any applicable parking
restrictions of this Code, or on any developed residential lot as long as the vehicle, if parked in a front yard, is parked on a nonporous surface pad
adequate to accommodate the parked vehicle.
B. A habitable vehicle parked on private property may be occupied for residential purposes for no longer than seventy two (72) hours (outside of an
authorized mobile home park) within any thirty (30) day period. No habitable vehicle may be occupied for commercial purposes except as otherwise
provided by this Code. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
Chapter 15A
WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING
15-15A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted in accordance with Government Code section 65595(c) for the purpose of complying with California law and promoting water
conservation. This chapter may be referred to as the WATER CONSERVATION IN LANDSCAPING STANDARDS. The water conservation in landscaping
standards are intended to promote water conservation while allowing the maximum possible flexibility in designing healthy, attractive, and cost effective
water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meanings stated in the water conservation in landscaping act1; regulations promulgating
the water conservation in landscaping act; this code; and any successor statutes or regulations.
APPLIED WATER: The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.
AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: A timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation
controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather based) or soil moisture data.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the potable water supply due to the reverse flow of
water from the irrigation system.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: The document that certifies that the landscape design plan, irrigation scheduling parameters and landscape project has
been installed per the approved landscape documentation package. An irrigation audit report must also be included to obtain the final certificate of
completion for the project.
CERTIFIED IRRIGATION DESIGNER: A person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade
organization or other program such as the U.S. environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation
Association's certified irrigation designer program.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 530/581
CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR: A person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a
professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program
and Irrigation Association's certified landscape irrigation auditor program.
CHECK VALVE OR ANTIDRAIN VALVE: A valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to
prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.
CLIMATE ZONE: A region characterized by long term weather patterns. The climate is measured by assessing weather patterns, variation in temperature,
air pressure, wind, humidity, precipitation, sunshine, atmospheric particle count and other meteorological variables in a given region. The climate of a
region is affected by its latitude, terrain, and altitude, as well as nearby water bodies and their currents. Evapotranspiration along with temperature and
precipitation are used for classifying which animals and plants species would thrive in a specific climate zone. As such, the garden collection of plant
species described in Sunset Western climate zone no. 24 (with marine influence along the Southern California coast) would perform best in the city of El
Segundo.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS: Community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil
Code section 4100.
COMPOST: The safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.
CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62): The number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.
DESIGNER: A person qualified to practice landscape architecture and/or irrigation design.
DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY: The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.
DRIP IRRIGATION: Any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume
irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR (ETAF): A factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference
evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two (2) major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the
landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas must not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated
landscapes is 0.8.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT: A project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION OR USABLE RAINWATER (Eppt): The portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.
EMITTER: A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.
ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE: The point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are
established after one or two (2) years of growth.
ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD OF THE PLANTS: The first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two (2) years if irrigation will be
terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may
need three (3) to five (5) years for establishment.
ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE (ETWU): The total water used for the landscape. The ETWU is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation
method selected for the landscape design. The ETWU must be below the MAWA.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE: The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.
FLOW RATE: The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet
per second.
FLOW SENSOR: An in-line device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow
sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This
combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.
FRIABLE: A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root
structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.
FUEL MODIFICATION PLAN GUIDELINE: Guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building
structures in a fire hazard severity zone.
GRAY WATER: Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or
unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Gray water"
includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not
include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health And Safety Code section 17922.12.
GUIDELINES FOR THE CITY OF EL SEGUNDO LAND DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS FOR LANDSCAPING AND THE GUIDELINES FOR
IMPLEMENTATION OF WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE: Regulations separately adopted by city council resolution, and incorporated by reference into
this chapter, providing specific regulations for water conservation.
HARDSCAPE: Any durable material (pervious and nonpervious) that is comprised of solid manmade and natural materials used in the built environment
such as: stone, tile, wood, crushed rock, gravel, granite, brick, metal, glass, bitumen, concrete, and masonry. Hardscape projects may include paved
areas, walkways, patios, statuary, walls, pools, fountains, fireplaces, fire pits, stone benches, and architectural landscape features.
HYDROSEEDING (Otherwise Referred To As HYDRAULIC MULCH SEEDING, HYDROMULCHING, HYDRASEEDING): A planting process that uses a
slurry of seed and mulch. It is often used as an erosion control technique on construction sites, as an alternative to the traditional process of broadcasting
or sowing dry seed.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 531/581
HYDROZONE: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.
INFILTRATION RATE: The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES: Species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or
economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the
California invasive plant inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.
IRRIGATION AUDIT: An in depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation
audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff
that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's
landscape irrigation auditor certification program or other U.S. environmental protection agency "WaterSense" labeled auditing program.
IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (OR IE): The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation
efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for
purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.
IRRIGATION SURVEY: An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to:
inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A complete connection of system components, including the water distribution network and the necessary irrigation equipment
downstream from the backflow prevention device.
IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS: A review of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business And Professions Code,
section 5615.
LANDSCAPE AREA: All the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance
calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone
walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native
vegetation).
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR: A person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of
landscape systems.
LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The documents required to be provided to the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as
described in the implementation procedures of these water conservation in landscaping standards. (See section 15-15A-5 of this chapter.)
LANDSCAPE PROJECT: The total new or altered landscape area in a project, as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this chapter, meeting
requirements of water conservation in landscaping.
LANDSCAPE WATER METER: An in-line device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is
connected to a totalizer to record water use.
LATERAL LINE: The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.
LOCAL AGENCY: A city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is responsible for adopting and implementing the water efficient
landscape ordinance. The local agency is also responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan
check or design review of a project.
LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR: Any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.
LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION: The application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such
as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of
plants.
MAIN LINE: The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.
MASTER SHUTOFF VALVE: An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system which when
closed, water will not be supplied to the irrigation system.
MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA): The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the
area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use must not exceed the
maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as
orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62)
[(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].
MEDIAN: An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.
MICROCLIMATE: The climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun
exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.
MINED LAND RECLAMATION PROJECTS: Any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the surface mining and
reclamation act of 1975.
MODEL HOME: A facility used exclusively for the promotion and sale of homes similar to the model.
MULCH: Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose
and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 532/581
erosion.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.
NONRESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or
public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.
OPERATING PRESSURE: The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.
OVERHEAD SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS: Systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).
OVERSPRAY: The irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
PERMIT: An authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape.
PERVIOUS: Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.
PLANT FACTOR OR PLANT WATER USE FACTOR: A factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of
this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0.0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor
range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are
derived from the publication "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species". Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from
academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California department of water resources (DWR).
PLANTING PLAN: A planting plan must identify location, spacing, numbers, container planting sizes of all plant materials including common and botanical
names.
PROJECT APPLICANT: The individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the
local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.
RAIN SENSOR OR RAIN SENSING SHUTOFF DEVICE: A component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.
RECORD DRAWING OR AS BUILTS: A set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are
usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.
RECREATIONAL AREA: Areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports
fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.
RECYCLED WATER, RECLAIMED WATER, OR TREATED SEWAGE EFFLUENT WATER: Treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for
nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.
REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION OR ETo: A standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is
expressed in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four (4) to seven inch (7") tall, cool season
grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional
differences in climate can be accommodated.
REGIONAL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE: A local ordinance adopted by two (2) or more local agencies, water suppliers and other
stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region.
REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE: Any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of section 15-
15A-3 of this chapter, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes surrounding single- or multi-family homes.
RUNOFF: Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result
from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.
SOFTSCAPE: Includes trees, shrubs, flowers, live horticulture plants, vines, ground covers, grasses, and may include high quality artificial plants and
durable synthetic grass or artificial turf which are not made with heavy metals or lead with completely pervious backing.
SOIL MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE OR SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR: A device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also
suspend or initiate an irrigation event.
SOIL TEXTURE: The classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.
SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA): An area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or
water features using recycled water.
SPRINKLER HEAD: A device which delivers water through a nozzle.
STATIC WATER PRESSURE: The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.
STATION: An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.
STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION FEATURE: A device or system of improvements that captures, retains and subsequently releases stormwater
runoff from the site at a lesser volume and/or slower rate than it is collected, while holding the runoff in temporary storage for the purposes of infiltration,
bioretention, and/or storage with beneficial use as landscape irrigation.
SUBMETER: A metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.
SWING JOINT: An irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement
in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 533/581
TURF: A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial rye grass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool grasses.
(Minimize cool season turf.) Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm season
grasses.
VALVE: A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
WUCOLS: The "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species" published by the University Of California cooperative extension and the department of
water resources (2014).
WATER CONSERVING PLANT SPECIES: A plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.
WATER FEATURE: A design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls,
fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water
use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not
irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.
WATERING WINDOW: The time of day irrigation is allowed.
XERISCAPING (Often Incorrectly Referred To As ZERO-SCAPING Or XEROSCAPING): Landscaping and gardening that reduces or eliminates the need
for supplemental water from irrigation. It is promoted in regions that do not have easily accessible, plentiful, or reliable supplies of fresh water, and is
gaining acceptance in other areas as access to water becomes more limited. Xeriscaping may be an alternative to various types of traditional gardening.
The xeriscape landscaping design may include natural rocks in various sizes, shapes, colors and the use of California native species combined with
species from the Arizona desert, which are drought tolerant and require very little water or rain to maintain. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-3: APPLICATION OF POLICIES:
A. Applicability: This chapter applies to all of the following landscape projects:
1. New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building permit,
plumbing permit, or design review.
2. Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring
a building permit, plumbing permit, or design review.
3. Projects with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements
of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in section 15-15A-13 of this chapter.
4. Projects using treated or untreated gray water or rainwater captured on the site, with an area less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet which meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated gray water or through
stored rainwater captured on the site. Projects using gray water systems must conform to the California plumbing code (California code of
regulations title 24, part 5, chapter 16).
5. Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to section 15-15A-6
and subsections 15-15A-5I and 15-15A-14D of this chapter; and existing cemeteries are limited to the requirements described in section 15-15A-15
of this chapter.
6. Existing landscapes limited to the requirements described in section 15-15A-15 of this chapter.
B. Nonapplicability: This chapter is not applicable to:
1. Registered local, state or federal historical sites.
2. Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system.
3. Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system.
4. Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.
5. Any project with a landscaped area less than five hundred (500) square feet, unless the Director of Planning and Building Safety determines that
substantial compliance with the purpose of this chapter requires that a landscape plan be submitted or the existing irrigation system must be
modified. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-4: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
The project applicant must submit the following:
A. A landscape documentation package for review and approval to the Planning and Building Safety Department. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
B. The landscape documentation package must include a "Certificate of Compliance" that has been prepared by an appropriately licensed professional
stating that the landscape design and water use calculations were prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to
comply with the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
C. Before the City issues a building permit, a landscape documentation package must be submitted and reviewed in accordance with this chapter.
Applications for a landscape plan approval must be filed by the owner of the affected property or his agent, or by a public entity to which the provisions
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 534/581
of this chapter apply, on forms furnished by the Director of Planning and Building Safety.
D. No landscape documentation package can be approved unless the Director of Planning and Building Safety finds that the plan complements the design
of the project, is consistent with the provisions of this chapter; compatible with adjacent existing or future public landscaped areas, and with the
elevations and appearance of existing structures located upon lots within the immediate vicinity of the lot.
E. Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, the project applicant must submit a copy of the "water efficient landscape worksheet",
provided by City staff to the local water purveyor. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-5: LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Landscape Documentation Package Elements: Each landscape package must include the following six (6) elements:
1. Project information:
a. Date;
b. Project applicant;
c. Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));
d. Total landscape area (square feet);
e. Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner installed);
f. Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;
g. Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;
h. Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner;
i. Applicant signature and date with statement:
I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package.
2. Water efficient landscape worksheet describing water budget calculations for the:
a. Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA);
b. Estimated total water use (ETWU);
3. Soil management report;
4. Landscape design plan;
5. Irrigation design plan; and
6. Grading design plan.
B. Landscaping Design Plan Requirements: The landscaping plan must identify the location, spacing, numbers, container sizes of all plant materials
including common and botanical names, for the project in a clear and legible fashion in accordance with the policies established to implement the
provisions of this chapter. The landscape design plan must:
1. Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;
2. Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape must be included in the low
water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;
3. Identify recreational areas;
4. Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;
5. Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;
6. Identify type of mulch and application depth;
7. Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;
8. Identify type and surface area of water features;
9. Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious);
10. Identify location, installation details, and twenty four (24) hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management
practices that encourage on site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants must refer to the local agency or regional water quality
control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the
landscape design plan and examples are provided in section 15-15A-9 of this chapter.
11. Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in section 15-15A-9 of this chapter and their twenty four (24) hour
retention or infiltration capacity;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 535/581
12. Identify any applicable gray water discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;
13. Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the water efficient landscape ordinance and applied them for the efficient use
of water in the landscape design plan"; and
14. Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See
sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business And Professions Code, section 832.27
of title 16 of the California code of regulations, and section 6721 of the Food And Agriculture Code.)
C. Landscaping Design Plan Criteria: The landscape design plan must address the following design criteria as part of the landscape documentation
package:
1. Plant Material: Plant material may be selected for the landscape providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the
maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency must include one or more of the following:
a. Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;
b. Selection of water conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;
c. Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;
d. Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area;
e. Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists; and
f. Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines.
2. Similar Water Requirements: Plants having similar water use requirements should be grouped together in distinct hydrozones, with the exception of
hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in subsection E2d of this section.
3. Plant Adaptability: Plants must be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical
conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency must include one or more of the following:
a. Use the Sunset Western climate zone system which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of
continental and marine influence on local climate;
b. Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure
(e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth;
c. Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain;
d. Where possible, landscaping should be installed in the fall, in order to establish plant materials when they will benefit most from winter rains;
e. The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California invasive plant council, is strongly discouraged.
4. Turf: Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and
where "twenty five percent (25%)" means one foot (1') of vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length (rise divided by run x
100 = slope percent).
5. High Water Use Plants: The planting of high water use plants is limited to nonturf landscape area. The remaining landscape must be planted with
low and moderate water use plant materials. High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.
6. Fire Prone Areas: A landscape design plan for projects in fire prone areas must address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone
around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code sections 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire prone plant materials and highly flammable
mulches (refer to the local fuel modification plan guidelines).
D. Soil Preparation, Mulch And Amendments:
1. Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils must be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting
holes need meet this requirement.
2. Soil amendments must be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see section
15-15A-7 of this chapter).
3. For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area must be
incorporated to a depth of six inches (6") into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six inches (6") of soil are
exempt from adding compost and tilling.
4. A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch must be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
ground covers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five
percent (5%) of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.
5. Stabilizing mulching products must be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards.
6. The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded applications must meet the mulching requirement.
7. Organic mulch materials made from recycled or postconsumer products must take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products
unless the recycled postconsumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel
modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 536/581
E. Irrigation System Design Plan: The irrigation plan must identify all components of the irrigation system drawn on project base sheets in a clear and
legible fashion in accordance with the policies established to implement the provisions of this chapter. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system
must meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components must
be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria
must be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.
1. Irrigation System:
a. Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, must be installed for all nonresidential irrigated
landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies)
and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:
(1) A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or
(2) A privately owned meter or submeter.
b. Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing nonvolatile memory must be required for
irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.
c. If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating
device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for
optimal performance.
d. If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure regulating devices such as in-line
pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices must be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
e. Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply must be measured at the point of connection. These
pressure and flow measurements must be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the
measurements must be conducted at installation.
f. Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions must
be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or
during rain.
g. Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) must be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the
water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.
h. Backflow prevention devices must be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant must
refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.
i. Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on nonresidential landscapes and
residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger.
j. Master shutoff valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers
that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shutdown features.
k. The irrigation system must be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows
onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
l. Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, must be utilized when designing irrigation systems.
m. The design of the irrigation system must conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.
n. The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in section 15-15A-6 of
this chapter regarding the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
o. All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society Of
Agricultural And Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler And Emitter Standard".
All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in
ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
p. It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on
the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.
q. In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.
r. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices must have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's
recommendations.
s. Head to head coverage is recommended, however, sprinkler spacing must be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity
using the manufacturer's recommendations.
t. Swing joints or other riser protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic
areas of turf or grass.
u. Check valves or antidrain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.
v. Areas less than ten feet (10') in width in any direction must be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or
overspray.
w. Overhead irrigation must not be permitted within twenty four inches (24") of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback
from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted.
The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 537/581
(1) The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or the adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and
constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or
(2) The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly
demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection E1k of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be
confirmed during the irrigation audit.
x. Slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) must not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per
hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape
documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the
irrigation audit.
2. Hydrozone Criteria:
a. Each valve must irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.
b. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices must be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.
c. Where feasible, trees must be placed on separate valves from shrubs, ground covers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The
mature size and extent of the root zone must be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.
d. Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:
(1) Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or
(2) The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.
e. Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants will not be permitted.
f. On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas must be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the
irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone
information table (see water efficient worksheet) provided by staff. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the
controller.
3. Irrigation Design Plan: The irrigation design plan must contain:
a. Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;
b. Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture
sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;
c. Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;
d. Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;
e. Recycled or reclaimed water irrigation systems must be utilized if such lines are readily available adjacent to the site, as specified in subsection F
of this section;
f. The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the water efficient landscape ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient
use of water in the irrigation design plan;" and
g. The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to
design an irrigation system. (See sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business And
Professions Code, section 832.27 of title 16 of the California code of regulations, and section 6721 of the Food And Agricultural Code.)
F. Recycled Water:
1. The installation of recycled water irrigation systems must allow for the current and future use of recycled water.
2. All recycled water irrigation systems must be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.
3. Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special
landscape areas must not exceed 1.0.
G. Gray Water Systems: Gray water systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on site landscape irrigation. All gray water
systems must conform to the California plumbing code (California code of regulations title 24, part 5, chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance
standards. Refer to subsection 15-15A-3A4 of this chapter for the applicability of this chapter to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet with the estimated total water use is met entirely by gray water.
H. Irrigation Scheduling: For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules must be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount
of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules must meet the following criteria:
1. Irrigation scheduling must be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.
2. Overhead irrigation must be scheduled between eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. unless weather conditions prevent it. If
allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two (2) must apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the
normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.
3. For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current
reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water must be less than or equal to
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 538/581
maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules must be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference
evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.
4. Parameters used to set the automatic controller must be developed and submitted for each of the following:
a. The plant establishment period;
b. The established landscape; and
c. Temporarily irrigated areas.
5. Each irrigation schedule must consider for each station all of the following that apply:
a. Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);
b. Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);
c. Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;
d. Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;
e. Application rate setting;
f. Root depth setting;
g. Plant type setting;
h. Soil type;
i. Slope factor setting;
j. Shade factor setting; and
k. Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.
I. Landscape And Irrigation Maintenance Schedule:
1. Landscapes must be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule must be submitted with the certificate of
completion.
2. A regular maintenance schedule must include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its
components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; top dressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas,
and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and
system maintenance.
3. Repair of all irrigation equipment must be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater
efficiency.
4. A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities.
J. Effective Precipitation: A local agency may consider effective precipitation (25 percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the
following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance: MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas.
MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for nonresidential areas. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-6: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET:
The estimated water use calculations for the project must be identified. The water use calculations must be certified by the landscape professional that it
meets the water conservation in landscaping act requirements and bear the signature of the landscape professional as required by Business And
Professions Code section 5615.
A. Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet: A project applicant must complete the "water efficient landscape worksheet" supplied by staff, which contains
information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show
that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for
nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods
selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for
nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and
irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.
In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant must use the annual ETo value for El Segundo
of 33.0. The annual ETo is found in the CIMIS reference evapotranspiration zones map, from department of water resources, published in 1999.
B. Water Budget: Water budget calculations must adhere to the following requirements:
1. The plant factor used must be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved
by the California department of water resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water
use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 539/581
2. All water features must be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas must be included in the low water use
hydrozone.
3. All special landscape areas must be identified and the water use for each area must be calculated using the "water efficient landscape worksheet"
supplied by staff.
4. ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas must not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-7: SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT:
Soil conditioning notes should be included on the plans. The soil analysis must include a description of: soil texture, water holding capacity, infiltration rate
determined by laboratory test or soil infiltration rate table, pH, total soluble salts, sodium, percentage of organic material, and implementation of
recommended amendments to the soil. The recommended amendments for the soil must be appropriate for the plants selected. In order to reduce runoff
and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report must be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows:
A. Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.
1. Soil sampling must be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended
plants.
2. The soil analysis must include:
a. Soil texture;
b. Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;
c. pH;
d. Total soluble salts;
e. Sodium;
f. Percent of organic matter; and
g. Recommendations.
B. In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven (7) lots or approximately
fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects must sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven (7) lots.
C. The project applicant, or his/her designee, must comply with one of the following:
1. If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report must be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape documentation
package; or
2. If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report must be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape certificate of
completion.
D. The soil analysis report must be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design
plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.
E. The project applicant, or his/her designee, must submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the local
agency with certificate of completion. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-8: GRADING DESIGN PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
A grading design plan must be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package for the project.
A. The project applicant must submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:
1. Height of graded slopes;
2. Drainage patterns;
3. Pad elevations;
4. Finish grade; and
5. Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
B. To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:
1. Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain onto nonpermeable hardscapes;
2. Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 540/581
3. Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
C. The grading design plan must contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the water efficient landscape ordinance and applied
them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and must bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by state
law. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-9: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND RAINWATER RETENTION:
A. Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing
stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on site rainwater retention and
infiltration are encouraged.
B. Project applicants must refer to the local agency or regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical
requirements.
C. All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. (Refer to subsection 15-15A-5D of this chapter.)
D. It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious
surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: 1) the 1-inch, 24-hour rain event or 2) the eighty fifth percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or additional
capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation.
E. It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and
use:
1. Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.
2. Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways.
3. Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.
4. Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.
5. Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.
6. Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and dry wells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.
7. Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants.
F. Landscape areas containing artificial turf or synthetic grass must be permeable and must not contain lead or other toxic chemicals which can pollute
groundwater or the storm drain system. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-10: WATER FEATURES:
Decorative water features such as pools, ponds, and waterfalls used in landscaped areas must incorporate recycling of water, and must use recycled
water where it is feasible, cost effective, and meets health standards. The surface area of any water feature must be included in the high water use
hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
A. Recirculating water systems must be used for water features.
B. Where available, recycled water must be used as a source for decorative water features.
C. Surface area of a water feature must be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
D. Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-11: LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE:
The property owner must permanently and continuously maintain landscaping and irrigation in a neat, clean and healthy condition, including removal of
litter, proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeds, fertilizing, and watering; and replacement of diseased and/or dead plants and malfunctioning or missing
irrigation system components.
The water purveyor will monitor the annual water use at each project site and may require that corrections be made if water consumption substantially
exceeds the average yearly water use for landscaping areas. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-12: MODEL HOME LANDSCAPING:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 541/581
For each subdivision with model homes, the developer must submit a landscape plan and install landscaping for each model home, incorporating the
policies of this chapter and including:
A. Signs identifying water efficient landscape species, hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and other water conserving landscape design elements placed
around the model. Signage must include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed
the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, gray water systems, and
rainwater catchment systems.
B. Literature must be available to individuals touring the model home describing the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient
landscapes. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-13: PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE OPTION:
The prescriptive requirements may be used as a compliance option to the model water efficient landscape ordinance. Compliance with the following items
is mandatory and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option:
A. Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following elements:
1. Date;
2. Project applicant;
3. Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));
4. Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf and plant material;
5. Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner installed);
6. Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;
7. Contact information for the project applicant and property owner;
8. Applicant signature and date with statement:
I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option to the MWELO.
B. Incorporate compost: At a rate of at least four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet to a depth of six inches (6") into landscape area
(unless contraindicated by a soil test).
C. Plant material must comply with all of the following:
1. For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for seventy
five percent (75%) of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water;
2. For nonresidential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for one
hundred percent (100%) of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water; and
3. A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch must be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
ground covers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.
D. Turf must comply with all of the following:
1. Turf must not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the landscape area in residential areas, and no turf is permitted in nonresidential areas to comply
with the prescriptive compliance option;
2. Turf must not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one foot (1') vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length;
3. Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten feet (10') wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles. Any
turf in parkways must be irrigated by subsurface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.
E. Irrigation systems must comply with the following:
1. Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data.
2. Irrigation controllers must be of a type which does not lose programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.
3. Pressure regulators must be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturer's
recommended pressure range.
4. Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) must be installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the
water supply.
5. All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler And
Emitter Standard". All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 542/581
protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
F. At the time of final inspection: The permit applicant must provide the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation,
irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation maintenance. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-14: VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE:
A. Landscape Certificate Of Completion: Upon completion of the installation of the landscaping, the landscape architect, irrigation designer, contractor, or
owner must certify that the landscape complies with all policies of this chapter. A certificate of completion must be obtained from the city. City staff must
verify through the inspection process that all equipment, sprinklers and plant species installed conform to the approved landscape documentation
package plans for the project. Certification must be accomplished by completion of a landscape certificate on a form approved by the Director of
Planning and Building Safety. Additionally, a certified landscape auditor must perform a landscape irrigation audit to obtain final certificate of
occupancy. The landscape irrigation audit and landscape certificate for the landscape and irrigation system must be reviewed and approved by the
building official before final certificate of occupancy is issued. Failure to submit a complete and accurate landscape certificate will delay final approval
of the project and/or discontinue water service. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
B. Items Submitted For Review: The following items must be submitted for review to request a Certificate of Completion:
1. Landscape Certificate of Completion form.
2. Soil Management Report.
3. Irrigation Scheduling Parameters.
4. Irrigation audit report, Irrigation Survey, or Irrigation Water Use Analysis report.
5. Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance schedule. (Ord. 1551, 8-15-2017)
C. Verification Of Compliance: The verification of compliance of the landscape installation with approved plans must be obtained through the certificate of
completion in conjunction with a certificate of occupancy.
1. Upon completion of the landscaping project, the applicant must submit a "landscape installation certificate of completion" to the Planning and
Building Safety Department, certifying that the landscaping has been installed as shown on the approved record drawings with the City.
2. No final for the landscaping permit will be approved by the City for the project until the project applicant has submitted an "irrigation survey", or
"irrigation water use analysis", or "irrigation audit" report proving the project does exceed the "maximum applied water allowance" calculated by the
licensed professional as approved in the record drawings with the City. The "irrigation survey", or "irrigation water use analysis", or "irrigation audit"
report must describe how much water is used within a three (3) month period after the irrigation system is fully functioning and all landscaping has
been installed. The report must be used to evaluate water use in landscaping projects and provide recommendations to prevent water waste. All
landscape irrigation audits must be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.
D. Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, And Irrigation Water Use Analysis Report: The landscape certificate of completion must be accompanied by an
irrigation audit, irrigation survey, or irrigation water use analysis report. All landscape irrigation audits must be conducted by a certified landscape
irrigation auditor. Landscape audits must not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.
1. The irrigation audit, or irrigation survey, or irrigation water use analysis report must describe the following:
a. Operation pressure of the irrigation system;
b. Distribution uniformity of overhead irrigation;
c. Precipitation rate of overhead irrigation; and
d. Report of any overspray or broken irrigation equipment.
2. In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of one (1) in seven (7) lots or
approximately fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this requirement.
3. For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as described in section 15-15A-3 of this chapter:
a. The project applicant must submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the local agency which may include, but is not
limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and
preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and
any other factors necessary for accurate programming;
b. The local agency must administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation
surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance.
E. Irrigation Schedule: Irrigation schedule including:
1. Plant establishment irrigation schedule.
2. Regular irrigation schedule by month including: plant type, root depth, soil type, slope factor, shade factor, irrigation interval (days per week),
irrigation day, gallons per minute for each valve, precipitation rate, distribution uniformity and monthly estimated water use calculations.
F. Irrigation Maintenance Schedule: An irrigation maintenance schedule time line must be attached to the certificate of completion that includes:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 543/581
1. Routine inspections, adjustment and repairs to the irrigation system, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing, pruning and
weeding.
2. A final inspection must be performed by City staff to verify compliance. The final building permit approval will not be complete until the landscape
inspection is approved.
3. A certified landscape auditor must perform a landscape irrigation audit to obtain certificate of occupancy.
4. Irrigation of all landscaped areas must be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and will be subject to penalties and
incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor and the city. (Ord. 1515,
12-15-2015)
15-15A-15: PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPES:
A. Existing Landscapes: A local agency may by mutual agreement, designate another agency such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the
requirements contained in this chapter. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to
this chapter.
B. Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, And Irrigation Water Use Analysis: This section will apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before
December 1, 2015, and are over one acre in size:
1. For all landscapes that have a dedicated water meter for the irrigation system, the local agency is required to administer programs that may include,
but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as
necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The
maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes must be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62).
2. For all landscapes that do not have a dedicated meter for the irrigation system, the local agency must administer programs that may include, but not
be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water
waste.
3. All landscape audits must be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor and must describe the items in subsection 15-15A-14D1 of this
chapter.
C. Water Waste Prevention: Local agencies must prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the
target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks,
roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions will be established locally.
Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:
1. The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or
2. The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
15-15A-16: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate, to cause, or to maintain a violation of this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to remove or cause removal of water conserving irrigation valves or equipment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter will be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue will constitute a separate offense and will be punishable as such. Before any enforcement action of this section by the city, at least one
warning notice shall be provided to a person responsible for a violation of this section, provided that the violation does not create an immediate danger
to health or safety. In cases of immediate danger to health and safety, no warning notice is required before an enforcement action.
D. The director of planning and building safety department will have authority to perform the following duties:
1. To enforce the provisions of this chapter and the landscape specifications;
2. To supervise or inspect all work done under any permit or approval issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
3. To promulgate rules and regulations, and to amend or add to them, for the implementation of the provisions of this chapter and the standards as
technology, situations, products and procedures change. (Ord. 1515, 12-15-2015)
Chapter 16
DEVELOPER TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM)
15-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for major new developments to provide facilities that encourage and accommodate the use of
ridesharing, transit, pedestrian, and bicycle commuting as alternatives to single occupant motor vehicle trips. A reduction in such trips can be expected to
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 544/581
assist in reduced traffic congestion, air pollution and energy consumption impacts related to the new employment growth accommodated by new
developments. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-16-2: APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prior Approval: Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make the provision for, as a minimum, all of the following applicable
transportation demand management and trip reduction measures.
B. Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed "complete" by the city pursuant to California
Government Code section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a DEIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit
has been received, prior to the effective date hereof.
C. Increased Floor Space: The requirements shall also apply to any existing nonresidential use which proposes to increase its gross floor area by twenty
five percent (25%) or more above the floor area existing on the effective date hereof, and which after expansion exceeds the minimum building size.
This chapter shall then apply to the entire development. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
D. Existing Developments: Existing nonresidential developments regardless of size may voluntarily comply with the development standards and receive
reductions in the total number of required parking spaces as provided in section 15-16-3 of this chapter, subject to the monitoring provisions in section
15-16-4 of this chapter.
E. Maintenance: All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required must be maintained in a state of good repair. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-16-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Twenty Five Thousand Square Feet: Nonresidential development of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet or more and all projects within the urban
mixed use zone must provide the following to the satisfaction of the director of planning and building safety: a bulletin board, display case or kiosk
displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area must include, but is
not limited to, the following:
1. Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;
2. Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and locate transit operators;
3. Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter oriented organizations;
4. Bicycle route and facility information including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and
5. A listing of facilities available for car poolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.
B. Fifty Thousand Square Feet: Nonresidential development of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more must comply with subsection A of this section,
and must provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the director of planning and building safety:
1. Preferential Parking: Not less than fifteen percent (15%) of employee parking areas must be designated as preferential parking and must be located
as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s) without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential car pool/vanpool
parking area must be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of the director of planning and building safety.
A statement that preferential car pool/vanpool spaces for employees is available, and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be
included on the required transportation information board. Projects may reduce the total number of required parking spaces by one vehicle space for
every one space which is marked and reserved for preferential parking, up to a maximum of ten percent (10%), upon application to and approval by
the director of planning and building safety.
2. HOV Loading Area: A safe and convenient zone must be provided in which high occupancy vehicles (vanpools and car pools) may deliver or board
their passengers. This staging area must provide adequate space for passenger loading, unloading and waiting, which does not interfere with on site
circulation patterns. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches (7'2") or the minimum
required by the California building code, whichever is greater, must be provided for the loading area in accessways to be used by such vehicles.
Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions must also be included in HOV loading areas.
3. Vanpool Access: Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure,
a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches (7'2") or the minimum required by the California building code, whichever is greater,
must be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions must also be
included in vanpool parking areas.
4. On Site Amenities Or Shuttle: In order to reduce the need for employees to drive personal vehicles for midday activities, the project must provide any
one or more of the following measures which together must be sized to accommodate during the course of the business day at least twenty percent
(20%) of the on site population:
a. On site amenities.
b. Guaranteed operation of a privately operated midday shuttle serving the project site for the life of the project.
A reduction in the total number of required parking spaces of up to one percent (1%) must be permitted, based on the extent of the amenities,
upon application to and approval by the director of planning and building safety.
5. Bicycle Facilities: Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking spaces must be provided according to chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And Loading
Spaces", of this title. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle,
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 545/581
which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) must be provided to
the satisfaction of the director of planning and building safety.
6. Shower And Lockers (Optional): Projects may provide shower and locker facilities for bicycle riders, motorcycle riders, and pedestrians. If these
facilities are provided, the number of preferential parking spaces may be reduced by up to three percent (3%) and the total number of required
spaces may be reduced up to one percent (1%) based on the extent of facilities, upon application to and approval by the director of planning and
building safety.
7. Transit Support Facilities (Optional): Projects may provide facilities which will promote transit use. If transit facilities are provided, the number of
preferential parking spaces may be reduced by up to five percent (5%), and the total number of required spaces may be reduced up to one percent
(1%) for provision of bus transit facilities, and up to two and one-half percent (21/2%) for rail transit, upon application to and approval by the director
of planning and building safety.
C. One Hundred Thousand Square Feet: Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more must comply with
subsections A and B of this section, and must provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:
1. Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the
development.
2. If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus
service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When location of bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be
designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.
3. Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on site. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-16-4: MONITORING:
Physical facilities shall be verified through the city's existing development review process. Initial enforcement shall consist of verification during plan check
and field inspection prior to release of utilities/certificate of occupancy (to ensure that preferential parking spaces are marked, lockers are installed, etc.).
Subsequent enforcement shall be per established zoning code procedures. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-16-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The director of planning and building safety or his/her representative is hereby designated as the enforcing agent of this chapter and any amendments
thereto pursuant to section 15-1-4 of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
Chapter 17
EMPLOYER/OCCUPANT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT
15-17-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to set forth requirements for major employers and occupants to develop and implement transportation systems management
(TSM) programs to encourage and accommodate the use of ridesharing, transit, pedestrian, and bicycle commuting as a means to reduce single occupant
motor vehicle trips associated with employee commuting. A reduction in such trips can be expected to assist in reduced traffic congestion, air pollution and
energy consumption impacts related to employee commuting. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to every existing or future employer/occupant of: a) two hundred (200) or more persons during daytime business hours at a
common business location (e.g., a single building, group of buildings, or work locations at a single site or contiguous sites); and to b) less than two
hundred (200) persons during daytime business hours at a common business location in a multi-tenant complex. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-3: MULTI-TENANT COMPLEXES:
A. Every multi-tenant complex which is the place of employment of two hundred (200) or more people shall have a complex coordinator designated by the
property owner/manager. The complex coordinator shall serve as liaison to any major employers in the complex, and shall be the central information,
reporting and coordinating source for the complex.
B. Employers of two hundred (200) or more persons are required to comply with this chapter individually, and shall coordinate with the complex
coordinator, if one exists.
C. Employers of less than two hundred (200) persons, located within a multi-tenant complex which is required to comply with this chapter shall either:
1. Develop an individual TSM plan;
2. Participate in a complexwide plan; or
3. Undertake the following actions:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 546/581
a. Provide employees with the services of an employee transportation coordinator, which may be the complex coordinator;
b. Provide information to employees regarding alternative ways to commute to work; and
c. Provide a commuter matching service (i.e., provide and administer a program of preferential parking). (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-4: EXEMPT PROJECTS:
A. Temporary activities (less than 90 days) in existing nonresidential uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
B. The exemption provisions shall be reviewed by the planning commission after one year from the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-17-5: REQUIREMENTS:
Employers/occupants must be required to prepare a TSM plan for submittal to the director of planning and building safety according to the compliance
schedule established in accordance with section 15-17-7 of this chapter. The applicant shall have discretion to select among a range of program
measures. However, the following minimum measures shall be included:
A. Employee transportation coordinator (ETC).
B. Informational and promotional programs.
C. Establish and administer preferential parking program.
D. Develop and administer a personalized ridesharing program with a target trip reduction of either twenty percent (20%) reduction in the base traffic
generation level projected for the work site based on the Institute Of Transportation Engineers "Trip Generation", seventh edition, or most current
edition, or other source submitted by the applicant and approved by the director of planning and building safety, or a target average vehicle ridership
(AVR) of 1.43 employees per commute vehicle, which represents a twenty percent (20%) increase in vehicle ridership from the estimated baseline
AVR.
E. Monitoring and report to the director of planning and building safety once every three (3) years. The report must include, but need not be limited to: 1)
the name and phone number of the ETC; 2) the number of employees at the work site during the normal business hours; 3) the estimated number of
vehicles used for commuting (excluding public transit); 4) an identification of any objectives in the approved TSM plan which have not been achieved;
5) a description of proposed measures to remedy any deficiencies. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-17-6: PARKING INCENTIVES:
Existing employers may petition the director of planning and building safety for approval of parking reductions in on and off site locations commensurate
with the level of trip reduction proposed (up to a maximum of 15 percent). A condition of approval must be submittal of a TSM plan and the applicant shall
enter into a written agreement with the city, providing that the applicant and all successors in interest shall implement and maintain the approved TSM plan
or a subsequently approved TSM plan which complies with the intent of this chapter for the life of the project. The agreement must be in a form that may
be recorded and contain covenants which run with the land. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-17-7: IMPLEMENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. Compliance Schedule: Implementation must be through a permit system administered by the planning and building safety department. The director of
planning and building safety shall establish a phased compliance schedule with priority given to: 1) new businesses; 2) business license renewals for
companies employing one thousand (1,000) or more persons; 3) business license renewals with five hundred (500) or more employees; 4) business
license renewals with two hundred (200) or more employees. Companies with more than one business address shall be permitted to file one TSM plan
to cover all sites. The director of planning and building safety must also establish a compliance schedule for multi-tenant complexes, based on total
complex size.
B. Notice: The planning and building safety department must mail notice of requirements to all businesses requiring a permit, based on the compliance
schedule. Notified parties must submit their proposed TSM plan to the director of planning and building safety within forty five (45) days of receipt of
notification. A filing fee may be established by council resolution to cover the cost of program administration. The director of planning and building
safety must administratively review the TSM plan and determine whether it reasonably complies with trip reduction objectives and standards specified
herein.
C. Compliance Audit: The director of planning and building safety shall have the authority to require a compliance audit to be prepared by any employer or
complex coordinator upon demonstration of a reasonable basis for complaint relative to noncompliance with an approved TSM plan. No compliance
audit shall be required more often than once every twelve (12) months. Said audit must be submitted to the director of planning and building safety
within thirty (30) days of his request. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-17-8: OFF SITE PARKING:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 547/581
Employers may, upon application and approval of the director of planning and building safety, use off site parking as part of their TSM plans. Off site
parking must comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
A. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all required parking must be provided on site;
B. Transportation from the satellite lot to the workplace must be detailed as part of the TSM plan; and
C. Satellite lots must be tied to the site development that they are meeting the parking requirements of, through a legal instrument, such as a covenant or
deed restriction. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
Chapter 18
SIGNS
15-18-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the effective use of signs, to help maintain the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract
businesses, to encourage harmonious integration of signs with their surroundings, to ensure pedestrian and traffic safety, and to minimize possible
adverse effects.
B. This chapter was adopted pursuant to the City's police powers to advance the goals set forth in the General Plan to regulate the time, place, and
manner that signs may be used within the City.
C. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or circumscribe the content of any sign placed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-2: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter are prohibited. Such prohibited signs include, but are not limited to:
A. Beacon signs, used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes;
B. Balloons or other inflated devices or signs used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes;
C. Billboards;
D. Flags and pennants, except those exempt under section 15-18-3 of this chapter;
E. Signs that emit sounds (except ordering menu boards at drive-throughs), odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or steam;
F. Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a surface, except those exempt under section 15-18-3 of this chapter;
G. Trailer or portable signs;
H. Signs that flash, rotate, pulsate, or otherwise move in a way that creates a traffic hazard;
I. Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic lights, signs, or signals or signs that interfere with the effectiveness of traffic lights, signs, or signals;
J. Strobe lights used in signs;
K. Abandoned signs. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-3: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs and/or face changes are exempt from plan review, but all such signs may require a building permit and must comply with the corner
clearance and driveway visibility standards of chapter 2 of this title:
A. Complies With Master Sign Program: Any sign that is on a property with an approved Master Sign Program and fully complies with the program's
standards and design requirements.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 548/581
B. Face Changes: Face changes of existing signs previously approved under a valid Master Sign Program pursuant to subsection 15-18-5A of this
chapter;
C. Inside Building: Signs inside a building not attached to a window or door;
D. Required By Law: Signs required by Federal, State, or local law;
E. Building Marker: Building marker signs;
F. Holiday Decorations: Lights used for holiday decorations;
G. Temporary Election Season Signs: Temporary election season signs are allowed in any zone subject to the following:
1. Sign cannot exceed four (4) square feet in area;
2. Except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, such signs cannot be erected more than sixty (60) days before an election in which residents of the City
of El Segundo are eligible to vote; and,
3. Except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, such signs must be removed not later than forty eight (48) hours after the election.
H. Works Of Art: Works of art, including decorative flags and murals, such as historical and community oriented murals, which are not for commercial
purposes are permitted, subject to the following standards:
1. The use of registered, copyrighted, or trademark names, insignia, or logos is permitted within the sponsor's portion of the artwork, but names,
insignia, or logos larger than six (6) square feet or one percent (1%) of the area of the artwork, whichever is less, may not include registration,
copyright, or trademark symbols. Such artwork is subject to review by the Director or their designee to determine if the extent of any commercial
message in the mural is a minor component of the artwork. When the use of names, insignia, or logos is larger than six (6) square feet or one
percent (1%), the entire artwork will be treated as a sign that is subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-4: GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS:
A. Signs In Non-Residential Zones: All signs in non-residential zones must be erected and maintained consistent with the purposes of the chapter.
1. Sign Types:
a. Signs On Freestanding Buildings: Freestanding buildings allow wall, fin, marquee, canopy, awning, projecting, and roof signs to have a cumulative
area up to five percent (5%) of each building face. This standard is applicable to signs installed on the second story and above.
b. Signs On Store Fronts: Store front shops are allowed signs up to fifteen percent (15%) of each shop front per tenant space, including any wall, fin,
marquee, canopy, awning, and projecting signs. This standard is applicable to signs installed on the ground floor or street level of the primary
entryway for a commercial building. Signs proposed on walls other than primary entryway (i.e., side walls or rear wall) are allowed a cumulative
sign area up to five percent (5%) of each building face.
c. Monument, Ground, Freestanding, Or Pole Signs: One monument, ground, freestanding, or pole sign that provides a shared usage of such signs
is allowed for every one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof. Such signs are allowed a sign area up to one hundred fifty
(150) square feet per sign and must not be placed closer than fifty (50) linear feet from another monument, ground, freestanding, or pole sign on
the same property. Any such sign may be erected and maintained in a required building setback, provided it is at least three feet (3') from the
property line and is not located in a required corner clearance or driveway visibility area.
d. Additional Development Standards: Additional development standards are as follows:
(1) Monument or ground signs: Maximum height of eight feet (8') by right. Signs over eight feet (8') and up to a maximum of twenty feet (20') are
allowed with an administrative use permit.
(2) Ground directory signs: Maximum height of twenty feet (20') and are:
(A) Designed to be viewed primarily by pedestrians; and
(B) Designed to have minimal visibility from the public rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Director.
(3) Freestanding or pole signs: Maximum height of twenty five feet (25').
(4) Off-site directional signs: Maximum height of eight feet (8') by right and must:
(A) Provide directions to a business located on another property within the City.
(B) Maintain a maximum distance of five hundred feet (500') from the property on which the sign is located.
(C) Require an administrative use permit for signs over eight feet (8') and up to a maximum of twenty feet (20').
2. Electronic Message Centers: Electronic message centers (EMCs) are allowed in all non-residential zones. EMCs may be approved for nonresidential
uses in the Multi-Family (R-3) Zone upon the approval of an administrative use permit, pursuant to the requirements of chapter 22 of this
title. EMCs are subject to the following standards:
a. EMCs may have up to two (2) faces;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 549/581
b. For all ground-mounted signs, the changeable copy portion of the sign cannot exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the total permitted sign area;
c. EMCs may include animated graphics and video only when they are:
(1) Designed to be viewed primarily by pedestrians; and
(2) Designed to have minimal visibility from the public rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Director;
d. When visible from the public right-of-way, the sign display must remain fixed for at least seven (7) seconds and transitions between slides must be
instantaneous. Any form of blinking, scrolling, or sliding of image elements is prohibited;
e. EMCs must be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination, that are programmed to
automatically dim according to ambient light conditions;
f. In the case of malfunction, EMCs must contain a default design to either freeze the sign in one position or go blank.
3. Large Signs: Any sign over five hundred (500) square feet that otherwise meets the provisions of this chapter, requires an administrative use permit,
pursuant to chapter 22 of this title.
B. Signs In Residential Zones: All signs in residential zones must be erected and maintained consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
1. Sign Types:
a. Identification Signs: One identification sign per lot is allowed, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. The sign must not extend more than
six inches (6") above or out from the front wall and must contain only the name and street address of the building upon which it is placed.
b. Wall Signs: Permitted nonresidential uses in residential zones that are currently in compliance with this Code, except home occupation
businesses, are permitted one wall sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet in size for the purpose of identifying the business located on the
property. Such signs must not contain advertising.
C. Temporary Signs: Except as otherwise provided, two (2) temporary signs not exceeding a cumulative total of six (6) square feet, are allowed at all times.
The following additional types of temporary signs may be displayed upon the City's issuing a temporary sign permit, provided the sign meets the
following requirements:
1. Special Event Or Sale Sign: A sign placed in connection with and on the site of a special event or sale, up to a maximum size of one hundred (100)
square feet, for a specific maximum thirty (30) day period is allowed, which may be renewed up to a total of one hundred twenty (120) days. Animals
or human beings, live or simulated, designed or used to attract attention to the premises may be used, provided they are not located on public
property or in the public right-of-way.
2. Construction Signs: Signs placed on an active, lawfully permitted construction site up to a maximum size of thirty two (32) square feet per
construction site are allowed for a maximum period of six (6) months. The Director may grant up to three (3) separate six (6) month extensions.
Construction signs must be removed within one week after completion of construction.
3. New Development/New Business Signs: One temporary sign on the site of a new development or business may be erected and maintained from the
time a building permit is issued until final inspection, but in no case may a new development or business sign be displayed for more than one year.
New development or business signs for nonresidential uses are allowed a maximum size of one hundred (100) square feet; residential uses are
allowed a maximum size of six (6) square feet.
D. Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs as defined and authorized by Civil Code section 713, do not require a building permit, but must comply with the
following:
1. Consent For Display: Signs must be displayed on private real property and only with consent of the owner;
2. Number Of Signs; Location: One sign may be placed on the real property to which it pertains in residential zones; three (3) signs may be placed on
the real property to which they pertain in all other zones;
3. Maximum Size: Signs cannot exceed six (6) square feet in size for residential uses in residential zones, exceed twelve (12) square feet in size for
nonresidential uses in the R-3 Zone, or exceed the cumulative total of fifty (50) square feet in size for all other zones;
4. Apartment Buildings: Before the City issues a certificate of occupancy, multi-family apartment buildings with four (4) or more units must install one
monument, ground, freestanding, or pole sign that is for the sole purpose of unit owners advertising their units. The design for the sign and its
location on the property must be approved by the Planning and Building Safety Director, or his designee, before its installation. The sign may have
up to two (2) faces and cannot exceed a cumulative total of nine (9) square feet in size per sign face.
5. Removal: Signs must be removed within five (5) days after the advertised property is sold, rented, or leased.
6. Temporary Real Estate Directional Signs: Directional signs authorized by Civil Code section 713(a)(2) that identify and provide directional information
to any residential property that is offered for sale, lease, or exchange by the owner or his or her agent must comply with the following:
a. Signs must be located only along direct routes to the residential property from arterial streets;
b. Not more than one sign is permitted at each intersection on private property and only with consent of the owner;
c. Signs must be removed when the subject property is sold or when the event ends;
d. Signs cannot exceed nine (9) square feet in area or five feet (5') in height;
e. No real estate signs are allowed on public property.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 550/581
E. Signs Within Five Hundred Feet Of Freeway Or Highway: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, no outdoor advertising structure, outdoor
advertising display, or billboard, regardless of size, which does not advertise the business conducted, the services rendered, or the goods produced
upon the property upon which the sign is placed may be placed within five hundred feet (500') of either side of a State or County freeway or highway in
a manner which makes the sign thereon visible to persons or passengers upon any such thoroughfare. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-5: MASTER SIGN PROGRAMS, APPLICATIONS, AND PERMITS:
A. Master Sign Programs: Multi-tenant developments of three (3) or more commercial tenants require an approved Master Sign Program by the Director or
their designee. No permit may be issued for an individual sign requiring a building permit until a required Master Sign Program is approved. A Master
Sign Program is not required for a development, lot, or business that has less than three (3) tenants.
1. Application For Master Sign Program: An application for the Master Sign Program must include:
a. Accurate plot plan of the lot;
b. Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas;
c. Computation of the maximum sign area allowed, maximum area allowed for individual signs, height and number of signs, and total building wall
area on which signs are proposed;
d. Proposed location of each sign, present and future, whether requiring a permit or not, shown on both the plot plan and elevations;
e. On site signs including, but not limited to, building marker signs, directional signs, identification signs and onsite signs used for either ingress or
egress, identification of facilities or similar features must be submitted as a part of a Master Sign Program;
f. Optional consistency standards among all signs on the lots affected by the program with regard to:
(1) Color scheme;
(2) Lettering or graphic style;
(3) Lighting;
(4) Material; and/or
(5) Sign dimensions;
g. Payment of the applicable fees established by the City Council.
2. Window Signs: A Master Sign Program may indicate the areas and general types of window signs without specifying the exact dimension or nature
of every window sign.
3. Consent: Master Sign Programs must be signed by the property owner or their authorized agent.
4. Review Procedure: Within ten (10) working days of receiving a complete Master Sign Program application, the Director must either:
a. Approve the proposed program if it conforms with the provisions of this chapter; or
b. Deny the proposed program if it fails to conform with the provisions of this chapter. In cases of a denial, the Director will specify in writing the
sections of this chapter with which the program is inconsistent. The Director's determination may be appealed pursuant to chapter 25 of this title.
5. Modifications: Any new sign locations or the increased size of signs require an application for an amended Master Sign Program that conforms to all
requirements of this chapter. Minor changes to signs including, but not limited to, color scheme, material, sign dimensions, location on building face,
at the discretion of the Director do not require an amended Master Sign Program.
B. Administrative Use Permits, Adjustments, Variances, And Conditional Uses:
1. Proposed signs that require discretionary review must be approved by the Director before building permits are issued.
2. Signs that require the approval of an administrative use permit will be processed pursuant to chapter 22 of this title.
3. Deviations from any nonstructural provision of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the number of permitted signs, the size of proposed signs up
to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the area of the building face, and setbacks, may be granted upon the approval of an adjustment, pursuant
to chapter 24 of this title. The Director may consider a deviation request to be a request for a variance and refer the request to the Planning
Commission for review pursuant to chapter 23 of this title.
4. Except as otherwise provided, all deviations from this chapter must comply with the variance procedures set forth in chapter 23 of this title. All sign
regulations for land uses requiring conditional use permits are controlled by this chapter and must be processed without regard to the proposed
message, content, or copy of proposed signs.
C. Permits Required:
1. Before erecting, modifying, repairing, or relocating any sign, the City must issue the building permit if the proposed sign meets all provisions of this
chapter and of the applicable Master Sign Program.
2. Building permit applications reviewed for consistency with the applicable Master Sign Program do not require additional Master Sign Program fee.
D. Signs On Public Property And Public Right-Of-Ways: No signs shall be allowed on public property or in the public right-of-way, except as approved by
the Public Works Department, consistent with title 9 of this Code, and as listed below:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 551/581
1. Permanent Signs:
a. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body.
b. Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company.
c. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities.
d. Awning, canopy, marquee, projecting and suspended signs which are attached to private property but project over public property or a public rightof-
way in conformance with the provisions contained within the latest adopted Uniform Building Code and Uniform Sign Code.
2. Emergency Or Construction Signs: Emergency and construction warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a
contractor doing authorized or permitted work within public property or the public right-of-way.
3. Encroachment Permit: If a sign requires an encroachment permit under this chapter, then the terms and conditions of the encroachment permit may
be incorporated into the sign permit.
4. Removal Of Other Signs: All signs installed or placed on public property or in the public right-of-way not in conformance with this section may be
removed without complying with this chapter. Said signs shall be retained by the City for a period of not less than three (3) working days. Thereafter,
any unclaimed signs may be discarded. Should the City be required to remove any illegal sign pursuant to this section, the cost of removal shall be
assessed against the owner or person placing such sign.
5. Signs On City Property: Unless otherwise provided by this chapter or by City Council resolution, it is unlawful to display signs on public property
owned by the City. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-6: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs are subject to the provisions contained in chapter 21, "Nonconforming Buildings And Uses", of this title. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-7: SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE:
Noncommercial copy may be substituted for any commercial copy on any sign that is allowed by this chapter, whether permitted or exempt.
Noncommercial copy of any kind may be substituted for any other type of noncommercial copy on any sign that is allowed by this chapter whether by
permit or exemption. Message substitution may be made without additional City approval or permitting. This section prevails over any more specific
provision to the contrary within this chapter. The purpose of this section is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over any other
noncommercial message. This section does not create a right to increase the total number or size of signs on property, does not affect the permitting
requirements of this chapter, nor overrides terms and conditions in private contracts. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
15-18-8: ENFORCEMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Sign Classification: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may classify signs proposed in accordance with this chapter. Signs that do not clearly
fall within one of the definitions provided by this title must be placed in a classification based on the sign's design, location, physical characteristic, and
purpose. Unless appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to this Code, the Director's decision is final. The Director may refer any such request
to the Planning Commission for review.
B. Compliance With Codes: Signs must comply with applicable provisions of the latest adopted Building Code, Electrical Code, and Sign Code at the time
of permit issuance.
C. Permanent Materials: Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming with the provisions of this chapter, signs must be
constructed of permanent materials, and must be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall,
frame, or structure.
D. Maintenance: Signs permitted pursuant to this chapter must be maintained in good repair, structural condition, function properly, be free from defects
including, but not limited to, cracking, rusting, and peeling. Signs not so maintained will be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to
this Code.
E. Abatement Of Signs: When the permittee, property owner, or person in possession of control of the property fails to comply with the Director's order
requiring compliance with the chapter, the City may declare the sign as a public nuisance in accordance with title 7 of this Code. Once designated as a
nuisance, the City is authorized to abate the nuisance according to the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017)
Chapter 19
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
15-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these requirements and guidelines is to regulate the location and design of "wireless communication facilities" as defined herein to protect
the public safety, the general welfare, and the quality of life in the City, and to facilitate the orderly deployment and development of wireless
communications services in the City. The City Council has found and determined that these requirements and guidelines for wireless communication
facilities are necessary to attain such purpose. These regulations are intended to supersede applicable provisions of this Zoning Title pertaining to antenna
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 552/581
structures and appurtenant communications equipment and to establish minimum requirements and flexible guidelines for the governance of wireless
communications facilities, taking into consideration the rapid technological advances and the proliferation in use of radio communication services. (Ord.
1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: An "accessory structure" as defined in Section 15-1-6 of this Title.
ANTENNA STRUCTURE: An antenna, any structure designed specifically to support an antenna, and/or any appurtenances mounted on such structure or
antenna.
COLLOCATION OR COLLOCATED: The location of multiple antennas which are either owned or operated by more than one service provider at a single
location and mounted to a common supporting structure, wall or building.
COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICE: Any mobile service that: a) is offered in return for monetary compensation; b) is available to the public or a substantial
portion of the public; and c) provides subscribers with the ability to access or receive communication from the public switched telephone network.
Commercial mobile service includes, but is not limited to, paging service, wireless data transmission, cellular telephone service, specialized mobile radio
service (SMR), and personal communications service (PCS).
COORDINATED ANTENNA PROGRAM OR CAP: A coordinated program to preapprove multiple locations for proposed and potential future facilities.
DISGUISED FACILITY: Any wireless communication facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is
architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure.
FIXED WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service providing radio communication to or from antenna structures at fixed and specified locations which are not
designed to be moved during operation and which offers the ability to access or receive communication from the public switched telephone network.
GROUND MOUNTED: Mounted to a pole, lattice tower or other freestanding structure that is specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an
antenna.
LATTICE TOWER: A tower-like structure used to support antennas, typically with a height in excess of forty feet (40') and comprised of three (3) or four (4)
steel support legs.
MAJOR FACILITY: A wireless communication facility that is either ground mounted or roof mounted; provided, that a roof mounted facility screened on all
four (4) sides by solid material that is architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and does not exceed the maximum height of the
applicable zoning district shall be deemed a minor facility.
MICROWAVE COMMUNICATION: The transmission or reception of radio communication at frequencies of a microwave signal (generally, in the 3GHz to
300GHz frequency spectrum).
MINOR FACILITY: A wireless communication facility that is either: a) wall mounted; b) utility mounted; or c) roof mounted in such a manner that the entire
facility is screened by solid material on four (4) sides, is architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment, and does not exceed the maximum
height of the applicable zoning district.
MOBILE SERVICE: Any service providing radio communication to or from at least one antenna that is designed to be moved during operation or used
during halts at unspecified locations; or as otherwise defined in 47 USCS section 153 and interpreted by the Code of Federal Regulations and the Federal
Register.
MOUNTED: Any manner of attachment, support, or connection, whether on ground or on a structure.
MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICE: A microwave communication service that delivers video programming directly to subscribers, including
multichannel multipoint distribution services, instructional television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services, or as otherwise defined by
section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, section 1,4000 of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and any interpretive decisions thereof
issued by the Federal Communications Commission.
RADIO COMMUNICATION: The transmission and/or reception of impulses, writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds through space by
means of electromagnetic waves.
ROOF MOUNTED: A facility that is mounted on any structure that is not specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting antennas, in any manner
that does not satisfy either the definition of "wall mounted" or "utility mounted", typically mounted on the roof of an existing building.
UTILITY MOUNTED: A facility that is mounted to an existing aboveground structure specifically designed and originally installed to support electrical
power lines, cable television lines, street lighting, traffic signal equipment, park lighting or a structure on public or private property deemed by the City to be
similar in nature.
WALL MOUNTED: A facility that is mounted on any vertical or nearly vertical surface of a building or other existing structure that is not specifically
constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna (including without limitation the exterior walls of a building, an existing parapet, the side of a water
tank, the face of a church steeple, or the side of a freestanding sign) such that the highest point of the antenna structure is at an elevation equal to or lower
than the highest point of the surface on which it is mounted.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY OR FACILITY: An antenna structure and any appurtenant facilities or equipment located within City limits and
that is used in connection with the provision of wireless service.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Any type of wireless service providing radio communications that satisfies the definition of commercial mobile service, fixed
wireless service, or wireless video service.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 553/581
WIRELESS VIDEO SERVICE: Any service providing radio communication which delivers video programming. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-3: APPLICABILITY:
A. All facilities which are erected, located, or modified within the City on or following the effective date hereof shall comply with this Chapter, subject to the
categorical exemptions under subsection C of this Section, provided that:
1. All facilities for which applications were determined complete by the Community, Economic and Development Services Department prior to the
effective date hereof shall be exempt from the regulations and guidelines of this Chapter.
2. All facilities for which building permits were issued by the Community, Economic and Development Services Department prior to the effective date
hereof shall be exempt from the regulations and guidelines of this Chapter, unless and until such time as subsection B of this Section applies. (Ord.
1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
B. All facilities for which building permits and any extension thereof have expired shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
C. The following uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter until such time as Federal regulations are repealed or amended to eliminate the
necessity of the exemption:
1. Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter and is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including
direct-to-home satellite service, as defined by section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and
any interpretive decisions thereof issued by the Federal Communications Commission.
2. Any antenna structure that is two meters (2 m) (78.74 inches) or less in diameter located in a commercial or industrial zone and is designed to
transmit or receive radio communication by satellite antenna.
3. Any antenna structure that is one meter (1 m) (39.37 inches) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is designed to receive multipoint
distribution service; provided, that no part of the antenna structure extends more than twelve feet (12') above the principal building on the same lot.
D. The following uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
1. Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely to receive television broadcast transmission.
2. Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely in connection with authorized operations of an amateur radio station licensed by the FCC
(i.e., a "HAM" radio transmission). (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-4: DISTANCES:
For the purpose of this Chapter, all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the
proposed major facility to the relevant property line. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-5: REGULATIONS FOR ALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
A. Application Requirements And Procedures:
1. Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter shall submit: a) a site plan to the City which includes a description and visual diagram of the
location and design of the proposed facility; and b) a completed application for either a wireless communications facilities permit ("WCFP") or a
conditional use permit ("CUP"), in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapters 22 and 23 of this Title, and such additional or different
requirements as are made applicable by this Chapter. Any application that is improperly submitted or fails to contain all of the information as required
by this Chapter shall be deemed incomplete.
2. Each application shall contain a brief narrative accompanied by written documentation that explains and validates the applicant's efforts to locate the
facility in accordance with the screening and site selection guidelines set forth in subsection C of this Section.
3. Each application shall contain a narrative that discloses the exact location and nature of any and all existing facilities that are owned, operated or
used by the applicant and located within five (5) miles from the geographic borders of the City.
4. Each application shall contain a narrative and appropriate maps that disclose the geographic area within the City that are proposed to be serviced by
the proposed facility, the geographic area bordering the City, if any, that will be serviced by the proposed facility, the nature of the service to be
provided or purpose of the facility, the reasons, if any, why the applicant cannot locate the facility outside the City and the efforts, if any, that applicant
has made to locate the facility outside the City.
5. Notwithstanding any permit that may be granted in accordance with this Chapter, the facility shall be erected, located, operated and maintained at all
times in compliance with this Chapter and all applicable laws, regulations and requirements of the building code, and every other code and regulation
imposed or enforced by the City, the State, and the United States Federal Government. Applicants are separately required to obtain all applicable
building and construction permits that may be required prior to erecting or installing the facility.
B. Development Requirements: The facility shall comply with each of the following requirements:
1. The facility shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, public safety, warning, or other required seals or required signage.
(Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 554/581
2. Any and all accessory equipment, or other equipment associated with the operation of the facility, including, but not limited to, transmission cables,
shall be located within a building, enclosure, or underground vault in a manner that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in
which such equipment is located. In addition, if equipment is located above ground, it shall be visually compatible with the surrounding buildings and
either: a) shrouded by sufficient landscaping to screen the equipment from view; or b) designed to match the architecture of adjacent buildings. If no
recent and/or reasonable architectural theme is present, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services may require a particular
design that is deemed by the Director to be suitable to the subject location. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
3. The facility exterior shall be comprised of nonreflective material and painted or camouflaged to blend with surrounding materials and colors.
4. Any and all screening used in connection with a wall mounted and/or roof mounted facility shall be compatible with the architecture, color, texture
and materials of the building or other structure to which it is mounted.
C. Setback Requirements And Guidelines: The facility shall be considered an accessory structure. If the facility is located in a residential zone or within two
hundred feet (200') of a residential use, then the facility shall comply with the setback requirements for such zone. In all other instances, the extent of
compliance with the setback requirements for the zone in which the facility is located shall be considered, in accordance with the following guidelines,
by the City in connection with its processing of any facility permit.
D. Screening And Site Selection Guidelines: In addition to the above requirements, the following guidelines shall be considered by the City in connection
with its processing of any facility permit.
1. The extent to which the proposed facility blends into the surrounding environment or is architecturally integrated into a concealing structure, taking
into consideration alternate sites that are available.
2. The extent to which the proposed facility is screened or camouflaged by existing or proposed new topography, vegetation, buildings, or other
structures.
3. The total size of the proposed facility, particularly in relation to surrounding and supporting structures.
4. The location of the proposed facility and the extent to which it conforms to the following in order of preference (subsection D4a being the most
preferred):
a. Collocated with an existing facility or located at a preapproved location.
b. Attached to an existing structure such as an existing building, communication tower, church steeple or utility.
c. Located in an industrial zoning district.
d. Located in a commercial zoning district.
5. The availability of suitable alternative locations for the facility. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-6: MINOR FACILITIES:
The following requirements shall apply in addition to the requirements of Section 15-19-5 of this Chapter:
A. Requirement For Wireless Communications Facilities Permit ("WCFP"): Subject to subsections B and C of this Section, each minor facility that is not
specifically exempt under Section 15-19-3 of this Chapter must first obtain administrative approval of a WCFP in accordance with Chapter 22 of this
Title, and any additional or different requirements made applicable by this Chapter. If the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services
denies an application for a WCFP, (s)he shall make a written determination supported by findings that the proposed facility would cause significant
negative impacts on the public safety or welfare.
B. Residential Zones Require Conditional Use Permit: A minor facility shall not be located within a residential zone in the City unless such facility receives
Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit.
C. Height Requirements: Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, no minor facility, except utility mounted facilities, shall exceed the maximum
building height for the applicable zoning district unless such facility receives Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit, which permit
shall not be considered for approval unless:
1. The applicant demonstrates to the City's satisfaction that exceeding the height limitation is reasonably necessary for operation of the facility; or
2. The facility is collocated and the height in excess of zoning requirements is reasonably necessary to the proposed shared use.
D. Vertical Extension; Utility Mounted Facilities: A utility mounted facility may, if approved by the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services or Planning Commission, as appropriate, exceed the maximum building height limit for the applicable zoning district. The extent that the utility
mounted facility increases the height of the existing utility pole or structure, and the need for such height increase, shall be additional considerations
taken into account by the City in connection with its processing of any permit for a utility mounted facility. A utility mounted facility shall not increase the
height of a utility pole or structure by more than four feet (4') of its existing height unless such facility receives Planning Commission approval of a
conditional use permit.
E. Horizontal Extension; Utility Mounted Facilities: The extent that the utility mounted facility protrudes or extends horizontally from the existing utility pole
or structure, and the need for such extension, shall be additional considerations taken into account by the City in connection with its processing of any
permit for a utility mounted facility. A utility mounted facility may not protrude or extend horizontally more than eighteen inches (18") from the existing
utility pole or structure unless such utility mounted facility receives Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997;
amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 555/581
15-19-7: MAJOR FACILITIES:
The following requirements shall apply in addition to the requirements of Section 15-19-5 of this Chapter:
A. Requirement For Conditional Use Permit: Each major facility that is not specifically exempt under Section 15-19-3 of this Chapter must first obtain
Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 23 of this Title and any additional or different requirements
made applicable by this Chapter. If the Planning Commission denies any application for a conditional use permit, it shall make a written determination
supported by findings that the proposed facility would cause significant negative impacts on the public safety or welfare.
B. Location Requirements:
1. Lattice towers shall not be located in: a) any part of Zones C-RS or C-2; b) any area zoned for residential use; or c) any part of Zone C-3 located
west of Sepulveda Boulevard. Lattice towers may be permitted in all other zones; provided, however, that they shall not be located within one
hundred feet (100') of any property containing a residential structure.
2. No portion or extension of a major facility shall protrude beyond property lines or extend into any portion of property where such facility is not itself
permitted; provided, however, that the City may approve the location of guy wires in a required setback if such approval is consistent with the
guidelines and requirements set forth in this Chapter.
3. A ground mounted facility shall not be located in a required parking area, vehicle maneuvering area, vehicle/pedestrian circulation area or area of
landscaping such that it interferes with, or in any way impairs, the utility or intended function of such area. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
C. Additional Design Requirements:
1. A ground mounted facility shall be secured from access by the general public with a fence of a type and design approved by either the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services or the Planning Commission.
2. A ground mounted facility shall be covered with a clear anti-graffiti material of a type approved by the Director of Community, Economic and
Development Services. The City may grant an exception to this requirement if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City that there is
adequate security around the facility to prevent graffiti. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
D. Height Requirements: Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, no major facility shall exceed the maximum building height for the applicable
zoning district unless such facility receives Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit, which permit shall not be considered for
approval unless:
1. The applicant demonstrates to the City's satisfaction that exceeding the height limitation is reasonably necessary for operation of the facility; or
2. The facility is collocated and the height in excess of zoning requirements is reasonably necessary to the proposed shared use.
E. Additional Screening And Site Selection Guidelines: In addition to the above requirements, the following guidelines shall be considered by the City in
connection with its processing of any facility permit:
1. A major facility should not be located within two hundred feet (200') of any property containing a residential use.
2. A major facility should be located at least five hundred feet (500') from the nearest existing, legally established major facility (except in the event that
such facility is collocated).
3. A ground mounted facility should be located in close proximity to existing aboveground utilities, such as electrical tower or utility poles (not scheduled
for removal or undergrounding in the next 18 months), light poles, trees of comparable height, water tanks and other areas where the facility will not
detract from the image or appearance of the City.
4. A roof mounted facility that extends above the existing parapet of the building on which it is mounted should be screened by a material and in a
manner that is compatible with the existing design and architecture of the building.
5. A roof mounted facility, and any guy wires, supporting structures and accessory equipment should be located and designed so as to minimize the
visual impact as viewed from surrounding properties and public streets.
6. No part of a ground mounted facility should be located in any required setback. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-8: PUBLIC PROPERTY FACILITIES:
A. Preapproved Locations:
1. The City will approve by resolution, following a duly noticed public hearing, a list of sites which may be located on public property or within the public
right of way and which are approved for major facilities. Each site shall include a description of permissible development and design characteristics,
including, but not limited to, maximum height requirements. The City shall make said resolution available to all persons upon request. The approved
list of locations may be subsequently amended by resolution from time to time.
2. All facilities located on a public property site which is preapproved in accordance with subsection B1 of this Section following the effective date
hereof must obtain administrative approval of a WCFP in accordance with Chapter 22 of this Title, and any additional or different requirements made
applicable by this Chapter.
3. All leases of public property which are preapproved in accordance with subsection B1 of this Section shall be nonexclusive. The operator of a facility
located on such public property shall make the supporting structure of the facility available to any other applicant wishing to collocate to the extent
technically feasible.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 556/581
B. Requirement For Separate Lease Agreement: Any lease of City-owned property for the purpose of erecting a wireless communications facility shall
require a negotiated lease agreement or other written license granted by the City. The existence of a lease agreement or license shall not relieve
applicant of any obligations to obtain appropriate permits as required by this Code. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
15-19-9: COORDINATED ANTENNA PLANS:
A. Requirements: Any wireless service provider may apply for Planning Commission approval of a coordinated antenna plan (CAP) to obtain preapproval
for the use of proposed and potential future locations for facilities, subject to the following requirements:
1. The CAP shall specify permissible development and design characteristics for identified future locations, including, but not limited to, maximum
height and size, type of supporting structure, and type of antenna.
2. The CAP shall identify potential future locations by lot and parcel number.
3. Applications for a CAP may be considered by the Planning Commission after holding a noticed public hearing thereon in accordance with Chapter 27
of this Title.
4. Following Planning Commission approval of a CAP, each facility that complies with the specifications of the CAP may be approved subject to an
administrative WCFP in accordance with the requirements set forth and referenced herein. Except for the type of permit, nothing in this Section shall
relieve the applicant of the obligation to comply with the regulations, requirements, and guidelines as required by this Chapter, and the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services may deny a WCFP, or place conditions upon its approval, notwithstanding prior approval of a CAP.
5. Any conditions placed on the approval of a WCFP for a facility which complies with the CAP shall not be inconsistent with the specifications of the
CAP.
6. The CAP shall not vest any permanent rights to use the preapproved locations for facilities beyond the date of expiration. Unless extended, the CAP
shall expire twenty four (24) months following its approval by the Planning Commission regardless of whether any WCFP has been granted pursuant
to the CAP. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, after written request therefor, extend the term of the CAP for up to twenty four (24)
additional months; no CAP shall continue longer than forty eight (48) months.
B. Findings: The Planning Commission shall approve a CAP based upon the following findings:
1. The intent and purpose of this Chapter, and all its regulations and requirements will be preserved.
2. Any future facility complying with the specifications imposed by the CAP will not have a significant adverse impact on the subject site or surrounding
community beyond those impacts considered in the approval of the CAP.
3. Any future facilities within the specifications of the CAP will be consistent with the General Plan and the uses permitted in this Zoning Title, subject to
subsequent approval of a WCFP.
C. Application Procedures: Each applicant for a CAP shall submit the following information:
1. Written application on a form prescribed by the Community, Economic and Development Services Department.
2. A map clearly indicating the following information:
a. Lot and parcel dimensions for proposed locations.
b. Location, size, height and use of all existing buildings and structures on the proposed location and abutting properties.
c. Location, height, and description of all existing aboveground utility facilities on the proposed location and abutting properties.
d. Location, size, and dimensions of all existing yards, setbacks, landscape areas, parking, walls, fences, and spaces between structures on the
proposed location and abutting properties.
e. Any other information as may be required by the Community, Economic and Development Services Department.
3. Written statement indicating for each location: a) the proposed maximum height of the facility; b) the anticipated type of antenna structure; c) any
anticipated accessory equipment to be located on the site; d) proposed screening materials, if any, in general terms; and e) willingness to collocate
on the proposed location.
4. All applicable permit processing fees as established by resolution. An additional permit fee for each proposed facility shall be submitted with each
subsequent application for a WCFP, and with each request for modification of a permit.
D. Modification Procedures: Subsequent approval of a WCFP for a major facility subject to a CAP requires strict compliance with the specifications of the
CAP (in addition to any additional conditions of the WCFP); provided, however, that the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services
may approve a minor modification of the CAP concurrent with an application for a WCFP. For the purposes of this Section, a minor modification shall
include any adjustment to the approved specifications of the CAP which: 1) does not increase the height of the facility by more than five percent (5%)
from the approved maximum height; 2) does not move the location of the facility closer to any approved location; 3) does not move the location of the
facility within two hundred feet (200') of a residential property or school facility; and 4) does not otherwise significantly increase the adverse impacts
upon the subject site or surrounding community. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-19-10: APPEAL OR REVIEW AND NOTICES:
Any applicant or the operator and/or owner of a facility may appeal a final decision of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services or
Planning Commission. All appeals shall be processed as provided by Chapters 25 and 27 of this Title. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 557/581
15-19-11: RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO REVIEW PERMITS:
A. Changed Circumstance: Any conditional use permit or WCFP granted or approved pursuant to this Chapter shall be granted or approved by the City
and its Planning Commission with the reservation of the right and jurisdiction to review and modify the permit (including the conditions of approval)
based on changed circumstances. Changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following in relation to the approved facility as described
and diagramed in the related site plan: increased height or size of the facility; additional impairment of the views from surrounding properties; change in
the type of antenna or supporting structure; changed color or materials; substantial change in location on the site; and an effective increase in signal
output above or near the maximum permissible exposure (MPE) limits imposed by the revised radio frequency emissions guidelines by the Federal
Communications Commission.
B. Additional Right To Revoke For Violation: The reservation of right to review any permit granted or approved hereunder by the City, its Planning
Commission and/or City Council is in addition to, and not in lieu of, the right of the City, its Planning Commission and/or City Council to review and
revoke or modify any permit granted or approved hereunder for any violations of the conditions imposed on such permit. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997)
C. Modification Of Permit; Collocation: Upon review, any changed circumstance as determined by the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services shall require the application and approval of a modification to the original WCFP or conditional use permit; provided, that any modification to
accommodate collocated facilities may be approved administratively without the approval of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-1997; amd.
Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-19-12: FACILITY REMOVAL:
A. Discontinued Use: The operator of a lawfully erected facility, and the owner of the premises upon which it is located, shall promptly notify the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services in writing in the event that use of the facility is discontinued for any reason. In the event that
discontinued use is permanent, then the owner and/or operator shall promptly remove the facility, repair any damage to the premises caused by such
removal, and restore the premises as appropriate such as to be in conformance with applicable zoning codes. All such removal, repair and restoration
shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the use is discontinued, and shall be performed in accordance with all applicable health and safety
requirements. For purposes of this subsection, a discontinued use shall be permanent unless the facility is reasonably likely to be operative and used
within the immediately following three (3) month period.
B. Abandonment: A facility that is inoperative or unused for a period of six (6) continuous months shall be deemed abandoned. Written notice of the City's
determination of abandonment shall be provided to the operator of the facility and the owner of the premises upon which the facility is located. Such
notice may be delivered in person, or mailed to the address stated on the facility permit application, and shall be deemed given at the time delivered or
placed in the mail. A written notice of the City's determination of abandonment shall be mailed or delivered to the operator of the facility at the address
stated in the relevant permit application.
C. Removal Of Abandoned Facility Or Hearing: The operator of the facility and the owner of the property on which it is located, shall within thirty (30) days
after notice of abandonment is given either: 1) remove the facility and restore the premises, or 2) provide the Community, Economic and Development
Services Department with written objection to the City's determination of abandonment and request for hearing before the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 27 of this Title. If a written objection is timely received and a
hearing is properly requested, the procedures for hearings, notices and related fees set forth in Chapter 27 of this Title shall apply. The operator and/or
owner shall be given the opportunity to provide evidence that the facility was in use during the relevant six (6) month period and that it is presently
operational. The operator and/or owner shall be given the opportunity to cross-examine any evidence provided by the City to the contrary. The Director
of Community, Economic and Development Services shall review all evidence, determine whether or not the facility was properly deemed abandoned,
and provide the operator notice of its determination.
D. Removal By City: The City may remove the abandoned facility, repair any and all damage to the premises caused by such removal, and otherwise
restore the premises as is appropriate to be in compliance with applicable code at any time: 1) after thirty (30) days following the notice of
abandonment; or 2) following a notice of decision by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services, if applicable, subject to the
owner/operator's right of appeal under Chapter 25 of this Title. The City may, but shall not be required to, store the removed facility (or any part
thereof). The owner of the premises upon which the abandoned facility was located, and all prior operators of the facility, shall be jointly liable for the
entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and storage, and shall remit payment to the City promptly after demand therefor is made. The City may,
in lieu of storing the removed facility, convert it to the City's use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed by the City to be appropriate.
E. Penalties: The operator of the facility, and the owners of the premises upon which it is located, shall be in violation of this Chapter for failure to timely
comply with any requirements hereunder. Each such person shall be subject to penalties for each such violation, pursuant to Section 15-28-2 of this
Title.
F. City Lien On Property: Until the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage is paid in full, a lien shall be placed on the abandoned personal property
and any real property on which the facility was located, for the full amount of the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage. The Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services shall cause the lien to be recorded in the County of Los Angeles Recorder's office. (Ord. 1275, 8-19-
1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
Chapter 20
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
15-20-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to facilitate orderly business development and provide for the public benefit without increasing the total NFA permitted
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 558/581
under the General Plan. The goal of transfer of development rights is to reduce the impacts of potential increased development on properties west of
Sepulveda Boulevard and allow new development east of Sepulveda Boulevard, while minimizing traffic impacts and maximizing the public benefit. This
Chapter provides for the transfer of a minimum of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet of net floor area (NFA) between properties under common
ownership. Transfers may only occur from properties west of Sepulveda Boulevard, located in the C-3 and C-O Zones, to properties east of Sepulveda
Boulevard and located in the C-3, CO, MU-N, and M-1 Zones. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
15-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, whenever used in this Chapter, shall apply only to the transfer of development rights procedures as provided for in this Chapter:
DONOR SITE: A parcel located west of Sepulveda Boulevard and located within the C-3 or CO Zone from which NFA is being transferred pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter.
RECEIVING SITE: A parcel located east of the easterly right-of-way line of Sepulveda Boulevard, which does not abut or take access from Sepulveda
Boulevard, and located within the C-3, CO, MU-N, or M-1 Zone that receives NFA from a donor site pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
TRAFFIC ANALYSIS ZONE (TAZ): A specific area in the City of El Segundo which has been identified for traffic study and mitigation purposes.
TRANSFER: The transfer of the unused allowable NFA of a parcel from a donor site to a receiving site, which is approved in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRs): Allowing a property to increase its building square footage above that permitted by the floor area ratio
(FAR) standards by purchasing allowed building square footage from another site.
TRANSFER PLAN: A plan that identifies and describes the donor site, receiving site, amount of the NFA to be transferred, the proposed uses of the donor
site and receiving site, the public benefit of the transfer, and the proposed conditions of approval. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
15-20-3: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, no building permit shall be issued for any project that is inconsistent with the zoning
restrictions on the lot, except for FAR restrictions.
B. Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter to the contrary, only properties east of Sepulveda Boulevard, which do not abut or take access from
Sepulveda Boulevard, can qualify as a receiving site. (Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
15-20-4: APPROVAL OF TRANSFERS; PROCEDURE:
A. Application: Any person who owns both the donor site and the receiving site may apply for a transfer of NFA by submitting a written application for a
transfer to the Community, Economic and Development Services Department that identifies the donor site, receiving site, the amount of NFA proposed
to be transferred, and the proposed uses of the donor site and receiving site.
B. Review By Planning Commission: The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny a transfer plan. The Planning Commission
shall use the following criteria in making its determination:
1. That the transfer plan is in accord with the objectives of this Title and the purposes of the zone in which the sites are located.
2. That the proposed transfer plan will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in
the vicinity.
3. That the proposed transfer plan complies with each of the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
4. That the donor site and receiving site are located within the same traffic analysis zone (TAZ) as identified in Exhibit A located at the end of this
Section.
5. That the total square footage of the transfer may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total buildout square footage for each zone, as specified in the
General Plan summary of buildout (Exhibit LU-3).
6. That the proposed transfer plan recognizes and compensates for potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed transfer, such as
aesthetics, noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards.
7. That the proposed transfer plan provides a public benefit such as improved traffic circulation, open space, recreation facilities, landscaping,
pedestrian access, or other improvements which benefit the public.
8. That the proposed transfer plan is consistent with the General Plan.
C. Notice And Hearing: Upon filing of an application for a transfer plan by a property owner or an applicant with the consent of the owner, the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services shall give public notice, as provided in Chapter 27 of this Title of the intention to consider at a public
hearing the granting of a transfer plan. The notice shall be provided for the areas surrounding both the donor and receiving sites.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 559/581
D. Appeal To City Council: The applicant or any person affected by the Planning Commission's decision respecting a transfer plan can appeal the Planning
Commission's decision to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 25 of this Title.
E. Final Approval: A transfer plan approved by Planning Commission and/or City Council shall become final upon the completion of all applicable
conditions of approval and the following:
1. Recorded Covenant: A covenant in a form approved by the City Attorney shall be recorded against the donor site and receiving site setting forth the
details of the transfer plan and any conditions of approval imposed by the Planning Commission and/or the City Council. The covenant shall be
executed by all parties that have a legal or equitable interest in the donor site or the receiving site. The covenant shall reflect that from the date of
recording of the covenant that the donor site and receiving site shall thereafter in perpetuity be burdened by the covenant and the FAR for the donor
site and receiving site will be set in the covenant pursuant to the FAR allowed at the time of approval of the transfer plan. The Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services may approve the removal of the covenant from the properties if the transfer has not been utilized by the
receiving site and the legal and equitable owners of the property execute a request for removal in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. Any
modification to an approved transfer plan must be submitted to the City for review utilizing the procedures set forth in this Chapter for approval of a
transfer plan. Recording, modifying or removing a covenant shall require a title insurance policy as set forth below. (Ord. 1286, 3-18-1998; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000)
2. Title Insurance: Prior to recording, modifying or removing a covenant pursuant to subsection E1 of this Section, the applicant shall secure a title
insurance policy benefiting the City in an amount equal to the value of the NFA being transferred. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs
associated with procuring title insurance, including without limitation the cost of appraising the value of the NFA proposed to be transferred.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 560/581
(Ord. 1286, 3-17-1998)
Chapter 21
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
15-21-1: PURPOSE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 561/581
A. Establish Criteria: The purpose of this chapter is to establish provisions for the continued use, modification or removal of nonconforming buildings or
uses. A nonconforming building or use is one that was lawfully established and maintained, but due to changes in this title or other governmental
actions, such building or use no longer complies with the provisions of this title. A nonconforming building, or portion of a building, or use shall
constitute a nonconforming use of the property.
B. Eventual Compliance: It is also the intent of this chapter to permit nonconformities to continue until they are removed. In addition, nonconformities shall
not be enlarged, expanded, extended, altered, moved, reestablished after abandonment or restored after destruction, except as provided by this
chapter. It is the goal of this chapter to require nonconforming uses to be altered to conform to the current requirements of this title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-
1993)
15-21-2: CHAPTER APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to buildings, structures, lands and uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to any reclassification of
zones which occurred through the adoption of a new General Plan and subsequent rezoning actions to provide consistency with the General Plan. Any
uses which become nonconforming due to these actions shall be considered legal nonconforming uses and structures. If a use originally authorized by
variance prior to the effective date hereof is located within a zone in which such use is not permitted by the terms of this title, the use shall acquire a legal
nonconforming status. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-21-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following conditions apply to nonconforming uses and structures:
A. Safety: All nonconforming structures may undergo necessary maintenance to provide for their safe and habitable use.
B. Building Removal; Future Use: If any nonconforming building is voluntarily removed, every future use of the land on which the building is located must
conform to this Code.
C. Reestablish Damaged Or Destroyed Building: Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, a nonconforming use or structure that is damaged or
destroyed by fire, earthquake, or other calamity beyond the property owner's control may be reestablished subject to the provisions of this title if a
building permit is issued within twenty four (24) months of the occurrence of the damage or destruction. All nonconforming rights expire if a building
permit is not issued within twenty four (24) months.
D. Building Additions, Alterations, Remodel Or Reconstruction: A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, restored, remodeled or
reconstructed, or may include an addition, provided that no more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing original "exterior perimeter wall height" (as
defined) is removed, demolished or replaced. If more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing perimeter wall height and the original foundation is
removed, demolished, or replaced, the entire building or structure must be brought into conformity with all current development standards and laws.
The foundation must not be removed and a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the exterior perimeter walls must remain attached to the foundation at all
times. Solely removing exterior wall coverings, including wall insulation, electrical wiring, plumbing or interior plaster or drywall finishes does not require
that the entire building be brought into conformity with all current development standards within the zone in which the property is located.
E. Minor Exceptions For Building Additions, Alterations, Remodel, Or Reconstruction: The Director of Planning and Building Safety may grant
administrative adjustments for a reduction of retention of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of exterior perimeter wall height for life safety repairs or
upgrades, regardless of whether those repairs or upgrades exceed the fifty percent (50%) threshold for nonconforming buildings set forth in this
section. The upgrades must be incidental and necessary to protect public health and safety. The administrative adjustment must be granted before any
removal of any exterior perimeter wall in excess of fifty percent (50%) occurs. (Ord. 1460, 4-19-2011)
15-21-4: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A lot of record existing before the effective date hereof, which does not conform to the area and dimension standards of this title, may be used in
accordance with other provisions of this title. Even though such a lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, for a particular zone, it may
be used; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width of the lot be observed. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-21-5: RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTIONS:
All legal or legal nonconforming structures within any residential zone, in existence as of the effective date hereof, which are now legal nonconforming or
become legal nonconforming due to changes in the land use designation or zoning criteria under this title, are permitted to continue and remodel or
expand, provided all of the following requirements are met:
A. Where a side yard setback is nonconforming, the width of the existing side yard cannot be decreased or made more nonconforming due to remodeling
or reconstruction;
B. A nonconforming structure may expand, provided the expansion meets all the applicable criteria of this title; and
C. All new construction and additions where a building or structure is nonconforming and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing original exterior
perimeter wall height and foundation below is removed, replaced or rebuilt in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1460, 4-19-2011)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 562/581
15-21-6: NONRESIDENTIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Except as otherwise provided for the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, all legal or legal nonconforming uses or buildings, in existence as of the effective date
hereof, within the nonresidential use categories and all previously designated commercial properties which have been designated Multi-Family Residential
Zones by the 1992 general plan, with the exception of Smoky Hollow, which are now legal nonconforming or become legal nonconforming due to changes
in the land use designation or zoning criteria under this title, are permitted to expand or remodel subject to the following requirements: (Ord. 1460, 4-19-
2011)
A. Until May 6, 2006, a nonconforming building or nonconforming use within any commercial or industrial zoning category may be increased one time by a
maximum of twenty percent (20%) or fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, whichever is less. The expansion itself must meet the requirements of this
title related to setbacks, lot coverage, height and parking, but is not required to compensate for any deficiency or nonconformity in the original building
or use. Expansions allowed by this section before May 6, 2006, require a conditional use permit issued pursuant to sections 15-23-4 to 15-23-13 of this
title. Wherever these sections refer to the proposed "use" the term "expansion" shall be utilized for purposes of making a determination under this
section. (Ord. 1398, 10-3-2006)
B. After May 6, 2006, a nonconforming building or nonconforming use within any commercial or industrial zoning category may be increased up to the
maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) as determined by this title or the El Segundo general plan. The expansion must meet the requirements of this
title related to setbacks, lot coverage, height and parking, but is not required to compensate for any deficiency or nonconformity in the original building
or use, except as follows:
1. In the Urban Mixed Use South (MU-S) Zone, architectural building features may project up to five feet (5') from the existing building face into
required setback areas, but must maintain at least a fifteen foot (15') distance to a lot line. (Ord. 1496, 10-14-2014)
C. Except as otherwise provided for the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, if a nonconforming building remains vacant for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months, it must be upgraded to meet all requirements of this title before occupancy, except buildings which are actively available for lease and
occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to permit or subject to section 15-21-3 of this chapter are not considered vacant for purposes of this
section.
D. Except as otherwise provided for the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone, a nonconforming use in a conforming or nonconforming building may be replaced
with another similar nonconforming use, provided the building is not vacant for more than twelve (12) consecutive months, except buildings which are
actively available for lease and occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to permit or subject to section 15-21-3 of this chapter, are not considered
vacant for purposes of this section. (Ord. 1398, 10-3-2006)
15-21-7: RESTRICTIONS FOR THE HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (M-2) ZONE:
A. If a nonconforming building within a Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone remains vacant for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it must be upgraded to meet
all requirements of this title before occupancy, except buildings that are actively available for lease and occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to
permit or subject to section 15-21-3 of this chapter are not considered vacant for purposes of this section.
B. A nonconforming use in a conforming or nonconforming building located within the Heavy Industrial (M-2) Zone may be replaced with another similar
nonconforming use, provided the building is not vacant for more than six (6) consecutive months, except buildings that are actively available for lease
and occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to permit or subject to section 15-21-3 of this chapter, are not considered vacant for purposes of this
section. (Ord. 1398, 10-3-2006; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
15-21-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A nonconforming sign may not be:
A. Changed to another nonconforming sign or replaced by the same nonconforming sign, except for face changes;
B. Structurally or electrically expanded or altered unless such alteration is designed to and does bring the sign into greater conformance with current
provisions of this title and/or Building and Electrical Codes;
C. Relocated to another site on the same property or any other property within the City;
D. Reestablished after discontinuance of the use for ninety (90) days or more; or
E. Reestablished after damage or destruction of more than fifty percent (50%) of the value of the structure of the sign prior to said damage or destruction.
(Ord. 1559, 10-17-2017; amd. Ord. 1573, 10-2-2018)
Chapter 22
ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS
15-22-1: PURPOSE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 563/581
The administrative determination and administrative use permit (AUP) processes provide expeditious methods for determining and approving the types of
uses permitted within individual zoning districts. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-22-2: ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATION:
When a use is not specifically listed as either a permitted use or conditional use under a particular zone, and when that use is proposed or classification of
the use is requested, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services upon written request or upon his own initiative, shall determine
whether said use is sufficiently similar to a listed use in the particular zone to justify a finding that it should be deemed either a permitted use, a conditional
use or that an administrative use permit is necessary in one or more zones. Before permitting or classifying an unlisted use, the Director shall first
determine that all of the following conditions exist:
A. The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this Title;
B. The proposed use and its operation are compatible with the uses allowed in the zone; and
C. The proposed use is similar to one or more uses in the zone. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-22-3: ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT FILING AND REVIEW PROCESS:
To initiate the review process, a petition for an AUP shall be filed with the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services on forms
provided by the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services. Within five (5) working days of filing a petition, the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services shall notify the applicant as to the completeness of the application. The Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services shall have the authority to request any additional information deemed necessary to evaluate the application. Failure
of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services to respond within five (5) working days shall deem the application complete. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-22-4: DECISION:
Within ten (10) working days from the date an application is deemed complete, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall
issue a written determination as to the approval or denial of the application. The written determination shall state the findings for decisions. In approving an
application, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall have the authority to attach conditions to the approval deemed
necessary. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-22-5: FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS:
A. Conditions: Before an administrative use permit may be granted, it shall be found that:
1. There is compatibility of the particular use on the particular site in relationship to other existing and potential uses within the general area in which
the use is proposed to be located.
2. The proposed use is consistent and compatible with the purpose of the zone in which the site is located.
3. The proposed location and use and the conditions under which the use would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.
4. Potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed use, such as noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards have been
recognized and compensated for.
B. Alcohol-Related Use: In addition to the four (4) findings above, before an alcohol-related administrative use permit may be granted, it shall also be
found that:
The State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control has issued or will issue a license to sell alcohol to the applicant.
C. Video Arcade Use: In addition to the four (4) findings detailed in subsection A of this Section, before an administrative use permit for a video arcade
may be granted, the performance criteria in subsection 15-2-15A of this Title must be evaluated. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-22-6: EXPEDITIOUS REVIEW PROCESS:
An expedited AUP shall provide for the processing of a completed AUP within a period not to exceed five (5) total working days. The written determination
shall be subject to the same review and appeal process described in Sections 15-22-3 and 15-22-4 of this Chapter. The Director of Community, Economic
and Development Services is authorized to select and utilize the services of a consultant, paid for by the applicant, for purposes of processing the
expedited review and written determination. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-22-7: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
Written determinations on administrative use permits, made by the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall be placed as
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 564/581
receive and file items on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission. Prior to the written determination being placed on a Planning Commission
agenda, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall give public notice, as provided for in Chapter 27 of this Title, of the
intention of the Planning Commission to receive and file the determination of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. Any
Planning Commissioner may request that an item be discussed and a decision on the application be made by the Planning Commission instead of
received and filed. No decision of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services is final until the decision is received and filed or acted
upon by the Planning Commission or upheld on appeal. (Ord. 1260, 9-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-22-8: APPEALS:
All appeals shall be processed as provided by Chapter 25 of this Title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 23
VARIANCES AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
15-23-1: PURPOSE OF VARIANCE:
The purpose of any variance is to allow for deviations from the standards contained in this Title. Those standards which are determined at the discretion of
the Planning Commission, City Council, or administratively shall not be subject to the variance process. However, a variance shall not grant a special
privilege not shared by other property in the same vicinity and zone. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-23-2: AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCE:
When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general purpose of this Title result through the strict and literal
interpretation and enforcement of the provisions thereof, the Planning Commission shall have authority, subject to the provisions of this Title, to grant upon
such conditions as it may determine such variance from the provisions of this Title as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so that the
spirit of this Title shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. A variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this
Section shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-23-3: VARIANCE; FINDINGS:
Before any variance may be granted, it shall be found:
A. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property or to the intended use that do not apply generally to
the other property or class of use in the same vicinity and zone;
B. That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and
zone but which is denied to the property in question;
C. That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvement in such vicinity and
zone in which the property is located; and
D. That the granting of the variance will not adversely affect the General Plan. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-23-4: AUTHORITY TO GRANT CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The Planning Commission may grant a conditional use permit upon application for such uses allowed by this Title other than for alcohol sales at bars. The
authority to approve conditional use permits for alcohol sales at bars rests with the City Council. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing
for any conditional use permit application for alcohol sales at bars and make a recommendation to the City Council, whose decision is final. (Ord. 1239, 11-
21-1995)
15-23-5: PURPOSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The purpose of a conditional use permit shall be:
A. To assure the compatibility of the particular use on the particular site in relationship to other existing and potential uses within the general area in which
the use is proposed to be located;
B. To assure the proposed use is consistent and compatible with the purpose of the zone in which the site is located; and
C. To recognize and compensate for potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed use, such as noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors,
traffic and hazards. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 565/581
15-23-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT FINDINGS:
A. General: Before a conditional use permit may be granted, it shall be found:
1. That the proposed location of the conditional use is in accord with the objectives of this Title and the purposes of the zone in which the site is
located;
2. That the proposed location of the conditional use and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and
3. That the proposed conditional use will comply with each of the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
B. Alcohol Sales: Before a conditional use permit may be granted for the sale of alcohol, it shall be found that:
1. The State Department of Alcohol Beverage Control has issued or will issue a license to sell alcohol to the applicant;
2. There is compatibility of the particular use on the particular site in relationship to other existing and potential uses within the general area in which
the use is proposed to be located;
3. The proposed use is consistent and compatible with the purpose of the zone in which the site is located;
4. The proposed location and use and the conditions under which the use would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and
5. Potential impacts that could be generated by the proposed use, such as noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vibration, odors, traffic and hazards have been
recognized and compensated for.
C. Video Arcades: In addition to the three (3) findings detailed in subsection A of this Section, before a conditional use permit for a video arcade may be
granted, the performance criteria in subsection 15-2-15B of this Title must be evaluated. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-23-7: NOTICE AND HEARING:
Upon the filing of an application for a variance or conditional use permit by a property owner or an applicant with the consent of the owner, the Director of
Community, Economic and Development Services shall give public notice, as provided in Chapter 27 of this Title, of the intention to consider at a public
hearing the granting of a variance or conditional use permit. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-23-8: PUBLIC HEARING:
A. Decision: Not more than forty (40) calendar days following the termination of the proceedings of the public hearing on a variance or conditional use
permit, the Planning Commission shall announce its findings by formal resolution. The resolution shall recite, among other things, the facts and findings
which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, make the granting or denial of the variance or conditional use permit necessary to carry out the
provisions and general purpose of this Title, and shall order the variance or conditional use permit be granted or denied. If the resolution orders the
variance or conditional use permit be granted, it shall also recite such conditions and limitations as the Planning Commission may impose. (Ord. 1212,
11-16-1993)
B. Record: The formal resolution of the Planning Commission announcing its findings shall become a permanent record in the files of the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-23-9: PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION AND ACTION:
A. Notice: Upon rendering of a decision ordering a variance or conditional use permit be granted or denied, a copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the
applicant at the address shown on the application filed with the Planning Commission and to any other person requesting a copy. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-
1993)
B. Effective Date Of Action: The action of the Planning Commission in granting or denying a variance or conditional use permit shall become final and
effective the day following the end of the ten (10) day appeal period, unless a written appeal is filed with the City Council as provided by Chapter 25 of
this Title. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-23-10: ALCOHOL SALES:
A. City Council Hearing Procedure: Within forty (40) calendar days following the termination of the proceedings of the Planning Commission public
hearing, the City Council shall conduct a duly advertised public hearing on the matter and review the Planning Commission's recommendations. Public
notice shall be given as provided in Chapter 27 of this Title.
B. Council Decision; Announcement: The City Council shall announce its decision by resolution not more than forty (40) calendar days following the
termination of proceedings of the hearing.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 566/581
C. Notice Of Decision: Following the adoption by the City Council of a resolution ordering action on a conditional use permit for alcohol sales at bars, one
copy of the resolution shall be forwarded to the applicant at the address shown upon the application, and one copy shall be attached to the file. (Ord.
1239, 11-21-1995)
15-23-11: LAPSE OF APPROVAL:
Approval of a variance or conditional use permit shall lapse under the following provision:
A. Variance:
1. A variance shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date on which the variance became effective, unless prior to the expiration of
one year:
a. A valid building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the
variance application; or
b. A certificate of occupancy is issued authorizing occupancy of the site or structure which was the subject of the variance application; or
c. The site is occupied if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required; or
d. Unless by conditions of the variance a greater time is allowed. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
2. A variance subject to lapse may be renewed for an additional period to be specified by the Planning Commission; provided, that prior to the
expiration date, a written request for renewal of the variance is filed with the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
3. The Planning Commission may grant or deny an application for renewal of a variance for due cause.
B. Conditional Use Permit:
1. A conditional use permit issued under the terms of this Chapter shall expire twenty four (24) months after its approval if the use has not commenced;
or if improvements are required, but construction has not commenced under a valid building permit.
2. The expiration of the approved conditional use permit shall terminate all proceedings. The City shall not be responsible to notify the applicant of a
pending expiration.
3. For purposes of this Title, work shall be deemed to have been commenced at such time as any portion of the on-site improvements shall be placed
in or on the real property and affixed thereto in permanent position. Upon application made not less than ten (10) days prior to the lapsing of a
permit, the Planning Commission shall have authority to extend the period mentioned in subsection B1 of this Section for an additional period of sixty
(60) days. The Planning Commission shall have the power in its discretion to require a public hearing on any such application for an extension upon
such notice as it shall prescribe. In the event the Planning Commission denies the extension, the applicant may, within ten (10) days of the decision
of the Planning Commission, appeal the decision to the City Council and the decision of the City Council thereon shall be final. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-
1993)
15-23-12: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF APPROVAL:
Upon violation of any applicable provision of this Chapter, or if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, or if approval was
obtained by fraud, a variance or conditional use permit shall be suspended automatically. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing within forty
(40) days, in accord with the procedure prescribed in Section 15-23-7 of this Chapter, and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, or condition
is being complied with, may revoke the approval or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision, or
condition. Within ten (10) days following the date of a decision of the Planning Commission concerning revocation of a permit, the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services shall transmit to the City Council written notice of the decision. The decision shall become final thirty (30) days
following the date of the Planning Commission decision unless an appeal has been filed in accordance with Chapter 25 of this Title within the prescribed
ten (10) day appeal period. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-23-13: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
Conditions of approval may be set for either a variance or conditional use permit. Such conditions may include establishing limits on the duration a use
permit may exist. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 24
ADJUSTMENTS
15-24-1: GRANTING:
Whenever a strict interpretation of the provisions of this title or its application to any specific case or situation pertaining to the following items would result
in the unreasonable deprivation of the use or enjoyment of property, an adjustment or an administrative adjustment may be granted, subject to the
following restrictions. Adjustments may be granted to allow:
A. A fence, wall, or hedge up to a maximum height of eight feet (8').
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 567/581
B. Architectural landscape features which exceed the standards set forth in section 15-2-14 of this title.
C. Signs which exceed the standards set forth in chapter 18 of this title.
D. Noise permits which exceed the standards set forth in section 7-2-11 of this Code.
E. Parking and loading space standards as set forth in chapter 15 of this title.
F. Reduction of retention of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of exterior perimeter wall height and/or deviation from development standards for life safety
purposes.
G. Deviation from development standards for reasonable access accommodations.
H. Dimensions of required open space and size of required landscaping area within required open space in the Multi-Family Residential (R-3) Zone as set
forth in section 15-4C-5 of this title. (Ord. 1553, 8-15-2017)
I. Building height to exceed the maximum allowable height by not more than five feet (5'). (Ord. 1571, 9-4-2018)
15-24-2: PROCEDURE:
The applicant for an adjustment shall apply in letter form, stating the type of adjustment desired and explaining that the strict interpretation of this title
would result in the unreasonable deprivation of the use or enjoyment of his property. The applicant must submit the application with the required filing fee
to cover the cost of investigation and processing. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-24-3: SETTING FOR HEARING:
The Director of Planning and Building Safety must set an adjustment request for public hearing by mailing notice thereof to the applicant and the owners of
abutting property by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The requested adjustment must be heard before the Director of Planning and
Building Safety or his/her designated representative. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-24-4: NECESSARY FINDINGS:
A. Findings For Adjustment: No adjustment shall be granted unless the following findings are made:
1. That the proposed adjustment would not be detrimental to the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
2. That the proposed adjustment is necessary in order that the applicant may not be deprived unreasonably in the use or enjoyment of his property;
and
3. That the proposed adjustment is consistent with the legislative intent of this title.
B. Reasonable Access Accommodations: In addition to the findings above, the following findings must be made before any action is taken to approve or
deny a request for a deviation from development standards for reasonable access accommodations:
1. The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual protected under the Act.
2. The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual protected under the Act. (Ord. 1460, 4-
19-2011)
15-24-5: CONDITIONS:
Whenever any adjustment is granted, the Director of Planning and Building Safety or his/her designated representative must impose such conditions as
may be necessary to safeguard the interests of the neighborhood or district, and in all cases impose the following conditions:
A. That the adjustment shall not become effective until seven (7) days from the granting thereof has elapsed or, if an appeal is filed or a review called, until
final determination has been made on the appeal or review.
B. That the adjustment shall become null and void if the privileges granted thereunder has not been utilized within one hundred eighty (180) days from the
effective date thereof. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-24-6: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Requests for administrative adjustments must be reviewed by the Director of Planning and Building Safety or his/her designated representative. A decision
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 568/581
on an administrative adjustment must be made and mailed to the applicant within ten (10) working days after the application is deemed complete. The
Director's decision is final unless appealed as provided by chapter 25 of this title. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no public hearing or
notification is required for administrative adjustments. Administrative adjustments may be granted to allow:
A. Parking and loading space standards as set forth in chapter 15 of this title.
B. Reduction of retention of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of exterior perimeter wall height and/or deviation from development standards for life safety
purposes.
C. Deviation from development standards for reasonable access accommodations.
D. Deviation from the development and design standards as set forth in chapters V through VIII of the downtown specific plan. (Ord. 1521, 10-4-2016)
15-24-7: HEARING:
A determination on an adjustment must be made by the Director of Planning and Building Safety or his/her designated representative within ten (10) days
after the hearing. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-24-8: NOTIFICATION AND PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
Copies of the findings and decision of the Director of Planning and Building Safety must be mailed to each member of the Planning Commission and to the
applicant. Written determinations on adjustments, made by the Director of Planning and Building Safety or his/her designated representative, must be
placed as receive and file items on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission. Any Planning Commissioner may request that an item be
discussed and a decision on the application be made by the Planning Commission instead of received and filed. No decision of the Director of Planning
and Building Safety is final until the decision is received and filed or acted upon by the Planning Commission or upheld on appeal. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
15-24-9: APPEALS:
All appeals must be processed as provided by chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 1444, 8-3-2010)
Chapter 24A
RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
15-24A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to implement the orderly acquisition and improvement of public rights of way to benefit public health, safety and welfare. Private
property owners should provide and improve public rights of way to ensure that private property development does not adversely impact other public and
private facilities and services. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
15-24A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning set forth elsewhere in this code, Government Code or the Public Resources
Code.
DEVELOPMENT: The meaning set forth in chapter 1 of this title.
DIRECTOR: The public works director or such other director designated by the city manager.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT: A review of a development in accordance with section 6 of resolution 3805, adopted March 16, 1993.
USE: The meaning set forth in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
15-24A-3: DEDICATION:
A. Dedication: Unless otherwise provided, any development requiring an environmental assessment located on a lot abutting public rights of way, must
dedicate a portion of that lot to widen the public rights of way in accordance with the standards in exhibit C-8 of the general plan circulation element.
Property dedications must be noted on building plans before the city issues a building permit and the dedications must be made before the city
approves a final inspection for a building permit or issues a certificate of occupancy for a proposed project. The director is authorized to substitute an
irrevocable offer to dedicate or to substitute a combination of a dedication and an irrevocable offer to dedicate for public rights of way in compliance
with the standards in exhibit C-8 of the general plan circulation element and subject to section 15-24A-4 of this chapter.
B. Width: Table 1 of this section, is based on exhibit C-8 of the general plan circulation element and establishes the standard right of way widths for the
various classifications for public rights of way. The right of way dedication on an individual lot is that portion of private property necessary to provide
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 569/581
one-half (1/2) of the required standard width, measured from the centerline of the street.
TABLE 1
Right Of Way Classification Minimum Width (Feet)
Major arterial 142 - 150 (varies based on lane configuration)
Secondary arterial 98 - 120 (varies based on lane configuration)
Collector (divided) 80
Collector 64
Local:
Commercial 60 - 64 (varies based on lane configuration)
Residential 60
Alley 20
1. Greater Widths: Greater widths may be required as by the director of public works or designee conditions of subdivision maps, site plan review,
conditional use permits or standards variances.
2. Reduced Widths: The required standard width may be reduced at specific locations on specific streets due to unusual conditions, as authorized by
the director of public works or designee.
C. Effect On Required Yard Areas And Building Area Ratios: All required yard areas, lot coverage and floor area ratio calculations must be measured after
the dedication or reservation. If the director of public works requires an irrevocable offer to dedicate, the required yard areas, lot coverage and floor
area ratio calculations may be measured not including the area of dedication or reservation. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
15-24A-4: IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Applicability: Before the city approves a final inspection for a building permit or issues a certificate of occupancy for any development or change of use,
a property owner must make all required improvements and repairs to abutting public rights of way. The improvements and repairs must extend along
the width and depth of the property and for a reasonable distance beyond the property as is necessary to complete the improvement or repair. Existing
improvements that are damaged and that may have been damaged during construction of the building must also be repaired.
B. Required Improvements; All Development: Development or a change of use is required to provide the following right of way improvements that the
director determines to be required and applicable:
1. Sidewalk/Wheelchair Ramps And Parkway: Construction or repair of a sidewalk/wheelchair ramp and parkway adjoining the site. The
sidewalk/wheelchair ramp must have a minimum clear width of five feet (5') and a parkway, or six feet (6') if the sidewalk adjoins the curb.
2. Curb And Gutter: Construction or repair of curbs and gutters adjoining the site. All unused curb cuts must be replaced with a full height curb and
gutter.
3. Parkway Trees: Any missing or damaged parkway trees must be replaced with a minimum twenty four inch (24") size box tree in accordance with
title 9, chapter 3 of this code and administrative policies and procedures promulgated by the city manager.
4. Alley Paving: Construction, replacement, repair or extension of alley paving up to standard width. The alley must be paved the length of the site. If
vehicle access is taken from the alley, the director may also require that the alley be paved to a point where the alley intersects a paved public right
of way, and curb returns must be relocated as necessary.
5. Roadway Paving: Repair or replacement of roadway paving to standard street width as required in exhibit C-8 of the general plan circulation
element.
C. Required Improvements; New Development Requiring An Environmental Assessment: In addition to the improvements required by this section for
development, the following right of way improvements must be provided:
1. Alley Lighting: Construct or install on site alley lighting.
2. Roadway Paving: Construction or extension of roadway paving to standard street width as required in exhibit C-8 of the general plan circulation
element.
3. Traffic Signals And Street Signs: Provide a prorated share of the cost of all roadway signal and street sign modifications attributable or partly
attributable to the development.
4. Streetlights: Install or relocate streetlights. This may include widening the right of way as necessary.
5. Utilities Relocation: Relocate utilities as necessary to provide for the improvements set forth above.
D. Standards: All improvements within public rights of way must be installed in conformance with the specifications on file with the city engineer's office.
(Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 570/581
15-24A-5: RELIEF FROM REQUIREMENTS:
The director may waive requirements of this chapter if the director determines that such improvements are unnecessary for a public purpose or that the
cost of the improvement is proportionally excessive when compared to the scale of the project or the demand generated by the project subject to the
findings set forth below. The determination of the director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with chapter 25 of this title.
A. Proposed Waiver: To waive the need for improvements and dedications otherwise required by this chapter, the director must find upon substantial
evidence that:
1. The proposed waiver maintains the minimum roadway width necessary for emergency vehicle access as determined by the fire chief;
2. The proposed waiver maintains the minimum roadway width and lane widths deemed necessary for safe two-directional vehicular passage. The
minimum lane width cannot be less than ten feet (10') in width for a travel lane and eight feet (8') in width for a parking lane;
3. The proposed waiver will maintain the necessary roadway width for the traffic volumes projected during the general plan buildout as determined by
the director of planning and building safety unless the director determines that the dedication or irrevocable offer to dedicate will require the removal
of all or a portion of an existing building;
4. The proposed waiver complies with any requirements of state and federal regulations, including, without limitation, disabled access requirements for
public sidewalks;
5. The proposed waiver would not be detrimental to the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
6. That the proposed waiver is necessary in order that the applicant is not unreasonably deprived the use or enjoyment of his property; and
7. The proposed waiver is consistent with the legislative intent of this title.
B. Conditions: If the director grants a waiver, the director may impose such conditions necessary to safeguard public health, safety, and welfare. In all
instances the director must impose the following conditions:
1. Establish a term during which the irrevocable offer to dedicate is effective.
2. The waiver does not become effective for ten (10) days from when it is granted or, if an appeal is filed, there is a final determination.
3. The waiver becomes null and void if it is unused for one hundred eighty (180) days from its effective date. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
15-24A-6: NOTIFICATION:
A. Copies of the findings and decision of the director must be mailed to the applicant and all persons within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
project site. (Ord. 1465, 11-1-2011)
Chapter 25
APPEAL OR REVIEW
15-25-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish procedures for appeal of Planning Commission decisions for those individuals aggrieved by those decisions.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-25-2: APPEAL OF DIRECTOR'S DECISION:
A. Letter Of Appeal; Filing Fee: Any individual may appeal a decision or determination of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services
to the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be made within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the Community, Economic and Development
Services Director's decision by filing a letter of appeal, with the required appeal fee, with the secretary of the Planning Commission. In the event that
the tenth day falls on a holiday or weekend, the appeal letter may be filed on the next business day. Any appeal of an administrative use permit must
be received, with the required appeal fee, prior to the decision being received and filed by the Planning Commission. All appeals shall state specifically
wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the decision maker or where a decision is not supported by the evidence in the
record.
B. Hearing; Decision: Following the receipt of an appeal, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall transmit to the Planning
Commission the letter of appeal, the application and all other papers constituting the record upon which the action of the Director of Community,
Economic and Development Services was taken. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, in the manner prescribed in Chapter
27 of this Title, on the decision of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services which has been appealed. The hearing shall be
held within forty (40) calendar days of the appeal request. The project applicant shall provide the list of property owners, radius map and any additional
information required for the public hearing to the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services. The Planning Commission may
affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services. The decision of the Planning Commission is
appealable to the City Council, pursuant to Section 15-25-3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-25-3: APPEAL OF PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 571/581
Any individual may appeal a decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council. The appeal shall be made within ten (10) calendar days after the
date of the Planning Commission decision by filing a letter of appeal, with the required appeal fee, with the City Clerk. In the event that the tenth day falls
on a holiday or weekend, the appeal letter may be filed on the next business day. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an
error or abuse of discretion by the body making the decision or where a decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. Following the receipt of an
appeal, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services shall transmit to the City Council the letter of appeal, the application, and all
other papers constituting the record upon which the action of the Planning Commission was taken. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-25-4: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
The City Council shall hold at least one hearing on the decision of the Planning Commission which has been appealed. The hearing shall be held within
forty (40) calendar days of the appeal request. The City Council may affirm, reverse or modify a decision of the Planning Commission; provided, that if an
appealed decision is reversed or modified, the City Council shall, on the basis of the record transmitted and such additional evidence as may be submitted,
make the findings required by this Chapter a prerequisite to granting the application or shall specifically decline to make such findings. The decision of the
City Council shall be final. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-25-5: ADVERSE DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL:
If the City Council, upon appeal of a Planning Commission decision, proposes an action that is in any way contrary to the recommendations of the
Planning Commission, it may, before final action is taken, request further information from the Planning Commission on the matter. Failure of the Planning
Commission to report to the City Council within forty (40) calendar days after the request may be deemed to be approval by the Planning Commission of
any proposed change. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-25-6: ANNOUNCEMENT OF DECISION BY RESOLUTION:
The City Council, upon appeal of a Planning Commission decision, shall announce its decision by resolution not more than forty (40) calendar days
following the termination of proceedings of the hearing, or, upon receipt of a report from the Planning Commission, pursuant to Section 15-25-5 of this
Chapter, if the matter was referred back to the Planning Commission. The resolution shall recite and order, among other things, that the application be
granted or denied or modified, subject to the conditions or limitations that the City Council may impose. The project approval shall become effective the
date of the City Council action approving said application. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-25-7: NOTICE OF COUNCIL DECISION:
Following the adoption of a resolution ordering that a project application be granted or denied, a copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the applicant and
to any other parties requesting notice of the action, and one copy shall be attached to the Planning Commission's file of the case and the file returned to
the Planning Commission for permanent filing. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-25-8: FEE:
An appeal shall be accompanied by a fee, established by the City Council, to cover the cost of processing the appeal. The fee shall be refunded if the
appeal is upheld by the City Council. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-25-9: NOTICE PROCEDURES:
The City Council hearing and notification procedures for appeals shall be those utilized as part of the application's original hearing process, except, that in
all cases, the appellant, the property owner, applicant and applicant's agent shall receive notice of said hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled hearing date. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 26
AMENDMENTS
15-26-1: PURPOSE:
Whenever public necessity, convenience and general welfare require, the modification of zoning boundaries established by this Title, the classification of
permitted or conditionally permitted uses, or other provisions of this Title, such changes may be undertaken in one of the following methods:
A. By amending the Zoning Map;
B. By amending precise plans; and
C. By revising the text of the Zoning Title. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-26-2: INITIATION:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 572/581
Amendments of this Title may be initiated:
A. Upon the verified application of one or more owners of property which is proposed to be changed or reclassified; and
B. Upon the adoption of a motion by the City Council requesting the Planning Commission to process in the manner prescribed by law:
1. Any change in zone boundaries;
2. Any change to a precise plan; or
3. Any amendment of the Zoning Title text. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-26-3: APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT:
Whenever the owner of any land or building desires an amendment, supplement to or change of the regulations prescribed for his property or desires
approval of an amendment to a precise plan, he shall file an application with the Department of Community, Economic and Development Services. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 1315, 1-18-2000)
15-26-4: PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Application For Hearing: Upon filing of a verified application or upon the adoption of a motion by the City Council, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing as provided in Chapter 27 of this Title.
B. Findings And Recommendations: The Planning Commission shall announce its findings by formal resolution not more than forty (40) calendar days
following the hearing, and the resolution shall recite, among other things, the facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission,
make the approval or denial of the application necessary to carry out the general purpose of this Title, and shall recommend the adoption of the
amendment or modification to the precise plan by the City Council or deny the application. (Ord. 1272, 6-17-1997)
15-26-5: APPROVAL OR DENIAL; NOTICE OF DECISION:
A. Approval: When the Planning Commission's action is to recommend the adoption of the amendment or the approval of the precise plan modification to
the City Council, the Planning Commission shall notify the applicant by forwarding a copy of the resolution to the applicant at the address shown upon
the application.
B. Denial:
1. Notice Of Decision: When the action of the Planning Commission is to deny an application, the Planning Commission shall notify the applicant by
forwarding a copy of the resolution to the address shown upon the application.
2. Action Final: The action of the Planning Commission to recommend denial of an application for an amendment to the City Council or deny approval
of a precise plan shall be final and effective the day following the end of the ten (10) day appeal period unless a written appeal and appeal fee is filed
with the City Council as provided by Chapter 25 of this Title. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-26-6: CITY COUNCIL HEARING PROCEDURE:
Within forty (40) calendar days following receipt of the resolution from the Planning Commission recommending action on a public hearing item, the City
Council shall conduct a duly advertised public hearing on the matter, public notice of which shall be given as provided in Chapter 27 of this Title. (Ord.
1212, 11-16-1993)
15-26-7: REFERRAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION:
If the City Council proposes a change in any proposed amendment or precise plan modification recommended by the Planning Commission, it shall,
before final action is taken, advise the Planning Commission of the proposed change and request a further report of the Planning Commission on the
matter. Failure of the Planning Commission to report to the City Council within forty (40) calendar days after the request may be deemed to be approval by
the Planning Commission of any proposed change. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-26-8: COUNCIL DECISION:
A. Announcement: The City Council shall announce its decision by resolution not more than forty (40) calendar days following the termination of
proceedings of the hearing or from receipt of the report from the Planning Commission when a matter has been referred back to the Planning
Commission.
B. Notice Of Decision: Following the adoption by the City Council of a resolution ordering action on an amendment to this Title, precise plan modification,
or denying an application or recommendation for an amendment, or precise plan modification, one copy of the resolution shall be forwarded to the
applicant at the address shown upon the application, and one copy shall be attached to the file. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 573/581
Chapter 27
HEARINGS, NOTICES AND FEES
15-27-1: APPLICATION FORM:
All requests necessitating a public hearing shall be filed with the City using an approved application form. These requests shall include, but not be limited
to:
A. Changes to a zoning boundary.
B. Amendment to the Zoning Title.
C. Conditional use permits.
D. Variances.
E. Modifications to precise plans, conditional use permits, unclassified use permits and variances. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-27-2: APPLICATION RECORD:
Applications filed pursuant to this Title shall become a part of the permanent official records of the Planning Commission, and there shall be attached
thereto and permanently filed therewith copies of all notices and actions with certificates and affidavits of posting, mailing or publications pertaining thereto.
(Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-27-3: FILING FEES:
The applicant shall, at the time of filing an application, pay to the City such fees to cover the cost of examining and processing the application, in an
amount as fixed and established by City Council. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-27-4: SETTING OF HEARINGS:
All proposals requiring a public hearing shall be set by the secretary of the Planning Commission when the hearings are to be held before the Planning
Commission, and by the City Clerk for hearings to be held before the City Council. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-27-5: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS:
Applications requiring a public hearing shall contain specific information and be distributed as in the manner prescribed below.
A. Notification Process: Notice shall be provided in all of the following ways:
1. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or the owner's
duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant.
2. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage,
streets, roads, schools, or other residential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be
significantly affected.
3. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property as shown on the latest
equalized assessment roll within three hundred feet (300') of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. In lieu of utilizing the assessment roll,
the local agency may utilize records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector which contain more recent information than the assessment roll. If the
number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection A3 or subsection A1 of this Section is greater than one
thousand (1,000), the City, in lieu of mailed or delivered notice, may provide notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing by placing a display
advertisement of at least one-eighth (1/8) page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the local agency in which the proceeding is
conducted.
4. If the notice is mailed or delivered pursuant to subsection A3 of this Section, the notice shall also either be:
a. Published at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing pursuant to section 6061 of the California Government Code, in at least one newspaper of
general circulation within the local agency which is conducting the proceeding.
b. Posted at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing in at least three (3) public places within the boundaries of the local agency, including one public
place in the area directly affected by the proceeding.
5. For mailing lists containing ten (10) or more different owners of real property, notices returned undeliverable shall be resent to the resident or
occupant of the real property.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 574/581
6. In addition to the notice procedures listed above, the City may provide notice of the public hearing in any other manner it deems necessary or
desirable.
B. Contents Of Notification: The contents of the public hearing notice shall include:
1. A title stating "Notice of Proposed " (with the blank space containing the title of the application);
2. The date, time and place of a public hearing;
3. The identity of the hearing body;
4. A general explanation of the matter to be considered; and
5. A general description, in text or as a diagram of the location of the property. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
15-27-6: RULES OF CONDUCT DURING PUBLIC HEARING:
The Planning Commission may establish rules governing the conduct of public hearings conducted by it. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-27-7: CONTINUATION OF PUBLIC HEARING:
If, for any reason, testimony on any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the date set for the hearing, the person presiding at the public
hearing may, before adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time and place at which the hearing will be continued. No further notice is
required. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
15-27-8: HEARING FILES:
A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at public hearings held in connection with an application filed pursuant to this Title, any exhibits presented at
public hearings, and the names of persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. (Ord. 1245, 2-6-1996)
Chapter 27A
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
15-27A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and the mitigation fee act1, for the purpose of imposing fees on applicants seeking to construct
development projects. The purpose of such fees is to minimize, to the greatest extent practicable, the impact that new development has on the city's public
services and public facilities. Toward that end, the city intends that applicants for such development projects pay their fair share of the costs of providing
such public services and public facilities. Accordingly, the amount of each impact fee is calculated based upon the gross square footage of nonresidential
development, number of residential dwelling units, type or density or intensity of use, vehicle trip generation, or other appropriate methodology which
ensures that the fee is roughly proportional to the impacts of new development on public facilities. The city assumes responsibility for and will pay for with
general city revenues all public facility needs for existing development. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-2: APPLICABILITY:
Unless expressly excepted or exempted, this chapter applies to all fees imposed by the city to finance public facilities attributable to new development,
including without limitation:
A. Law enforcement facilities, vehicles, and equipment;
B. Fire suppression facilities, vehicles, and equipment;
C. General facilities, vehicles, and equipment;
D. Community library facilities and collections;
E. Public use (community centers) facilities;
F. Parks/open space and recreation facilities; and
G. Road project construction, right of way acquisition, and engineering. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-3: EXEMPTIONS:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 575/581
This chapter does not apply to:
A. Taxes and special assessments;
B. Fees for processing development applications;
C. Fees for enforcing regulations;
D. Fees collected under development agreements;
E. Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement between the city and a property owner for that portion of the cost of a public facility paid for by
the property owner which exceeds the need for the public facility attributable to, reasonably related to, and roughly proportional to the development;
F. Fees to mitigate impacts on the environment; or
G. Fees imposed, levied or collected by other governmental agencies including subdivisions of the state and federal governments. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this
chapter:
BENEFIT AREA: The geographic area within which impact fees are collected and expended for a particular type of capital improvement serving
development projects within such area.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: Land or facilities for the storage, treatment or distribution of water; for the collection, treatment, reclamation or disposal of
sewage; for the collection and disposal of storm waters and for watershed preservation purposes; for purposes of transportation and transit, including,
without limitation, streets, street lighting and traffic control devices and supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges, airports, and related
facilities; for parks and recreational improvements; for public safety, including police and fire facilities; for schools and childcare facilities; for libraries and
public art; for public buildings of all kinds; and for any other capital project identified in the city's capital improvements plan. Capital improvement also
includes design, engineering, inspection, testing, planning, legal land acquisition and all other costs associated with construction of a public facility.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: The long term plan for capital improvements, adopted by the city council, describing the approximate location, size,
time of availability and estimated cost of capital improvement projects and identifies sources of funding for capital improvement projects.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROJECT LIST: The list attached to a council resolution setting the base fee amount for each specific impact fee. The list
must describe the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of each capital improvement to be funded from a particular impact fee
account.
COLLECTION: The point in time at which the impact fee is actually paid over to the city.
COMMITMENT: Earmarking impact fees to fund or partially fund capital improvements serving new development projects.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a building or a portion of a room, designed, intended to be used, or actually used for occupancy by one family for
living and sleeping quarters, and containing one kitchen only, and includes a mobile home, but not hotel or motel units.
IMPACT FEE: Any monetary exaction imposed by the city as a condition of or in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of
defraying all or some of the cost of or repayment of costs previously expended from other city funds for capital improvements relating to the project.
IMPOSE: To determine that a particular development project is subject to the collection of impact fees as a condition of development approval.
NEW DEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Means and includes any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including, without
limitation, a project involving the permit issuance for construction, reconstruction, or change of use, but not a project involving permit issuance for
operating, remodeling, rehabilitating, or improving an existing structure, nor the rebuilding of a structure destroyed or damaged through natural disaster,
nor the replacement of one mobile home with another on the same pad if no dwelling unit is added.
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: All development other than residential development projects.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any development undertaken to create a new dwelling unit or units. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-5: NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any legislative action adopting an ordinance, resolution, or other legislative enactment adopting a new impact fee or approving an increase in an
existing fee must be accomplished in accordance with Government Code section 66018.
B. Any costs incurred by the city in conducting public hearings required by this section may be recovered as a part of the impact fees which are the subject
of the hearing. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-6: IMPOSITION OF FEES; AUTOMATIC ADJUSTMENT:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 576/581
A. Except as otherwise provided, persons submitting applications seeking approval for new development projects must pay the city impact fees, in an
amount set by city council resolution, as a condition for the city to approve such development projects.
B. No tentative or final subdivision map, parcel map, grading permit, building permit, final inspection, or certificate of occupancy, or other development
permit, may be approved unless the provisions of this section are fulfilled.
C. Impact fees will be imposed by including the following language in any document of development approval:
All fees imposed pursuant to Title 15 Chapter 27A of the El Segundo Municipal Code must be paid to the City before this project is approved.
(Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
D. The director of planning and building safety or the director of public works will collect impact fees in accordance with Government Code section 66007,
except that the connection fees are collected at the time an applicant seeks to connect to the city's utility system.
E. Unless otherwise provided by council resolution, the impact fees established by this chapter will be automatically adjusted on an annual basis at the
beginning of each fiscal year based on the average percentage change over the previous calendar year set forth in the construction price index for the
Los Angeles metropolitan area. The first impact fee adjustment cannot be made before a minimum of ten (10) months after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 1448, 10-19-2010)
15-27A-7: IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS:
A. The city must establish an impact fee account for each benefit area and for each type of capital improvement for which an impact fee is imposed.
Impact fees collected must be deposited in each such account according to type of improvement and benefit area. The funds of the account cannot be
commingled with the city's other funds. Any account previously established for the deposit of funds which would have been developer impact fees
under this chapter are deemed an impact fee account for the purposes of this chapter.
B. Each impact fee account must be interest bearing and the accumulated interest will become a part of the account.
C. The funds of each account will be expended within the benefit area exclusively for the capital improvements for which the impact fees were collected.
(Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-8: USE OF IMPACT FEE PROCEEDS:
Impact fees may be expended only for the type of capital improvements for which they were imposed, calculated, and collected and according to the time
limits and procedures established in this chapter. Impact fees may be used to pay the principal, interest and other costs of bonds, notes and other
obligations issued or undertaken by or on behalf of the city to finance such improvements. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-9: REFUNDS:
A. Except as described in this section, upon application of the property owner, the city must refund that portion of any impact fee which has been on
deposit over five (5) years and which is unexpended and uncommitted. The refund will be made to the then current owner or owners of lots or units of
the development project or projects, provided that the then current owner submits an application for a refund to the city within one hundred eighty (180)
days before the five (5) year period expires.
B. If fees in any impact fee account are unexpended or uncommitted, starting with the fifth fiscal year after the first deposit into the account or fund, and
every subsequent five (5) years, the city council must make the findings required by Government Code section 66001(d) for maintaining funds on
deposit. If the council makes such findings, the fees are exempt from the refund requirement.
C. The city may issue refunds through direct payment; offsetting the refund against other impact fees due for development projects by the owner on the
same or other property; or otherwise by agreement with the owner. If the costs of refunding the impact fees would exceed the amount refunded, the city
may instead comply with Government Code section 66001(f). (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-10: PROTESTS, APPEALS, AND AUDITS:
All protests, appeals, and audits must be conducted in accordance with the procedures contained in the mitigation fee act2. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-11: AMENDMENT PROCEDURES:
At least once each year, before the city council's adoption of the budget and revisions to the capital improvements project list, the city manager, or
designee, must report to the city council with:
A. Recommendations for amendments to this chapter and to other parts of this code and to resolutions establishing impact fees;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 577/581
B. Proposals for changes to the capital improvements project list, identifying capital improvements to be funded, in whole or in part, by impact fees;
C. Proposals for changes in the boundaries of benefit areas; and
D. Proposals for changes to impact fee rates and schedules. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-12: CREDITS:
A. A property owner who dedicates land or agrees to participate in an assessment district or otherwise contributes funds for capital improvements, as
defined in this chapter, may be eligible for a credit for such contribution against the impact fee otherwise due.
B. The director of planning and building safety or the director of public works must determine: 1) whether the contribution meets capital improvement
needs for which the particular impact fee has been imposed; 2) whether the contribution will substitute for or otherwise reduce the need for capital
improvements anticipated to be provided with impact fee funds; and 3) the value of the developer contribution. In no event, however, will the credit
exceed the amount of the otherwise applicable impact fee.
C. Any application for credit must be submitted at or before the time of development project approval on forms provided by the city. The application must
contain a declaration of those facts, under oath, along with the relevant documentary evidence which qualifies the property owner for the credit. (Ord.
1389, 12-6-2005)
15-27A-13: CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other ordinance or resolution establishing or amending impact
fees, the provisions of this chapter govern. (Ord. 1389, 12-6-2005)
Chapter 28
ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY
15-28-1: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
Whenever necessary to make any inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Title, the Director of Community, Economic and Development
Services or an authorized representative of the Director, is authorized to enter any property, premises, or building at all reasonable times. If such property,
premises, or building is occupied, the Director or his/her representative shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or
premises is unoccupied, a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property, premises, or
building to request entry. If entry is refused, the Director of Community, Economic and Development Services or his or her authorized representative may
seek an administrative inspection warrant and shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord.
1315, 1-18-2000)
15-28-2: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Failure To Comply With Provisions: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this Title or fail to comply with any requirements of this
Title. It shall further be unlawful for any person to operate, erect, move, alter, enlarge or maintain any use which is contrary to the provisions of any
permit, approval, or condition of approval obtained pursuant to this Title. A violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Title, or any
permits, approvals or conditions of approval issued pursuant to this Title shall constitute an infraction; except that any such violation may, at the
discretion of the City, be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1284, 2-3-1998)
B. Penalty, Infraction: Any person violating provisions of this Title may be deemed guilty on an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
by a fine as set forth in Section 1-2-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1247, 2-6-1996)
C. Penalty, Misdemeanor: Any person violating provisions of this Title may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in Section 1-2-1 of this Code.
D. Each Day A Separate Offense: Each person found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of
which any violation of any provision of this Title is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in
subsection C of this Section. Any use, occupation or building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions hereof shall constitute a public
nuisance. (Ord. 1212, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 29
PARKING IN-LIEU FEES
15-29-1: PURPOSE:
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 578/581
This chapter establishes fees in lieu of providing on-site parking spaces within designated parking in-lieu fee areas. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-29-2: PARKING IN-LIEU FEE AREAS:
Any property owner of a property located within the area enclosed by a bold dashed line on the parking in-lieu fee area map may pay parking in-lieu fees
as established by the City Council, in lieu of providing required on-site parking spaces as outlined in section 15-15-6 of this title or applicable specific
plans.
PARKING IN-LIEU FEE AREA
(Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-29-3: PAYMENT:
A. Timing Of Payment: The parking in-lieu fee must be paid before the City issues a Certificate of Occupancy for the project or formally approves the
project when such project does not require a Certificate of Occupancy. In addition, the parking in-lieu fee may be paid over a period of time, as
approved by City Council resolution.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 579/581
B. Use Of Funds: Funds collected by the City from such payments must be deposited in a separate fund and may not be commingled with any other City
fund. Monies from the In-Lieu Fund may only be used for acquiring, developing and maintaining additional on-street and off-street parking and parking
facilities within or adjacent to the area where they are collected. Funds paid to the City for in-lieu parking are non-refundable.
C. Written Agreement/Contract Required: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, payment of the parking in-lieu fee must be provided by
means of a written contract with the City. The contract must meet requirements identified by City Council resolution and approved as to form by the City
Attorney. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-29-4: NO VESTED RIGHTS:
Payment of a parking in-lieu fee does not provide or vest any property owner with a special right, privilege or interest of any kind in any parking facility that
may result from the payment of the fee. The City retains sole discretion to decide when and how the fees will be spent in accordance with this chapter. The
City retains sole discretion to determine where and when it will build parking, and the City is under no obligation to, and makes no such representation that
it will, build parking in a location near the fee payer's property or that is advantageous to the fee payer. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
15-29-5: DIRECTOR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Requests to pay parking in-lieu fees for more than fifty percent (50%) of the required parking spaces for a property or project as outlined in section 15-15-6
of this title or applicable specific plans must be approved by the Director at his or her discretion. The Director must consider potential impacts to the
surrounding area when deciding whether to approve such a request. The Director's decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to
section 15-25-2 of this title. (Ord. 1574, 10-2-2018)
Chapter 30
SITE PLAN REVIEW
15-30-1: PURPOSE:
A site plan review is a discretionary land use permit that is required for any proposed project that meets the criteria set forth in section 15-30-2 of this
chapter. The purpose of the site plan review process is to:
A. Ensure that the project is functionally compatible with the area in which it is located;
B. Allow all City departments the opportunity to review development proposals and place reasonable conditions to ensure that the public health, safety and
welfare are maintained. (Ord. 1572, 9-4-2018)
15-30-2: APPLICABILITY:
Except in the C-4 Zone, which has its own site plan review requirements, a site plan review pursuant to this chapter is required for development that meets
any of the following criteria:
A. Single-family residential development of more than ten (10) residential units;
B. Multi-family residential development of more than ten (10) units;
C. New commercial, institutional or industrial development that includes structures which have a combined gross floor area of more than fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet (not including parking structures);
D. Additions to existing structures if the combined total additions exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area, but not including parking
structures;
E. For projects with a mix of residential and commercial, institutional or industrial uses, if any criteria above applies, the entire project is subject to site plan
review. (Ord. 1572, 9-4-2018)
15-30-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a site plan review must be made on a form supplied by the Planning and Building Safety Department, and must be accompanied by the
following:
A. A site plan showing the location of all structures, landscape and hardscape areas, parking areas, walks, internal circulation, access, adjacent streets,
signs, and fence or wall type and placement;
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 580/581
B. Dimensioned and scaled building elevations for each proposed structure. The building elevations must show all sides of the building and call out
exterior building materials, window and door types, and roof materials;
C. A radius map showing the project site and all lots lying in whole or in part within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the project site, address labels for
the owners of all properties within the three hundred foot (300') radius together with any other individuals that have requested notice (this information is
available from the City), and a Certified Property Owners List Affidavit;
D. Application fees in the amount established by resolution of the City Council;
E. Any other pertinent information, exhibits or materials deemed necessary by the Director or designee. With the exception of the application fee, the
Director may waive or modify any of the application requirements deemed unnecessary for a particular application. (Ord. 1572, 9-4-2018)
15-30-4: REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Determination Of Completion: The Director or designee will determine whether the application is complete. An application is complete when it complies
with the requirements of section 15-30-3 of this chapter. If an application is found to be incomplete, the applicant will be notified by mail as to why the
application is incomplete and how the application can be made complete.
B. CEQA Review: After an application is determined to be complete, it will be reviewed in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act and an
appropriate determination will be made. While the CEQA process is underway, the application will be distributed to the appropriate City departments,
and to professional consultants if necessary, for review, comment and recommendations regarding appropriate conditions. The applicant is responsible
for the actual and reasonable costs incurred in preparing the appropriate CEQA document and all associated studies and reports. The City may require
the applicant to deposit funds in a designated project-related account which the City can draw upon as costs are incurred.
C. Public Hearing: Following the environmental determination, the application will be scheduled for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. The
Director or designee will give public notice of the hearing as provided in chapter 27 of this title and consistent with applicable law.
D. Conditions For Approval: The Planning Commission may approve or conditionally approve a site plan review if it makes the following findings:
1. The proposed development is consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Zoning
Code;
2. The project is functionally compatible with the area in which it is located;
3. The proposed development will not adversely affect the general welfare of the City.
E. Approval, When Effective: If the Planning Commission approves or conditionally approves a site plan review, the approval will become effective upon
expiration of the appeal period in section 15-25-3 of this title. If an appeal is perfected within the prescribed time period, the Planning Commission's
decision shall be stayed pending final action of the City Council.
F. Appeals: An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title.
G. Scope Of Hearing On Appeal: Appeals shall be reviewed de novo. The City Council is not bound by the decision that has been appealed or limited to
the issues raised on appeal. (Ord. 1572, 9-4-2018)
15-30-5: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS:
A site plan review will lapse and become null and void two (2) years following the effective date of the site plan review approval unless, prior to the
expiration date: a) a building permit is issued and construction is being diligently pursued toward completion, or b) a certificate of occupancy is issued for
the construction that was the subject of the application. One-year extensions may be granted by the Director for good cause upon written request of the
applicant received prior to expiration of the site plan review approval, provided there are no changes proposed to the previously-approved project. An
application for extension involving any significant change from the original plan or the conditions of approval, as determined by the Director, shall be
subject to all of the provisions of this title and shall require a new application. Additional conditions may be imposed as deemed necessary to ensure that
the development plan will be in compliance with City standards in effect at the time the extension is granted. (Ord. 1572, 9-4-2018)
15-30-6: REVOCATION:
A. Grounds For Revocation: A site plan review may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
1. The approval was obtained by fraud;
2. The application included inaccurate, erroneous, or incomplete information and the City finds that accurate and complete information would have
caused additional or different conditions on the site plan review or denial of the application;
3. The project is being constructed contrary to the approved plans, conditions of approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation.
10/15/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=587 581/581
B. Hearing: If the Director finds that grounds for revocation exist, he or she may suspend a site plan review pending a hearing before the Planning
Commission, which must be held within thirty (30) days of the suspension. The hearing before the Planning Commission must be noticed in the manner
required by chapter 27 of this title and consistent with applicable law. The decision of the Planning Commission is subject to appeal to the City Council
pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 1572, 9-4-2018)